* 1952029
* SCC-PG Improving Community and Neighborhood Safety through Open Data Collection
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Ken Pence, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this planning grant proposal is to study how data obtained by
members of the public through camera pictures, video feeds and similar
technology can be used to improve public safety without unduly infringing on
personal rights such as privacy. To date, this effort has been driven by
governments, through CCTV and similar technology, or private companies, through
devices such as doorbell cameras. In contrast, this proposal will focus on how
public safety can be enhanced through the use of data that are obtained and
contributed voluntarily by individuals and are publicly maintained. For example,
individuals might choose to capture the license plate identifiers of the
automobiles that drive through their streets. The community might then agree to
share this information with policing agencies seeking to track down stolen
vehicles, reckless driving, or other criminal activities. As these examples
illustrate, this arrangement raises significant questions about surveillance,
trust, and privacy. This project aims to study these issues from multiple
perspectives—technological, historical, and legal—with the aim of developing a
workable and publicly vetted approach to concerns around privacy and public
safety raised by recent commercial and technological
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses a new and burgeoning
phenomenon. Closed circuit TV and public webcams have been available for
decades, and people have used cell phone cameras on a massive scale for at least
a decade. Much newer, however, is the increasing integration of such sensor
capabilities in a wider set of environments, such as doorbell cameras. Newer
still is the idea that this integration could be crowdsourced to the public
rather than controlled by private companies. This project will study these
societal issues from the following perspectives: (1) technology, including a
survey of low-cost embedded devices that are suitable for collecting,
encrypting, transmitting, and storing data from personally accessible devices;
(2) data privacy, in which this project will appraise the protocols that might
manage how these data are secured, stored, and kept private, including a
characterization of anonymization methodologies; (3) historical, in which this
project will review and analyze past episodes of public data collection and
public safety, with the aim of determining how this history can provide guides
for our current work; (4) legal, including a review of various state and federal
statutes, as well as Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, with the goal of analyzing
how the law might govern this type of information collection and storage; (5)
safety, where this project will address the effect public data collection and
dissemination of the type proposed can have on public
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.