* 1952392
* EAR-PF Investigating Volcanic Explosion Directivity Using Aerial Infrasound Observations with UAVs
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Alexandra Iezzi, Iezzi, Alexandra Michelle
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Alexandra Iezzi has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and educational activities at the University of California Santa
Barbara under the mentorship of Professor Robin Matoza. Infrasound sensors
measure low-frequency acoustic waves (below the limit of human hearing) and
provide a detailed means to monitor and characterize explosive sources such as
those caused by volcanic eruptions. However, these sensors are usually placed on
the Earth's surface, providing only a limited sampling of the acoustic radiation
pattern and directionality of volcanic explosions creating a bias in how
acoustic sources are characterized. This project addresses this issue by using a
novel approach of collecting infrasound data with sensors aboard multiple
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in addition to traditional sensor deployments on
the ground. Our sensor platform and measurements will increase our understanding
of acoustic directivity at the frequently active Yasur volcano, in Vanuatu and
for explosive sources in general. The research proposed here has the potential
to revolutionize the way active volcanoes are monitored using infrasound
instrumentation aimed at providing unique information on explosion dynamics. The
new techniques proposed will allow infrasound sensors to be deployed both in the
air and on the ground close to the eruption, so that a volcanic source is
understood better with significantly reduced risk exposure to field personnel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a proof-of-concept study of UAV-based
infrasound deployments that can extend data collection to previously unreachable
locations near active volcanoes and anthropogenic explosion sources around the
world. The UAV-mounted infrasound sensors will record data from unique angles,
allowing for acoustic source inversion methods that account for the effects of
topography to constrain the directional radiation pattern of explosions in a way
not previously possible. By following these methods, we will also improve the
calculation of the mass flow rate, which is an invaluable parameter for
monitoring. The infrasound observations will be validated with ballistic
trajectories determined from multiple cameras deployed around the crater rim,
which we assume to be similar to the directionality of ash, gas, and steam
emissions that may present harm to those near the volcano. Configuring UAV-
mounted infrasound sensors in a vertical line above one of the crater rim
stations will, for the first time, allow us to investigate the precise vertical
location of the infrasonic source. Finally, we will create a prototype and test
a UAV infrasound sensor deployment where the sensor is flown to an inaccessible
area, dropped off, and retrieved by the UAV. This technique can be applied for
future monitoring during times of eruption crises. As part of the broader
impacts of this project Dr. Iezzi will teach a reading seminar course and design
a demonstration mimicking the usage of UAVs around Yasur volcano entitled
“trashcano”, which is sure to catch middle-school students’ interest. Outreach
activities include a photo-journal from Yasur volcano to share with local
teachers and thus expanding outreach educational
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.