* 1952905
* EAR-PF: Fault-rock trapped-charge and 4He/3He thermochronometry: new  paleothermometers to assess scales and rates of fault slip
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Margaret Odlum, Odlum, Margaret
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2024
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Margaret Odlum has been awarded the NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research as well as a professional development plan at Utah State University
(USU) under the mentorship of Professors Alexis K Ault and Tammy Rittenour. The
goal of the project is to develop new approaches to fingerprint past earthquakes
in fault rocks. Pinpointing evidence of ancient seismicity is important for
understanding earthquake processes and mechanics and building a more complete
record of fault activity, which collectively inform hazard assessment in
seismically active fault systems. Most of the energy during an earthquake is
given off as heat, which imparts a thermal and/or chemical signature in fault
rocks. Proposed research uses coupled luminescence properties of minerals and He
isotope thermometry integrated with textural analysis to access the thermal
record of earthquake events across the full range of seismic slip rates, as well
as temporal and spatial scales to inform fault slip processes. Complementary age
information provided by these methods will provide a more continuous record of
deformation over historical to geological timescales which is essential to
understand earthquake cycles in a particular fault. This research will be
conducted on the Wasatch and Hurricane faults in Utah. These are young,
seismically active faults that are adjacent to Utah’s two largest population
centers along the Wasatch Front and in the Saint George region, respectively.
New approaches developed here will create pathways for researchers to quantify
the spectrum of fault slip behavior in other fault systems. Dr. Odlum’s
professional development plan is aimed at growing STEM workforce and engaging
women, an underrepresented group in Utah in STEM, in earthquake science research
and geotechnical skill-building. A seismic hazards module developed in
partnership with the Utah Geological Survey will impact students enrolled in the
new USU GeoPaths program, and reach a wider undergraduate community by sharing
the module with other universities located in the Intermountain Seismic Zone and
Wasatch Front region, as well as online through the USU Geosciences webpage and
GeoMinutes YouTube channel, thus extending the reach and impact of this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop new
approaches to identify, quantify, and date frictional heating caused by seismic
slip in the rock record across the full range of seismic slip rates
(micrometers/sec to tens of meters/sec). Much (~90%) of the energy budget during
an earthquake goes into work done overcoming frictional resistance and
dissipates as heat. The magnitude of temperature rise across a fault is a
function of slip velocity, material properties, and strain localization.
Frictional heat, in turn, impacts these factors and the interplay between
variables controls fault strength during the seismic cycle. Transient, elevated
temperatures impart textural and/or geochemical signatures in fault rocks. This
project will combine trapped-charge analysis on quartz and feldspar with
hematite and apatite 4He/3He thermochronometry of fault surfaces and underlying
host-rock to recover paleotemperatures associated with seismic slip. The
seismically active Wasatch and Hurricane faults in Utah will be the first field
sites for applying this novel approach. Both seismogenic normal faults have
textural evidence of past coseismic frictional-heat, bulk hematite (U-Th)/He
dates that reflect thermal resetting or mineralization during earthquake slip
within the viable age range for trapped-charge thermochronometry (&lt;0.5 Ma),
and pose seismic risk to large population centers in Utah. Coupled
paleotemperature and textural information from fault surfaces will inform
dynamic weakening mechanisms operative during coseismic slip and improve
understanding of rheological changes to fault materials that accompany fault
thermal evolution and in-situ earthquake mechanics and fault strength in the
upper seismogenic zone. Complementary temporal information on fault slip from
trapped-charge and 4He/3He thermochronometry will fill a critical temporal data
gap between historical, geodetic, and paleo-seismic (1 - 10,000 years) and low-
temperature thermochronometric (100,000 - 1,000,000 years) records of
deformation, with direct applications to seismic hazards assessment. The new
thermochronometric approach to extract coseismic fault temperatures and temporal
constraints on deformation applied here is transferable to other fault systems,
giving researchers new tools to access the record of fault slip across seismic
slip rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.