* 1952862
* Towards Computationally Efficient One-Shot Design for Performance-Critical Distributed Multi-Agent Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Chengzhi Yuan, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 413,188.00

Multi-agent systems, an important class of interconnected/networked systems
composing a group of distributed interacting entities, have been emerging as a
powerful paradigm for various unprecedented engineering applications, such as
spacecraft formation flying, air-traffic management, sensory networks, etc.
Through collaboration, a multi-agent system can accomplish numerous complicated
control tasks that surpass the capability of a single dynamical system, such as
moving an oversized object, environmental monitoring, and disaster
search/rescue. Moreover, a multi-agent system can solve some problems faster
using parallelism and increase robustness through redundancy. However,
implementing cooperative multi-agent systems also presents challenges, making
many related applications (especially those demanding critical controlled
performance) remain conceptual. One important challenge lies in the lack of a
systematic approach that allows control engineers to treat associated multi-
agent distributed control design in a computationally-efficient and fully-
integrated manner. Existing approaches of separating the design into high- and
low-level controls often fail to analytically guarantee reliability, which is a
critical requirement for acceptance by control engineers. This project supports
fundamental research to provide the knowledge needed to overcome these
challenges, thereby promoting broader real-world applications of multi-agent
distributed control techniques. This project will also create unique
opportunities to promote engineering education through the development of a
cross-departmental robotics engineering program, and to boost minority
involvement in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to make fundamental contributions to the advancement of distributed
multi-agent control theory by (i) developing novel hybrid switching control
schemes to address complicated factors (e.g., agentâ€™s physical dynamics,
actuation and data sampling limitations, communication delays) in a holistic,
one-shot distributed control design, and (ii) generating effective computational
tools from combined deterministic and probabilistic perspectives to enable
balancing design complexity and controlled performance. It will introduce
innovative methodologies and tools to the field, leading to the following
important paradigm changes: (i) from separated two-step designs dominantly
adopted in current study to holistic, one-shot designs with provable network
stability and controlled performance; (ii) from Lyapunov functions with simple
quadratic forms dominantly utilized for current stability analysis and
distributed control synthesis to Lyapunov functions with advanced composite
forms that would significantly reduce analysis conservatism and improve
controlled performance; and (iii) from distributed algorithms with trivial
state/output feedback controller structures dominantly exploited by existing
methods to distributed algorithms with novel hybrid controller structures of
mixed continuous-time and discrete-event dynamics, facilitating simplified
distributed optimal control synthesis via off-line convex
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.