* 1952038
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Reducing Barriers to Residential Energy Security through an Integrated Case-management, Data-driven, Community-based approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Johanna Mathieu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,116,000.00

The goal of this Smart and Connected Communities (SCC) project is to explore the
efficacy of new social-technological paradigms to reduce residential energy
insecurity for low- and moderate-income (LMI) households in three neighborhoods
in Detroit, Michigan, which is one of the top ten highest energy burdened metros
in the US, where LMI households spend 15 - 30% of their income on energy costs
(6% or less is considered affordable). This research fully integrates community
perspectives in the design, application and testing of emerging smart
technologies, individualized residential energy management approaches, and
energy rate structure reform to realize cost savings, improved energy efficiency
and conservation, and enhanced health equity. The study draws from several
distinct fields: engineering, public administration, and public health, and
actively engages community partners in all aspects of the project guided by a
community-based participatory research approach (CBPR) for all major decision-
making and project implementation. The knowledge created by the project can
improve the design of future utility residential energy programs, increase
equity in electricity rates, and lower overall US energy consumption, thereby
reducing our dependence on foreign energy sources, facilitating a faster
transition to renewable energy sources, and improving the overall impact of the
electricity sector. The project will foster societal outcomes to advance
knowledge for social and technological innovations to promote smart and
connected communities. The outcomes include reduced energy insecurity and
consumption for disadvantaged urban populations, increased LMI participation in
energy efficiency and renewable energy programs, participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in interdisciplinary research, and advancement of
meaningful academic community&lt;br/&gt;engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed study will support the advancement of social and technological
innovation in three research aims. First, we will develop and implement a
neighborhood-embedded energy case management intervention to facilitate
participation in utility energy programs. This intervention will engage nearly
200 participant households, to evaluate the effect on program utilization,
energy consumption, and energy burden with the introduction of an energy case
manager (ECM) who recruits households, develops individualized energy
improvement plans (EIP), and assists households to implement the EIP. The ECMs
will facilitate accessing existing utility programs with the use of smart
technology-driven recommendations (i.e. smart meters). Second, we will develop
social-technological methods to determine the household-specific amount of
electricity that should be considered a basic right. Algorithms will be
developed that use smart meter data to identify consumers' basic electricity
needs. Neighborhood focus groups will enable a deliberative process through
which residents will consider and define electricity-dependent household
necessities, further informing our understanding of basic electricity needs.
Third, we use knowledge from the first and second research aims to develop a new
electricity rate paradigm that seeks to achieve the following objectives: i) a
free level of basic electricity, ii) supplemental electricity priced to cover
utility provider costs, iii) dynamic stability, and iv) rates that encourage
energy efficiency and renewable energy investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.