* 1952102
* SCC-PG: Safety and Security of College Campuses and their Adjacent Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Fabien Josse, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Public safety/security (PSS) is the most basic human need and on a college
campus it is a must for college students to focus on their academics as they
prepare to be productive citizens and faculty/staff to safely practice their
educational mission. Improving PSS will also drive economic development in the
surrounding communities. This project aims to identify social and cultural
challenges of PSS on Marquette University (MU) campus with its surrounding
communities and conduct a preliminary feasibility study of partly automating the
current security monitoring infrastructure to improve detection of incidents
while addressing the community concerns. The results of this project will be
used to write an SCC-IRG grant proposal with the long-term objective and the
national impact of creating a blueprint that is adaptable to thousands of
college campuses in the US to establish an automated network of smart sensors
for maintaining safe and secure zones on these campuses and their surrounding
neighborhoods. This will improve the existing monitoring by law enforcement
officers or security staff, and it will provide more reliable and actionable
information for incident management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of
this proposal are to: a) Understand in-depth the PSS challenges and the
community concerns regarding the use of certain technologies on MU campus and in
adjacent communities, b) Determine if existing technologies in multi-modal
sensing and AI are sufficient to enable the level of automation that will lead
to substantially enhanced diagnosis and prognosis decisions made by human
operators, c) Combine multi-modal sensory data for cross-correlation in order to
improve detection and predictive capabilities, d) Decide which features and
system components need to be improved to enable real-time operation, e)
Characterize the relation between the observables such as behavioral patterns,
and PSS incidents. The scope of the proposed work and the methods and approaches
used for each research item will be to: (i) Explore the PSS issues and
challenges on MU campus and its periphery in collaboration with the MU Police
Department and social scientist colleagues with expertise in crime mapping,
analysis, and prevention, (ii) Solicit feedback from relevant stakeholders
through community meetings and multidisciplinary workshops, and (iii) Conduct
initial feasibility studies involving multi-modal (e.g. camera and audio) data
together with contextual information simulating various scenarios (e.g. robbery
in its early stages and tracking a suspect) in our labs to see whether some
behavioral patterns can automatically predict certain PSS incidents with the
help of MU Police Department. The intellectual merit of this proposal is in its
paving the way to novel community-supported and data-driven solutions involving
advances in real-time image processing, machine learning, predictive analysis,
statistical detection and estimation toward developing a smart sensor network to
enhance PSS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.