* 1952477
* IRES Track 1: US-Morocco Collaborative Research for Socially and Environmentally Sustainable Women's Argan Oil Production
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Colleen Naughton, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2023
* USD 119,938.00

Population growth and changing climates have made it difficult to ensure
equitable access to food, water, and economic security across the globe,
particularly for women and vulnerable communities. In southern Morocco, rural
women engage in the production of argan oil that is extracted from the nuts of
an indigenous tree. As both an edible and cosmetic product in high demand on the
world market, argan provides a source of food and income to local communities
and benefits the environment by conserving argan trees that prevent erosion and
desertification. Through an interdisciplinary field school over three summers,
U.S. students will conduct research with Moroccan faculty and students to
investigate environmental and socioeconomic aspects of women’s argan production.
This project provides professional development opportunities for 18 U.S.
students in undergraduate and graduate programs in Environmental Engineering and
Systems and Anthropology at UC Merced and USF. USF and UC Merced have partnered
with Dar Si Hmad for Development, Education and Culture and Université Ibn Zohr
in Agadir, Morocco to provide international research experience for students.
The skills and experience students gain through this project will be applicable
to other food and livelihood systems in the United States and throughout the
world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this collaborative USF-UC
Merced IRES project is to train an interdisciplinary workforce to research and
design socially and environmentally sustainable and equitable systems. Specific
objectives of USF-UC Merced IRES are to: (1) Provide interdisciplinary summer
research opportunities between environmental engineers and scientists and
anthropologists, (2) Educate students in environmental and social life cycle
assessment (E-LCA and S-LCA) and thinking to better design systems, (3) Train
students in household livelihood systems approaches and ethnographic and
qualitative research methods, (4) Exchange research findings with host
communities and partner institutions to improve the environmental sustainability
and socioeconomic benefits of argan oil production as a model for other food
systems, (5) Increase the amount of underrepresented minorities, women, and
lower income students that participate in international research and improve the
long-term global competency of the U.S. workforce, and (6) Strengthen
collaboration between the United States and international institutions in
Morocco.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.