* 1952977
* The Baylor Analysis Conference: From Operator Theory to Orthogonal Polynomials, Combinatorics, and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Andrei Martinez-Finkelshtein, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 12/31/2022
* USD 24,750.00

The Baylor Analysis Conference: From Operator Theory to Orthogonal Polynomials,
takes place May 18-22, 2020 at Baylor University, Waco, TX. This conference will
bring together scholars from around the world for fruitful scientific exchange
in a broad range of areas of analysis and other fields of mathematics. It will
give a convenient framework for interaction of senior and early-career
researchers and advanced graduate students, and it will facilitate interaction
among researchers working in different areas. As a distinguishing feature, this
meeting will expose a wide-ranging group of researchers to related work that is
normally outside their area of specialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference is organized around topics including operator and spectral theory,
special functions and orthogonal polynomials, and their connections with
combinatorics, probability theory, and number theory. As an interdisciplinary
conference, it has the potential to stimulate synergy and cross-fertilization of
ideas from the participating areas. Moreover, we are witnessing a fast
development of analytic methods in spectral and scattering theory, probability
theory, random matrix theory, and enumerative combinatorics (such as asymptotic
analysis of random matrices, random growth models and combinatorial problems
using the orthogonal polynomials approach and the Riemann-Hilbert techniques
borrowed from the inverse scattering and integrable systems toolbox), and, as a
consequence, new problems and questions come within reach of these methods.
Conference website:
https://www.baylor.edu/math/conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.