* 1952964
* IRES Track II: Translanguaging Science - Assessment of Language Proficiency and Processing Across Languages and Modalities
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Joseph Hill, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2023
* USD 401,828.00

For a large number of children in the United States, knowing more than one
language is increasingly common. For many children this takes the form of two or
more spoken languages, but for those children who are deaf and hard-of-hearing
(DHH), their languages are often signed and spoken and therefore structurally
different from each other. Much work has yet to be done to understand the
process of language acquisition for these unimodal (speech-speech) and bimodal
(sign-speech) bilinguals. The way in which English is acquired is likely to be
influenced by the modality and typology of the other languages that the child
knows. One particular challenge is determining whether a child’s acquisition of
English is atypical or typical given their school and home language environment.
Researchers studying the United States’ population of DHH children are often
equipped to study only one of the child’s language modalities, either signed
(ASL) or spoken (English and/or Spanish). This may result in underestimating a
multilingual child’s linguistic abilities, or a failure to detect and intervene
when language difficulties emerge. The objective of this award is to provide
advanced training to 20 U.S. graduate students across two ASIs in the assessment
of multiple languages in multiple modalities (signed, spoken, written) within a
theoretical framework – translanguaging – that centers multilingual children and
how they use their languages for different purposes. There will be a particular
emphasis on the situation of DHH children, for whom acquisition of English is
often highly variable despite its importance for integration into the U.S.
workforce and economy. &lt;br/&gt;​ &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the ASI is to
enhance literacy research with the application of translanguaging theory to the
methods of language assessment and processing. For two years, 10 U.S. graduate
students will be selected to ensure diverse cohorts who have demonstrated an
aptitude for scientific research. Students will be selected on the basis of
strong academic standing, recommendations from advisors and other faculty, and a
clear statement of research interests that demonstrates a strong potential to
benefit from the ASI curriculum. Selected students will participate in a two-
week summer ASI hosted by Stockholm University, and taught by faculty from the
United States, the United Kingdom and Sweden. Stockholm University is a leading
center for the study of multilingualism and language acquisition in DHH
children. Students will have access to an outstanding US and European faculty,
and to cutting edge resources at the new Stockholm University Brain Imaging
Center. The two major ASI themes will be language assessment and language
processing. Students will learn how to assess language proficiency and
processing across modalities using behavioral, EEG and eye tracking methods.
They will also receive a grounding in translanguaging theory and address the
theoretical and practical issues when assessing DHH children who use multiple
languages. The ASIs will also incorporate advanced statistical training in
longitudinal data analysis in order to provide the tools needed to study
language development. Students will participate in lectures and research talks,
small and large group activities, and one-on-one interactive discussions with
research mentors. Before, during, and after the ASI, the students will work with
those research mentors to develop a Doctoral Dissertation Improvement grant
proposal. This proposal will serve as the primary means for assessing student
learning and will be the primary short-term outcomes of the ASIs. Longer term
outcomes include new international collaborations, an increase in theoretical
innovation, and better recruitment and retention of DHH graduate students in
doctoral programs. ASI administrators will work closely with colleagues who have
active mentoring programs for DHH students to ensure the development of
individualized educational plans that will allow students to maximize this
learning opportunity and prepare a new generation of U.S, researchers to study
the complexities of multimodal and multilingual language
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.