* 1952884
* SRN: Integrated Urban Infrastructure Solutions for Environmentally Sustainable, Healthy and Livable Cities.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Anu Ramaswami, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 3,752,167.00

1444745 (Ramaswami)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several hundred cities in the US and
abroad, including 40 of the world's most populous cities (the C40 cities) have
announced goals that include environmental sustainability, health, climate-
resiliency and livability. Engineered infrastructures - defined broadly to
include the seven key sectors that provide water, energy, food, sanitation/waste
management, transportation (connectivity and access) and public spaces to more
than half the world's people living in cities today - are essential in achieving
these multi-faceted societal goals. Increasingly, cities are exploring the
proposition that movement from large centralized systems toward local or
distributed infrastructure, combined with changes in user-behavior and
corresponding changes in institutions and policy in all the above sectors - is a
critical pathway in achieving the triple goals of environment, health and
livability (EHL goals). However, this proposition has never been verified on the
ground due to three key gaps in the science of developing EHL focused cities,
namely: (i) lack of standard metrics for monitoring EHL urban outcomes; (ii)
lack of understanding of the role of social actors - across multiple scales from
the household to city/ regional government - in the adoption and stewardship of
distributed infrastructure solutions, and (iii) lack of dynamic urban models
that can represent the EHL outcomes associated with distributed infrastructure
systems and explore city futures. This SRN will bring together a network of
universities, cities and industry partners who, jointly, will co-develop the
science of sustainability, practical knowledge and policy innovations that will
enable urban infrastructure transformation toward environmentally-sustainable,
healthy and livable (EHL) cities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three primary research
thrusts will support this transformation of urban infrastructure. Theme 1 of the
SRN will develop the science of integrated measurement of environmental
sustainability, health and livability (EHL), capturing linkages, synergies and
trade-offs, considering human-environment interactions with all the seven
infrastructure sectors together. Theme 2 of the SRN will develop new principles
for designing integrated social-infrastructural solutions, with engineering and
social science fully assimilated across home-, neighborhood- and city-regional
scales, drawing upon innovative field experiments underway in the SRN cities (7
U.S. and 4 Asian) linked with test beds in SRN research labs. Finally, Theme 3
will operationalize the new knowledge created in Themes 1 and 2, to describe the
dynamic interactions between natural systems, urban design, infrastructures and
people in a democratized simulation environment, which expands upon a platform
used by cities across the globe to allow multiple stakeholders to explore city
futures with distributed infrastructure scenarios based. The SRN will focus on
linking research and education with concrete actions in SRN partner cities. By
closely working with community, government and industry collaborators, the SRN
will operationalize the Network's findings well beyond a research setting,
enabling real-world impact. The SRN's focus on the role of distributed
infrastructure in urban sustainability and the large data base the SRN will
develop as part of the Theme 2 will pave the way for future research endeavors
in urban sustainability. Among the SRN's outreach, training and education foci
are: (i) training of Public Officials on design and implementation of coupled
social-infrastructural solution through collaborations with our partner cities,
and nationally- the National League of Cities, City Managers Association; (ii) a
Summer REU program that engages Native Indian Students from a network of 6
Tribal Colleges - from the undergraduate level to graduate degrees, and (iii) an
innovative interdisciplinary summer school on Integrated Infrastructure
Solutions for Sustainable, Healthy and Livable Cities- for students at all 9 SRN
Universities, connecting environmental sciences, infrastructure engineering,
urban planning, social sciences, public affairs, and public health.