* 1952183
* SCC-PG Smart Septic Strategies: Data Integration to Manage Hidden Infrastructure Threats to Our Homes and Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Brian Bledsoe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Residential systems collect and treat wastewater from home toilets, sinks,
baths, and washing appliances and are a key component of the water
infrastructure of the United States. Approximately one in four U.S. households
relies on septic systems to treat their wastewater. Most of this vast hidden
infrastructure is poorly maintained and periodically overloaded by periods of
high water use and/or household leaks. Improving the functionality of these
systems will lead to significant improvements to public health and environmental
quality by reducing the volumes of untreated or under-treated wastewater
released into the environment, which in turn will reduce exposures to dangerous
pathogens in groundwater and surface waters, improve aquatic ecosystem health by
reducing excess nutrient discharges, and avoid economic losses of closed fishing
areas and beaches associated with high bacterial levels in the water. The
results of this project will ultimately enable the development of smart septic
systems, improved infrastructure asset management, and reduced threats to homes,
health, water supplies, and the natural environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be the first to integrate high quality data on household-scale
water use and leak patterns from existing smart water meters, in situ sensor
measurements of septic system behavior, automated processing of infrared (IR)
aerial imagery that can show septic system failure, and continuous monitoring of
septic contamination in community streams with water quality sensors to enable
smart septic systems, infrastructure asset management, and reduced threats to
homes, health, and water supplies. The project will also create innovative data
analytics tools that will generate household water usage profile breakdowns for
specific fixtures and appliances, and further detect, classify and quantify
water leakages and the impact to septic tank failures. The development of these
processes and constituent technology will be performed in close collaboration
with septic management and regulatory officials as the state, regional, and
local level to ensure that the processes and products that result from this
research will a meaningful real-world impact on this important and long-
neglected issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.