* 1952469
* Light-induced liquid flow control for biomimetic retinal implants and therapies
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sang-Woo Seo, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 06/30/2024
* USD 349,999.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; Retinal prosthesis is a type of neural prosthesis, which is
an implant process to restore or treat damaged sensory elements in the neural
system. It is well known that complex information transfer in neural cells is
primarily through biochemical reactions. Neurotransmitter-based chemical
stimulation is a relatively new concept and has demonstrated its potential to
mimic neural information processing. However, most of the current efforts rely
on limited cell numbers and their responses because of the lack of appropriate
methods to investigate large cell populations. Neural cell arrangement in the
retina is especially in a highly arrayed configuration. As such, their neural
activities are interconnected with surrounding cells. To better understand the
large-scale neural signal processing and develop clinically applicable neural
prostheses, it is important to mimic the synaptic functionality of releasing
neurotransmitters in a large, arrayed configuration with high spatial
resolution. The proposed research work will provide a solution for this critical
need and develop light-induced liquid flow control, especially for large-scale
chemical stimulation. In addition to the technical impacts, the broader impact
of the proposed program will be the education and training of a new generation
of workforces for future scientific community. The City College of New York is
well-positioned to attract its dominant underrepresented minorities. The project
will integrate the research activities into the current curriculum to provide
undergraduate and graduate students with hands-on experience and research
opportunities. The proposed research activities will also be integrated into
outreach activities through lab demos, tours, and summer internships for high
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed research
program is to advance the scientific and technological &lt;br/&gt;foundations
for large-arrayed neurotransmitter-based chemical stimulation with application
to retinal prosthesis. The project will implement a self-powered, three-
dimensional microfluidic platform to address the fundamental limitations of the
current chemical stimulation approach when it is applied to highly
interconnected, large arrayed neural stimulation. Two control mechanisms will be
studied. One is based on light-induced electroosmotic effect, and the other is
based on light-induced physical on-off valves using stimulus-responsive
polymers. The successful completion of this project will significantly simplify
overall system complexities for chemically stimulating densely populated cells
and initiate a new paradigm of chemical stimulation that can be potentially
applied to large-area, with high spatial resolution, without limiting its
scalability. The resulting platform will have broad impacts of translating the
current chemical stimulation approach from a bench-top laboratory setting to
practical neural prostheses and therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.