* 1952635
* The Dynamics of Curved Fluid Films Between Complex Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Eric Stefan Shaqfeh, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 344,984.00

The dynamics of thin films are critical to the coalescence of drops, foam
stability, the action of lubricants of all types, as well as, “drying’’
phenomena of all kinds, including the levelling of paints and coatings. In our
bodies, thin fluid films play a key role in a wide array of processes including
the cleaning of the air after inhalation, the ability to see clearly under all
kinds of conditions through the so-called “tear film”, and the ability of single
red blood cells to transfer oxygen in capillaries. It is now known and has been
demonstrated repeatedly in experiments over the last decade that very small
inhomogeneities in the films (i.e. impurities), generate film thickness patterns
that can be time dependent and chaotic. These dynamics can even lead to a new
kind of “turbulence”. There is very little physical understanding of the
formation of these complex patterns, which, once they appear, completely control
the lifetime and evolution of the thin films. So, for example, they determine
whether a foam is stable or unstable or whether a lubricant fails or remains
useful. The research integrates theory, numerical simulations, and experiments
to develop a physical understanding of these complex dynamics and the conditions
in which they may occur. The knowledge learned during the research will be
disseminated in two classes at Stanford, three high school teachers will be
involved in the research with summer internships, and the Stanford STAR –
Scientific Teaching Through Art – program will highlight the natural beauty of
the dynamics of these films and visually develop appealing stories to reach a
broad audience including high school and community college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the understanding of these thin
film chaotic dynamics the research will employ direct numerical simulation (DNS)
via a lubrication or “thin film” theory– thus even with the “thin film”
assumption a large numerical solution is required. The research will elucidate
via numerical simulation over parameter regimes associated with previously
accomplished experiments, what are the conditions and mechanisms for the
formation of these patterns. The simulations will be coupled with additional
experiments to directly test whether a new physical understanding has been
successfully modelled. The research goal is to delineate the parameter regimes
where prior simplifying assumptions regarding space and time development are not
valid, thus fundamentally changing the study of thin film dynamics between
complex interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.