* 1952888
* EAR-PF: Unraveling the Convergent Origins of Secondary Palates in Amniotes
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Zachary Morris, Morris, Zachary
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2023
* USD 236,000.00

Dr. Zachary S. Morris has been granted an NSF EAR postdoctoral fellowship to
conduct research and outreach activities at Yale University under the mentorship
of Dr. Bhart-Anjan S. Bhullar. Convergent evolution, or the independent
derivation of similar features, as observed in the fossil record is arguably the
greatest evidence of evolution by natural selection. However, how and why
convergent evolution has happened is often poorly characterized. One striking,
and understudied, example of convergent evolution is that of the secondary
palate in amniotes (reptiles, mammals, and birds), which completely restructures
the roof of the mouth and affects both feeding and breathing. This project will
integrate analyses of the fossil record and developmental processes, to
understand the timing and pattern of palate evolution and increase our
understanding of the mechanisms driving the important phenomenon of convergent
evolution. This project is an ideal platform for the mentorship of students, the
development of classroom and public lectures, and outreach and education about
the fossil record and developmental mechanisms of evolutionary change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living amniotes and their extinct relatives in the fossil
record display an astounding array of palate specializations, reflecting over
300 million years of evolutionary specialization in anatomy, diet, and behavior.
Ancestrally the amniote palate allows the nasal passage to open into the mouth
anteriorly, but mammals, crocodilians, and some lizards and turtles have
independently derived an ossified secondary palate that segregates respiratory
and olfactory functions from food acquisition and processing. This project will
use quantitative analysis of the fossil record and modern evolutionary modeling
with state-of-the-art imaging of embryonic anatomy in 3D to address two major
research questions: 1) how has amniote palate shape evolved and secondary palate
convergence been achieved? and 2) how has palate development changed to allow
secondary palate convergence? By studying palate shape change at two distinct
scales, macroevolutionary and developmental, the results of this project will
reveal insights into the fundamental developmental and evolutionary mechanism
that underlie the phenomenon of convergent evolution. Dr. Morris will develop
educational materials for undergraduate and graduate students as well as public
outreach activities through the Yale Peabody Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.