* 1952993
* LEAP-HI: Engineering New Solutions to Reduce the Burden of Skeletal Fracture
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Laura Pyrak-Nolte, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2025
* USD 2,012,957.00

Each year in the USA alone up to 1.5 million age-related bone fractures occur
and bone fractures are expected to increase in the coming years due to the
current unprecedented growth in the elderly population. Thus, the nation is
entering a looming medical and economic crisis threatening to weaken America’s
quality of life and prosperity. Medical treatments have focused on reducing
fracture risk by maximizing bone quantity. Yet, outcomes have stalled at a
modest level of impact on reducing population fracture risk. There is a need for
new strategies to prevent age-related bone fragility. This Leading Engineering
for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) award supports
fundamental research on transformational changes in reducing fracture risk
through bone hydration. The concept of enhanced bone hydration is a novel and
promising pathway to reduce bone fragility that seeks to improve the quality of
bone tissue by combining expertise in materials engineering, physics, mechanics,
biology, and biomedical sciences. This approach underpins a sustained
interdisciplinary approach for translational impact that provides educational
opportunities for a broad range of learners. The team will work with the
specific at-risk age group of the population in outreach engagements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhanced bone hydration is a promising pathway to reduce
bone fragility. This approach leverages tissue properties that are independent
of bone mass or density. Yet, there are several scientific barriers to overcome
to realize this approach. This award supports research on the biomechanisms
through which hydration alters local and tissue-level deformation and fragility.
Three key research questions are addressed: (1) How can in-depth understanding
of bone fracture toughness guide deployment of hydration as a therapeutic
approach to increase bone fracture resilience? (2) What are the differences in
biomechanical properties of water-hydrated bone vs bone hydrated under
pharmacologically modulated conditions? (3) How can current clinical prediction
models for bone fracture analysis become predictive under consideration of
hydration conditions? Research will be conducted on bone tissue specimens that
will be subjected to ex vivo pharmacologically treatment to modulate hydration.
Bone microstructure, mineralization and degree and type of tissue hydration will
be measured and correlated to the deformation and fracture behavior bone in the
control and modulated state and ex vivo finding will be extended to whole bone
and in vivo conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.