* 1952848
* The Second International Conference on Computational Methods and Applications in Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Mohsen Razzaghi, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 03/31/2023
* USD 13,999.00

This award supports participation in the Second International Conference on
Computational Methods and Applications in Engineering held at Mississippi State
University on May 7-9, 2020. With the rapid development of high-performance
computing and its applications, robust mathematical models and their efficient
computational algorithms and simulations have emerged as an essential analysis
tool in science and engineering. In this regard, various professional
scientific/engineering societies host cross-disciplinary conferences and
meetings in related areas. However, a truly multidisciplinary conference with a
focused theme, which provides a forum for mathematical scientists and engineers
to share their research, is needed in the field of computational mathematics,
sciences, and engineering. Moreover, this effort should reach researchers from
many different countries. For this purpose, an interdisciplinary conference was
successfully organized in 2018 by Mississippi State University and Universitatea
Politehnica Timisoara, Romania. The main objective of this project is to
continue to carry the same theme and tradition of the first conference and to
host “The Second International Conference on Computational Methods and
Applications in Engineering” on the campus of Mississippi State University. A
mission of the conference is to further expand the established collaboration
between the organizing institutions and to provide a joint forum where
computational scientists and engineers from all over the world exchange research
ideas in related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference offers five
plenary lectures to be given by experts. The conference will also feature around
50 mini-symposium talks and 80 contributed papers. The mini-symposium topics
include: 1) Recent Developments in Non-conforming Finite Element Methods, 2)
Recent Advances in Time-Integration of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs), 3)
Instability, Transition and Turbulence in Fluids: from Fundamentals to
Applications, 4) Constitutive Modeling of Engineering Materials and
Computational Simulations, 5) Lower Length Scale Methods in Machine Learning, 6)
Recent Advances in Numerical PDEs: Fast Algorithms and Applications, 7)
Numerical Methods and Models for High-Performance Computational Fluid Dynamics,
and 8) Numerical Methods for Optimization Problems with PDE Constraints.
Proceedings of the conference will be published as refereed manuscripts in a
special issue of the Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics. The
conference will provide graduate students and early career researchers with an
opportunity to present their work, meet other researchers and educators, and
learn of recent developments in the field of computational methods and
engineering applications. More details are available on the conference web site
https://www.iccmae2020.math.msstate.edu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.