* 1952192
* SCC-PG: JST: Privacy-enhanced data-driven health monitoring for smart and connected senior communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Weihua An, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 75,000.00

Many countries, including the United States and Japan, are facing a rapidly
aging population. Improving the quality of healthcare and quality of life for
senior citizens while managing and even reducing the health and social care
costs is a critical challenge. The growth and accessibility of wearable devices
enable continuous monitoring of a personâ€™s vital signs and other health
indicators. These wearable data, combined with medical records and other
community and environment data, are particularly valuable for senior communities
in order to identify new conditions or relapses for early intervention.
Collectively, such data from different individuals, communities, and countries,
can be used to learn better predictive models and improve population health at
large. This project aims to build a multidisciplinary team including academic
researchers with complementary expertise (big data, privacy and security,
machine learning, human-computer interaction, sociology, and mobile health) and
community stakeholders (seniors, community service providers, healthcare
providers, and government agencies), to understand the unique challenges and
form a research agenda for developing and deploying a health monitoring system
for senior communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study: 1) data
integration and machine learning techniques to integrate data from multiple
sources in real time for monitoring and intervention; and to leverage the data
from different communities to improve healthcare outcome and medical research;
2) privacy-enhancing techniques including differential privacy and federated
learning to ensure the system is compliant with regulations, while balancing the
privacy protection and utility of the system; and 3) social implications and
cultural differences of the technology in the two countries via online surveys
and qualitative studies to identify challenges and barriers in health monitoring
for senior communities, and their impact on the design and adoption of the
proposed technology. The project includes a set of community engagement
activities in order to develop a research agenda that can not only empower the
senior communities and improve their health and well-being, but also enable
data-driven medical research that improves population health at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.