* 1952473
* RUI: Exploring the Algebraic Geometry of Matroids
* MPS,DMS
* 09/04/2019,08/31/2022
* Noah Giansiracusa, Bentley University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2022
* USD 118,537.00

There have been recent breakthroughs in parts of combinatorics related to
matroid theory coming from the importation of tools and ideas from algebraic
geometry, which is the study of systems of polynomial equations and their
solutions. The PI will further develop the bridge between algebraic geometry and
matroid theory, thereby allowing insight and progress in one subject to carry
over to the other. This paves the way for well-known applications of matroids in
topics such as optimization and network theory to draw from the heavily
developed, and computationally powerful, machinery of algebraic geometry. The PI
will also run a summer enrichment program, focusing on interactions between math
and law, for disadvantaged minority students at a nearby underfunded public high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's program of bringing more
algebraic geometry into matroid theory consists of three projects. (1) Matroids
can be viewed as modules over the two-element Boolean semifield or as tensors in
a tropical exterior algebra. By extending this framework the PI
will&lt;br/&gt;geometrize various combinatorial constructions and results in the
matroid literature. Motivating problems focus on transversal matroids and
matroid irreducibility. (2) The maximal torus action on the Grassmannian
beautifully brings together topology, combinatorics, representation theory, and
algebraic geometry. The PI is extending portions of this story to diagonal
subtori. This opens several paths of investigation, including the possibility of
extending the K-theoretic interpretation of the Tutte polynomial from matroids
to their multiset generalization, discrete polymatroids. (3) The PI is applying
the tropical scheme theory he co-developed to construct a functorial moduli
space of matroids. This entails a careful understanding of how matroids vary
algebraically in families and could lead to an eventual Schubert calculus on the
Dressian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.