* 1952169
* SCC-PG: Sustainable Food Access through Sensing, Data Analytics, and Community Engagement
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Sherif Abdelwahed, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 144,325.00

Food deserts, generally defined as areas in which it is difficult to buy an
affordable, high-quality fresh food, are not exclusive to urban or rural areas,
but more indicative of under-served communities, low-income households, and
minority neighborhoods. Food deserts are not only a health issue but also a
community development and equity issue. Access to safe and nutritious food is a
fundamental individual right. This project aims to address the food desert
problem in Greater Richmond area, by engaging a wide range of food access-
related stakeholders and utilizing the power of data analytics and advanced
smart technologies to achieve sustainable food access program, leading to higher
levels of quality of life and health for the city
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing smart technologies to improve food
access for a large segment of the community is not a straightforward task. There
are many questions to be answered in order to realize the potential of these
technologies, including: (1) what are the data needed to better understand and
help address the food desert problem. (2) What are the social and economic
impacts of food deserts? (3) What are the main factors contributing to limited
food access in certain geographical areas? (4) What are the technologies and
cyber-infrastructure that can help address the food access problem? (5) How to
encourage micro-businesses to help tackle limited food accessibility? (6) How to
present food desert data efficiently to help in decision-making?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project will assemble a core group of
scientists in engineering, life sciences, social work and government policy
colleges to engage with community leaders and stakeholders, to identify through
both quantitative and qualitative assessment the key challenges to sustainable
food access in Richmond and its adjoining communities, and create the knowledge
and tools for community-based sustainable food access program. This will be
achieved by (1) developing a fundamental understanding of challenges facing
communities due to food desert problem, (2) developing a better understanding of
the factors contributing to food access problem, (3) recognizing various types
of data collection in communities for addressing food access challenge, (4)
deriving data-analytics techniques that can help identify effective solutions
and evaluate their impacts, and (5) facilitate customized sensing, data-
management, cyber-infrastructure and smart technologies solutions to develop a
robust program for sustainable food access. The proposed plan will offer a
research and development model that can be extended to other cities and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.