* 1952281
* Sirtuins as rewiring points to evolve new responses to low NAD+ stress in yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Laura Rusche, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/29/2024
* USD 781,164.00

This project investigates how new traits are created through changes in the set
of genes that are activated upon stress. It will uncover basic principles of
molecular evolution that explain how organisms adapt to environmental changes in
the short term and how species adapt to environmental changes in the long term.
The project focuses on a molecule called nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, or
NAD+, which is required to extract energy from nutrients. NAD+ levels in cells
fluctuate with metabolic conditions, and these fluctuations are sensed by a
widespread family of proteins called sirtuins. When NAD+ levels are
insufficient, sirtuins allow particular genes to become active, which produces a
response that allows the organism to adjust to the low NAD+. This project
examines the hypothesis that new responses to low NAD+ stress can arise when new
genes come under the control of sirtuins. In addition to advancing the
understanding of molecular evolutionary processes, this project will enhance the
scientific infrastructure by training the next generation of scientists in three
ways. First, the experiments will be conducted by two PhD students. Through
their work, the students will learn analytical, laboratory, and computational
skills. Second, the project will provide summer research opportunities for four
undergraduates. These undergraduates will be introduced to experimental science
and discover whether a research career is a good fit. Third, the project will
enhance undergraduate education in genetics at the University at Buffalo. The PI
will develop interactive teaching modules for an undergraduate genetics course.
These activities will increase student engagement and academic success by
helping them appreciate the relevance of genetics to their lives and careers.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although scientists have long studied how deacetylation
by sirtuins modulates cellular processes, there has been little consideration of
the evolutionary implications of changes in sirtuin targets. This project
addresses the issue by investigating how the yeast sirtuin-containing complex
SUM1C contributes to phenotypic variation and adaptive evolution. SUM1C is
composed of a sirtuin deacetylase and a DNA-binding protein that targets the
deacetylase to particular genomic locations. The central hypothesis is that
SUM1C serves as a rewiring point that allows yeast species to evolve distinct
responses to low NAD+ stress by bringing new genes under the control of an
NAD+-dependent deacetylase. This project will identify SUM1C target genes in
eight phylogenetically distributed yeast species using a combination of RNA-Seq
and ChIP-Seq. These data will be used to (i) investigate how SUM1C tunes
transcriptional output to intracellular [NAD+] and (ii) determine the functional
consequences of changes in the set of SUM1C targets. In so doing, this work will
provide new insights into how sirtuin deacetylases, which are broadly conserved
across the tree of life, contribute to phenotypic variation in the short term
and adaptive evolution in the long-term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.