* 1952013
* SCC-PG: Developing Food Oases in the Urban Food Deserts with Smart Urban Grower Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Sookhee Oh, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,610.00

This Smart and Connected Communities planning grant aims to build a
collaborative ecosystem among urban growers/producers and create bridges from
these farmers to underserved low-income neighborhoods in Kansas City. This
planning project will focus on identifying the needs and challenges of
stakeholders from both urban growers and food desert communities who have
limited access to healthy and affordable food. In addition to the involvement of
these key stakeholder groups, the project involves multiple disciplines from the
geosciences, computer sciences, social sciences, and the transportation and food
engineering sciences. This multi-disciplinary, stakeholder driven approach seeks
to better understand the problems and issues of grower and underserved
communities in order to develop science-based solutions to address problems
associated with food insecurity issues in urban environments. The project aligns
directly with NSFâ€™s mission by employing multi-disciplinary science and
engineering to address food security issues to address the welfare and health of
vulnerable, food insecure urban populations. This project will have significant
broader societal impacts beyond the Kansas City metro area as it aims to create
a transferable model for other urban communities across the United States. New
findings and technical solutions will be widely disseminated to the broader
stakeholder communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has at its foundation
the development of a secure social/informational platform serving both urban
growers (food producers) and residents in food deserts (consumers), integrating
them into a urban community through data cultivation and dynamic integration of
data on transportation, food processing, and food insecure neighborhoods. The
transformative platform will be built on a form of multi-disciplinary data
layering and processing consisting of: (1) an Internet of Things (IoT) Sensing
Network Layer that builds a smart farm sensing system for cost-effective food
production via automated real-time data collection and dissemination, (2)
Socioeconomic Layer that assesses socioeconomic benefits to urban growers and
low-income residents, (3) Transportation Layer that explores fledgling
transportation solutions such as delivery sharing, micro-transportation, and
drones, and (4) Food and Nutrition Layer that builds knowledge platforms for
urban farmers about food processing and preservation techniques to improve the
shelf life and safety of fresh products to better meet the nutritional needs of
vulnerable populations. A significant planning effort will be made for community
engagement through neighborhood seminars, field training, focus group meetings,
and survey development through partnerships with the University of Missouri
Extension, Cultivate KC, and Antioch Urban Growers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.