* 1952353
* PreCheck: Understanding Press Release Exaggeration (PRE) of Scientific Research
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Bei Yu, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 375,000.00

The accuracy of press releases plays a critical role in the public’s
understanding of science and public trust in scientific research. However,
several types of exaggeration have been found in press releases, such as making
causal claims from correlational findings and inference to humans from animal
studies. These exaggerations cause misinformation to be spread to the public
through both social media and the mainstream media. This project furthers our
understanding of how scholarly research findings may be miscommunicated to
policymakers and the public by using state-of-the-art techniques in machine
learning and artificial intelligence. This project provides an in-depth
understanding at both micro- and macro-levels. On the micro-level, the project
examines precisely when and where exaggeration occurs. On the macro-level, the
project will examine the prevalence of exaggeration over time and across domains
and institutions. These findings will provide useful insights for improving the
quality of press releases as an important channel for science communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a large-scale, nuanced
understanding of exaggerations in press releases issued by research
institutions. The project develops a NLP and deep learning tool called PreCheck,
which will automatically checking press release exaggeration, Specifically,
PreCheck will link the press releases in EurekAlert!, the major academic press
release portal, to the original research articles in PubMed, and then use
machine learning and NLP techniques to examine each press release regarding two
major types of exaggeration: causal claims of correlational findings and
inference to humans from animal studies. Once exaggerations can be identified at
the individual press release level, aggregated analyses will be done to answer
research questions regarding the status and trend of press release exaggeration
and its relationship with research areas and research institutions. The study
results will be shared with press officers from various research institutions to
discuss the research findings and their implications for communicating
scientific research through press releases. In addition, PreCheck will be made
publicly available so that science communicators can perform their own
communication and science consumers can have a way to measure potential
exaggeration in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.