* 1952045
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Smart Integrated Farm Network for Rural Agricultural Communities (SIRAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Sajal Das, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,531,830.00

With a goal to form a community of Smart and Connected Farms (SCFs), this
innovative project aims to establish a Smart Integrated Farm Network for Rural
Agricultural Communities (SIRAC). The goal is to improve timely data sharing and
knowledge exchange among farmers community for coordinated responses to
production threats (weed, disease, insect, pest, weather), ensuring
profitability. The project will develop a flexible, scalable and efficient
communication infrastructure for SCFs; provide privacy-preserving data analytics
across farms for community-level decision-making; establish community of
practice to facilitate learning and feedback among farmers/scientists, trusted
data and technology acceptance; and demonstrate economic benefit to
SCFs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of SIRAC project lies in the holistic
integration of multiband dynamic spectrum access (DSA) technology for rural
connectivity and community decision-making, with social translational research
to address adoptability, trust, and risk preferences, and economics research to
benefit farmers. Mobile crowd sensing will improve trustworthiness and decision
accuracy of information spread. Fundamental contributions involve the
development of novel routing algorithms, privacy-preserving machine learning
techniques, and affordable communication infrastructure with unlicensed multiple
spectrum bands to create SCF community for efficient data sharing. Translational
research model with behavioral experiments will identify social and economic
incentives for farmers/stakeholders leading to technological
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SIRAC framework has the potential to
provide tremendous impacts, as it can be adapted and replicated in different
rural areas. The proposed (rural) communications technology will apply to a
broad range of smart and connected communities. The assessment of social and
economic incentives for farmers and other stakeholders will facilitate
participation in SCF network. The project will motivate next generation of
scientists and farmers to contribute to smart agricultural communities with
innovative solutions. Results will be disseminated via web lecture series,
invited talks, a dedicated project website, participants and other communities,
extension field days, conferences and workshops, and peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SIRAC repository will maintain computational
codes, models, real world and simulation data, experimental results for two
years after the project period is over. The project website will provide two
levels of access: Public and Login Required. An account can be created via
registration with no charge. Additionally, developed codes and simulation models
will be available to the community through the Iowa State University’s digital
repository. Permission will be granted to freely use and distribute the
anonymized data from simulations and field experiments with due acknowledgement
of the copyright notice and the authors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.