* 1952846
* CAS: RUI: Click Synthesis and Structure-Property-Function Relationships of Amphiphilic Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Arsalan Mirjafari, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2023
* USD 249,783.00

In this RUI project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Arsalan Mirjafari and his students
of the Department of Chemistry &amp; Physics at the Florida Gulf Coast
University are developing new type of organic materials called ionic liquids.
Ionic liquids are liquid salts comprised entirely of ions. The search for new
ionic liquids is driven in part by efforts to address unmet needs in medicine
and energy. Salts of this kind can be utilized as alternatives for more
conventional organic solvents in various applications, including electronic
materials, new generation of rechargeable batteries, and gene delivery. The
project is designed to advance the scientific enterprise in tandem with
educating and training undergraduate students to become the next generation of
chemists. The project brings together elements of chemical synthesis, computer
modeling as well as advanced materials development and characterizations,
providing undergraduate students with opportunities to experience faculty-
mentored research. Since Florida Gulf Coast University has a large
underrepresented minority population in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math (STEM) fields, the project provides important opportunities to engage in
the professional training of individuals from these communities. Outreach
activities involving local middle and high schools is part of the funded project
as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental to the field of ionic liquids is the
understanding that structure begets function. In this project, Professor
Mirjafari seeks the development of functional ionic liquids that simultaneously
have improved fluidity and amphiphilic character â€“ a combination of attributes
that, while frequently antithetical, is very desirable in many applications.
Click reactions are utilized to incorporate a diverse array of functional groups
into the thioamide-based heterocyclic cations structures. The research involves
efforts to understand the relationships between the chemical structure and
physicochemical properties and the development of ionic liquids for specific
functions including aliphatic/aromatic separation, liquid crystals, fluoride-ion
electrochemistry, and gene transfer. New strategies are being pursued to improve
the chemical stability and toxicity profiles of ionic
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.