* 1952808
* EAR-PF: Unleashing the petrogenetic potential of sanidine using a combined compositional, experimental, and 3D textural approach
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Hannah Shamloo, Shamloo, Hannah I
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Hannah Shamloo has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and educational plans at Oregon State University alongside mentor,
Professor Adam Kent. This investigation will examine the processes that produce
some of the largest volcanic eruptions known, through the study of minerals
present in erupted magmas. The tool developed will help to accurately and
quantitively resolve the many processes recorded in zoned minerals that lead to
large eruptions. The information for relating magmatic/volcanic processes
obtained from individual Barium (Ba) zoning in minerals is critical to the real-
time volcano monitoring efforts of future eruptions. This study will consist of
three components, (1) quantifying chemical characteristics of natural zoned
sanidine from supervolcanoes, (2) perform novel 3D textural characterization of
Ba zoning in sanidine, and (3) conduct a series of experiments under relevant
conditions to shallow and evolved magmatic systems to constrain the behavior of
Ba and other trace elements in sanidine. Additionally, the education plan will
entail research opportunities for undergraduates related to this project,
teaching opportunities with a focus on minorities in STEM, and outreach via
social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will better resolve large-
scale processes recorded in zoned minerals including pluton formation,
initiation of volcanic eruptions, and formation of continental crust. Although
the zoning of Ba in sanidine and other alkali-feldspar has been widely
documented since at least the 1970â€™s, its use as a quantitative tool is severely
limited by a lack of fundamental data, and as a result, hypotheses based on Ba
zoning are often difficult to test. This study will couple in-situ major- and
trace-element characterization of natural zoned sanidine from a variety of
supervolcanoes using laser ablation ICP-MS and electron microprobe, with 3D
textural characterization of Ba zoning using high-resolution X-ray
microtomography. Additionally, a series of experiments will be performed under
the relevant conditions to shallow and evolved magmatic systems using cold-seal
pressure vessels and non-end-loaded piston cylinders to quantify the
partitioning behavior of Ba in sanidine and silicic melt. This investigation
will also develop a novel technique to study chemical zoning in crystals in 3D
rather than the traditional 2D approach often used in petrology that can lead to
additional uncertainty. Broader impacts include research opportunities for
undergraduate students that will focus on recruiting members of unrepresented
minorities in STEM majors. This project received co-funding from the Petrology
and Geochemistry program in the division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.