* 1952163
* SCC-PG: Community Integration Platform for Health Science Education of Social Emotional Intelligence through Collaborative Mixed Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Marjorie Zielke, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 149,967.00

In order to maximize competitiveness, the United States must create sustainable
education pathways to develop workforce readiness through life-long education
and training using innovative educational technologies. This project leverages a
unique collaboration between Richardson Independent School District (RISD) and
the Methodist Richardson Medical Center (MRMC) to enable students to graduate
from high school with entry-level medical certifications in fields such as
Pharmacy Tech, EKG Technician or Clinical Medical Assistant and start working
immediately after high school. However, a key component to readiness for these
workers is social emotional intelligence (SEI) or the ability to successfully
handle patient/family/caregiver situations; develop cultural empathy; and
strengthen professional stamina. Skills in these areas will help these workers
gain employment and stay employed. In order to get this real-life experience,
students traditionally do clinical rotations in medical settings. However,
clinical experiences are limited, not all students can participate, and students
sometimes do not get enough hospital experience to develop SEI. Through this
planning grant, the project team will design a platform to provide education
that will expand on the clinical educational opportunities available to students
with complementary networked and collaborative virtual experiences designed to
fill SEI educational gaps and facilitate student learning through both high
school faculty and hospital staff. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this planning grant,
an established group of experts in both healthcare curriculum and learning
science methodology will confirm the required SEI skills necessary for the
students to develop and explore the immersive media that will best be able to
provide these experiences, while heavily considering the social learning or
group and observational educational opportunities between faculty, students and
hospital staff. From a technology perspective, the project planning team will
explore using educational video game environments, virtual humans, and similar
collaborative mixed reality over high speed networks such as the Richardson US
Ignite Smart Gigabit Community. This project will define mixed reality as the
appropriate balance of advanced digital technology emphasizing augmented and
virtual reality. The project will also design the metrics for determining the
platform’s viability and usability. A potential approach is design-based
research, which provides a basis for cross-disciplinary work. This iterative
research approach will integrate key community stakeholders such as students,
teachers and working professionals; learning context, e.g. hospital culture; and
integration of these factors with technology research. This research will
contribute to new types of learning paradigms that are dynamic, immersive,
engaging and distributable– thus enabling a unique type of educational platform
for sustaining critical STEM educational pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.