* 1952725
* EAR-PF: Investigating the lithospheric structure and the origins of seismic anomalies in the Southwestern United States using a joint seismic analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Eva Golos, Golos, Eva
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

An EAR Postdoctoral fellowship has been awarded to Dr. Eva Golos to carry out
research and education plans at Brown University under the mentorship of
Professor Karen Fischer. She aims to understand the structure and evolution of
the lithosphere under the southwestern United States by integrating information
from different types of seismic waves. The research will focus on how various
factors such as temperature, rock composition, and melting control the structure
and strength of the present-day lithosphere, and how this interplay has guided
tectonic evolution over geologic time scales. Dr. Golos will develop a new
inversion method using a variety of seismic data, including surface waves,
seismic waves that traverse the lithosphere, and those that have been reflected
or converted from one type of seismic wave to another. The combination of input
data will produce models with more resolution. Interpretation of the resulting
seismic model will be carried out alongside forward-modeling of the effects of
melt and anisotropy (the dependence of the speed of seismic wave propagation on
vibration direction). Information from a number of scales must be synthesized
from the grain-scale to sharp discontinuities in the mantle to the entire depth
extent of the lithosphere. The findings will yield insight into how lithospheric
properties affect deformation and surface dynamics, with implications for
natural hazards such as earthquakes and volcanoes. These applications provide a
natural starting point for outreach activities, which will be done through
programs aimed at elementary school audiences as well as through teaching and
undergraduate mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many unanswered questions pertain
to the nature of the continental lithosphere, and particularly the relative
roles of temperature, compositional variations, anisotropic structures, and the
presence and abundance of partial melt. This work aims to understand these
factors and their effects on lithospheric structure, thickness, and strength; on
deformation and the response at the surface to tectonic forces; and on the
evolution and fate of the continental lithosphere. The southwestern United
States will be used as a case study, to probe the origins of geophysical
anomalies associated with the Colorado Plateau, Basin and Range Province, and
Rio Grande Rift. The approach taken will be two-pronged. First, a seismic model
will be developed incorporating a variety of networks including the USArray
Transportable Array, Earthscope FlexArray deployments, and permanent broadband
stations. A model of shear wavespeed and discontinuity structure will be
generated through a Bayesian inversion of a plethora of seismic data, including
P-to-s and S-to-p receiver functions, Rayleigh wave phase velocity dispersion,
and body wave reflectivity autocorrelograms. The complementary nature of these
data will help resolve smooth large-scale features as well as sharp boundaries
and discontinuities. Variations in receiver functions at different frequency
bands, and from different directions, can be used to infer the sharpness and the
anisotropic properties of interfaces, respectively. The second part of this
investigation involves using forward modeling to estimate the relative effects
of thermal, compositional, and melt-related properties on seismic structure, and
to provide constraints on their interplay at regional-to-continental scales.
This project was funded jointly by the Geophysics program in the Division of
Earth Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR) office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.