* 1952346
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Developing a new Lower Cretaceous time scale: Foundation for the next generation of paleoceanographic and biogeochemical studies
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2024
* Mark Schmitz, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 10/31/2024
* USD 191,335.00

The Cretaceous was a time of global warming during which atmospheric carbon
dioxide levels surpassed 800 ppm, similar to those predicted for 2100 by
“business-as-usual” emission scenarios. Cretaceous rocks record high sea levels,
high biological productivity, massive volcanism, and major perturbations of the
carbon cycle during several ocean anoxic events (OAEs). Understanding these
phenomena can provide deep-time analogs for future greenhouse scenarios. Marine
sediments that record these crises are globally widespread but weaving these
records into a common temporal framework is essential if they are to reveal the
causes. This project aims to generate a new temporal framework spanning 125 to
93 million years ago during which several major OAEs occurred. This will permit
examination of repeated deteriorations of marine ecosystems across the Pacific,
Atlantic, and Mediterranean oceans. The team will be involved in novel outreach,
international collaboration, and training of future earth science leaders. They
will bring deep-time science to the public via presence at the Sturgis
Motorcycle Rally. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The favored hypothesis for ocean anoxic
events involves volcanic initiation leading to a cascade of processes amplifying
global marine production; key factors are the nature of volcanism and the source
of increased nutrients. Yet geographic differences in proxy records (Carbon and
Osmium isotopes) indicate additional complexities, such as sea level and ocean
circulation. The goals for the project are to establish: (1) A new time scale
for global geochemical and paleobiologic datasets; (2) Chemostratigraphic
correlation of the new time scale to European sections using isotope
stratigraphy, and (3) A new global time scale for improved understanding of
major biogeochemical perturbations. The team will: (i) Determine radioisotopic
ages of rhyolitic tuffs in sediments of Japan, (ii) Integrate these new ages
with new Osmium and Carbon isotope chemostratigraphy in Europe, (iii) Compile
global geochemical proxy data for OAE 1a within a common temporal and
stratigraphic framework, and analyze trends and patterns from the Pacific to
Europe, (iv) Evaluate the volcanic versus climatic/orbital hypotheses for OAE
initiation, and (v) Explore the significance of geography in the timing and
magnitude of geochemical signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project that is
jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s Directorate of Geosciences
(NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council (UKRI/NERC) of the
United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement
allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the
Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon
successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of
the budget and the investigators associated with its own investigators and
component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.