* 1952520
* Collaborative Research (IRES Track I): A Multi-Faceted Approach for Understanding Hydrologic Controls on Transmission Losses in Dryland Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alan Fryar, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 90,952.00

This IRES project is co-funded by Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) and Hydrologic Sciences programs
(GEO/EAR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1: &lt;br/&gt;Water resources are critical
to health and sustainable development, particularly in arid regions such as
the&lt;br/&gt;Middle East and North Africa. Water-resource management strategies
require scientific knowledge,&lt;br/&gt;physical observations, and cultural
sensitivity to ensure long-term sustainability. This program
will&lt;br/&gt;develop the abilities of young US hydrologic scientists with
diverse backgrounds to conduct research,&lt;br/&gt;communicate their findings,
and work collaboratively in an international setting. Over three
years,&lt;br/&gt;student-led projects with colleagues in Morocco will provide an
improved understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;sustainability of groundwater resources.
Understanding how aquifers are recharged by infiltration
through&lt;br/&gt;streambeds in arid regions will allow researchers to model
water-resource availability and answer&lt;br/&gt;questions about the impact of
such infiltration on water quality and ecosystem services. Students
will&lt;br/&gt;acquire both "hard" (technical) and "soft" (interpersonal) skills
by participating in online training courses&lt;br/&gt;and a workshop, in field
data collection and analysis, and in professional meetings and public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: &lt;br/&gt;This IRES project proposes to
integrate international research projects with cultural training, technical
instruction, and&lt;br/&gt;preparation for professional practice in hydrology
for 5 graduate students each year from US institutions,&lt;br/&gt;including
underrepresented colleges and universities. The proposed research examines
infiltration&lt;br/&gt;(transmission-loss) rates and variability within
ephemeral channels in arid watersheds to test whether&lt;br/&gt;modern recharge
occurs within these settings, further the understanding of transmission-loss
processes,&lt;br/&gt;and examine controlling factors. This represents a
partnership between the University of Georgia (UGA),&lt;br/&gt;University of
Kentucky, Middle Tennessee State University, and four Moroccan universities.
Three sets&lt;br/&gt;of activities will be linked to the research theme: (1)
developing technical expertise through a pre-trip&lt;br/&gt;online course, a
pre-trip workshop at UGA, and a 5-week research trip to Morocco; (2)
developing&lt;br/&gt;professional contacts and skills, including accessing and
distributing data via shared platforms,&lt;br/&gt;communicating science, writing
grant proposals, and learning scientific ethics; and (3)
conducting&lt;br/&gt;outreach to the general public, increasing studentsâ€™ global
awareness, and transferring information to&lt;br/&gt;technical users. We will
pursue continuous improvement of mentoring through training and feedback,
and&lt;br/&gt;we will evaluate student learning through both formative and
summative assessments.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work lies in the
integration of physical hydrology, geochemistry, remote&lt;br/&gt;sensing, and
modeling to determine groundwater recharge at local to regional scales under
varying&lt;br/&gt;environmental conditions. The researchers seek to determine
(1) the timing of flash floods and net infiltration, (2) the&lt;br/&gt;effects
of soil moisture, slope, and soil properties during transmission losses, (3)
whether infiltration&lt;br/&gt;during transmission losses is equal to
groundwater recharge, and (4) the influence of subsequent
rainfall&lt;br/&gt;events on infiltration, as well as (5) improving future land-
surface parameterization of models in drylands.&lt;br/&gt;Socioeconomic and
political constraints, inaccessibility, and/or the heterogeneous nature of
transmission&lt;br/&gt;losses could limit access to vast, sustainable, fresh
groundwater reserves. An improved understanding of&lt;br/&gt;transmission losses
will lead to better decisions by water managers, regulators, and planners in
arid&lt;br/&gt;regions such as the Middle East and North Africa. Results will be
disseminated through meetings with&lt;br/&gt;collaborators, public outreach
activities, the Consortium of Universities for the Advancement
of&lt;br/&gt;Hydrologic Science (CUAHSI) Water Data Center, the Global
Groundwater Monitoring Network&lt;br/&gt;(GGMN), scientific presentations in the
USA and Morocco, and peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.