* 1952243
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Smart Social Connector: An Interdisciplinary, Collaborative Approach to Foster Social Connectedness in Underserved Senior Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ashley Bangert, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,499,132.00

Seniors (i.e., adults aged 65+) are the most rapidly growing segment of the U.S.
population and have an increased risk of social isolation due to changes in
lifestyle and physical health. Social connectedness, which involves
establishing, sustaining, and increasing the quality of social relationships, is
key to preventing or mitigating social isolation. Technology can foster social
connectedness through online services and mobile applications. However, several
factors, including lack of technological skills and awareness, accessibility
issues, and privacy concerns may limit seniors’ use of technology-enabled
services and resources, creating a generational digital divide that may
contribute to social isolation. The Smart Social Connector (SSC) project
addresses social isolation due to age-related barriers by creating informed
strategies for seniors to learn and adopt technology and aligning resources with
community needs. As such, this project promotes meaningful social connectedness
among seniors that creates a sense of belonging within their community,
advancing their health and welfare. Specifically, the SSC project provides a
foundation for reconnecting senior residents in El Paso, Texas, a majority-
Hispanic bicultural community with a growing senior demographic. This
interdisciplinary, collaborative project has the potential to shift attitudes
and behaviors toward seniors by restoring their visibility, value, and equitable
participation in their community. With the involvement of students who are
primarily from underrepresented groups, the SCC project contributes to
broadening participation and preparing the next generation of professionals who
possess the technical skills and knowledge required to address societal
problems, specifically those relevant to senior
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a strategic partnership among The
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso Community College, and the City of El
Paso, the project is driven by integrative and interdisciplinary research among
social sciences (i.e., anthropology and cognitive psychology); computer science;
engineering (i.e., systems engineering and civil engineering); and scholarship
of engagement (i.e., awareness and education). The SSC goal is to develop and
sustain social connectedness of seniors to improve their quality of life through
the intersection of technology, community engagement, and social sciences. In
collaboration with community stakeholders, this community-based participatory
research project has two main objectives: (i) advance knowledge on the systemic
and behavioral factors that increase social connectedness and bridge the
generational digital divide in seniors; and (ii) increase social and
technological connectedness for seniors through Smart City solutions. The
research team will utilize a variety of methods and instruments, including
assessments of computer self-efficacy and cognitive ability, team-performance
measurements, virtual/physical social-network analysis, and user-centered
iterative design and testing of Smart City solutions. The SSC will involve the
creation of a human and technological infrastructure, including a Living Lab
environment, to support service delivery and the iterative development and
piloting of Smart City solutions that integrate people, technology, and
information. The SSC project will support seniors in strengthening their social
connectedness, increasing their technology self-efficacy, and contributing to
their community. The outcomes and lessons learned from the SCC project have the
potential to be applied in other cities that need to address the generational
digital divide to improve seniors’ quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.