* 1952651
* EAR-PF: Resolving the multi-scale hydraulics of shallow overland flows on patchily-vegetated hillslopes: towards a simple predictive framework
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Octavia Crompton, Crompton                Octavia        V
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Octavia V. Crompton has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to develop tools that predict the redistribution of surface flow from
bare soil to vegetated areas during intense rainfall events. This redistribution
maintains ecosystems in regions where annual rainfall alone is insufficient to
support plant growth. At present, this water redistribution can only be
predicted using complex and computationally demanding numerical models. Dr.
Cromptonâ€™s research will simplify these predictions by linking hydrological
processes on small scales to hillslope-outcomes using the spatial pattern of
bare and vegetated sites as a basis for upscaling. In addition to providing
insights into the physics of overland flow in dryland landscapes, the study will
develop basic scientific knowledge needed by land managers and ecologists to
assess landscape vulnerability and design viable restoration strategies. Dr.
Crompton will be mentored during her postdoctoral research by Professor Gabriel
Katul at Duke University, and Professors Davide Poggi and Constantino Manes at
Turin Polytechnical University, Italy. While at Duke University, Dr. Crompton
will partner with the Duke University Environmental Science Summer Program to
teach environmental science to students from underrepresented groups in STEM.
Aiming to broaden participation in quantitative environmental sciences, Dr.
Crompton will develop and teach a curriculum on computational modeling of
environmental processes, complementing the program's existing field-based
learning approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has several objectives:
First, a series of flume experiments will resolve uncertainties regarding the
physics of very shallow (&lt; 3 cm deep), infiltrating flows through vegetation
patches. This will generate some of the first experimental treatments of these
flows, and enable new understanding of the physics. Second, a modeling framework
based on the Saint-Venant equations will be used to upscale physics from
vegetation patch to hillslope scales, accounting for spatial heterogeneity.
Finally, reduced complexity models, derived from spatial averaging and
analytical approximations to the flow, will be developed to predict hillslope-
scale hydrological outcomes, and their predictions tested using flume
experiments. The resulting tools will improve predictions relevant to dryland
restoration, remediation and conservation, by enabling explicit description of
the effects of within-storm hydrologic processes. Broader impacts of this
project will include a better understanding of dryland degradation, which has
large social and environmental consequences, affecting 10 to 20% of global
drylands and impacting approximately 1.5 billion people. This project was funded
by the Hydrological Science program in the Earth Science
division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.