* 1952589
* IRES Track 1: US-Italy Bio and Electronic Advanced Material Systems (IRES-BEAMS)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sylvia Thomas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,992.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The NSF IRES BEAMS program will address the interest of the
nation by advancing science and technology, developing U.S. students as leaders
to address global challenges, and impacting people’s health and societal well-
being. The significance of the program is to train U.S. students to enhance bio
and electronic devices and materials important for healthcare diagnostics,
cancer therapies, tissue engineering, drug delivery platforms, wearable and
flexible sensors, edible electronics, energy efficiency, vision restoration, and
real-time biological monitoring. The fundamental issues to be addressed by the
NSF IRES BEAMS program includes providing an understanding of materials and
device solutions to scientists and engineers for continued technological
innovation; equipping scientists and engineers with an interdisciplinary
research “toolbox” that will enable them to be at the forefront in developing
novel bio and electronic systems; and preparing scientists and engineers to be
creative and culturally and globally aware, to demonstrate leadership and
integrity, and to use team-focused approaches to solve problems that stretch far
beyond national boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRES-BEAMS Program will
leverage synergistic research, education, and mentoring thrusts between leading
research facilities at the University of South Florida (USF), the National
Research Council of Italy - Institute for Polymers, Composites and Biomaterials
(IPCB), and the Italian Institute of Technology Center for Nano Science and
Technology (IIT-CNST), building upon pre-existing collaborative efforts with
experts in materials and devices. This program will address scientific
challenges for bio and electronic device materials leading the way for patient
compliance and biological monitoring, regenerative disease, and wearable and
flexible sensors, and many other healthcare technology platforms needed to
advance humanity, prepare for future pandemics, and improve quality of life.
Several strategies will be employed to engage participants and to proactively
recruit diverse participants from NSBE, SHPE, SWE, USF REU, NSF Florida-Georgia
LSAMP, USF NSF FGLSAMP Bridge to Doctorate, USF Sloan UCEM, and Florida A&amp;M
University’s NSF CREST. Students, faculty, and global partners will engage in
diverse thought and innovation on a global level and foster professional
networks, academic collaborations, and funding
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Preparing global technology
leaders in the area of advanced material systems will address many of the grand
challenges of engineering and foster a highly-skilled, domestic workforce in
areas of national need. To support this effort, the IRES-BEAMS Program (US-Italy
International Research Experience for Students for Bio and Electronic Advanced
Material Systems) focuses on advanced materials for bio and electronic devices.
IRES-BEAMS leverages ongoing research and mentoring initiatives between the
Advanced Materials Bio and Integration Research (AMBIR) group at the University
of South Florida and the National Research Council of Italy - Institute for
Polymers, Composites and Biomaterials (CNR-IPCB), and the Italian Institute of
Technology Center for Nano Science and Technology (IIT-CNST), both among Italy’s
top ten research organizations. The specific objectives of the IRES-BEAMS
program are: Develop student “global competency”, teamwork, and leadership
skills that will enable them to bridge cultural differences and collaborate
effectively within multinational teams Expand student participation within
international research to enhance their global engagement and preparedness for
cutting-edge graduate programs (M.S., PhD.) Establish collaborative research
projects of mutual interest to facilitate new long-term partnerships, funding
proposals, future high-impact publications, patents, and student training
opportunities&lt;br/&gt;Provide students, particularly those from historically
underrepresented backgrounds, with state-of-the art research-training in bio and
nano electronics under the mentorship of international scientists to promote a
diverse, globally-aware workforce in future and advanced manufacturing
Intellectual Merit. The IRES-BEAMS program addresses transformational impacts of
advanced materials utilized for fundamental and applied research in bio and nano
electronics at the convergence of disciplines. Projects will be focused on two
overarching themes: Design and Fabrication of Micro/Nano Scaled Fibers for BIO
devices (CNR-IPCB) and ELECTRONIC devices (IIT-CNST). Several strategies will be
used to recruit 6 U.S. students per year from diverse disciplines with an
emphasis on the training of underrepresented minority participants. Efforts will
identify undergraduate and graduate students from targeted programs and student
organizations, including, NSBE, SHPE, SWE, USF REU, NSF LSAMP, NSF Florida-
Georgia Bridge to Doctorate, USF Sloan UCEM, and FAMU’s CREST to recruit three
cohorts. The IM will be mutually beneficial to students, faculty, and global
partners. Students will gain exposure and training on electro fluid dynamic
techniques (EFDTs), opportunities to engage in diverse thought and innovation on
a global level. AMBIR, IPCB, and CNST labs will collect new data, characterize
materials, analyze data, fabricate devices and publish findings in peer-reviewed
journals (MRS, ACS, IEEE, Advanced Materials, and others), a benefit to
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRES-BEAMS program will impact engineering
education, student success, collaborative innovation, and functionalized
materials development on the local, national, and international levels. The
benefits of international engagement will strengthen a students’ global
interconnectedness and awareness, cultural and language training, “comparative
openness beyond the classroom to embrace and promote diversity”, STEM career
readiness, and student empowerment. IRES-BEAMS will utilize websites, biweekly
blogs, presentations, publications, ethical perspectives, social media (Twitter,
Facebook, and YouTube), and K-12 outreach (EXPO) for dissemination to both
scientific and lay audiences. Assessment and evaluation efforts will capture the
impact of materials research on devicefabrication and longitudinal impact on
student professional progression. Additional evaluations, aligned with subscales
of the engineering global preparedness index, will provide further data on
faculty and student research, mentoring, and professional development skills.
IRES-BEAMS participants will be required to present their research annually
during university research days and local/national research symposiums, and
educational outcomes will be published/presented in STEM educational meetings/
proceedings/journals (Frontiers in Education, ASEE, Understanding Interventions
that Broaden Participation in Science Careers,&lt;br/&gt;and
others).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.