* 1952606
* NSF IRES Track 1: Nanomaterials for Next-Generation Functional Molecular Electronics Program at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) in Karlsruhe, Germany and the University
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Chris Huber, DOANE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,963.00

U.S. undergraduate students from Doane University and an alliance of midwestern
schools will conduct research at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) in
Karlsruhe and the University of Bayreuth (UBT) in Bayreuth. The proposed
research seeks to design, synthesize, and study inorganic, organic, and
bioorganic materials for next-generation functional molecular electronics.
Organic and bioorganic materials present a versatile and unique opportunity for
exploring new concepts in electronics, spintronics, and related technologies.
The research is relevant to solar energy generation, storage, organic field-
effect transistors, and even biomedical applications. Students will receive
enhanced professional training and exposure to world-class researchers and
facilities, in addition to experiencing international-level teamwork and post-
research activities, including networking opportunities. This project will also
increase the involvement of underrepresented minority students in undergraduate
research through targeted recruiting at Doane and through the NSF-funded the
Iowa-Illinois-Nebraska STEM Partnership for Innovation in Research and Education
(IINSPIRE) Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP). The
inclusion of Alliance students will strengthen existing connections and build
networks for further collaboration between students and campuses in the Alliance
and could serve as a model for future projects. Participation in research
experiences by students from groups underrepresented in the physical sciences
increases the likelihood that they will persist in their STEM studies and pursue
advanced STEM degrees. This project serves the national interest by (1)
promoting the progress of science in critical areas such as energy independence
and electronic materials for computing and devices, and (2) increasing the
future prosperity and welfare of students entering the STEM workforce by
providing high-quality training and professional development, especially for
underrepresented individuals and students from small colleges and universities
that do not have advanced research capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doane
IRES KIT-UBT will provide fifteen U.S. undergraduate students with eight-week
research experiences in Germany at KIT and UBT. This project will help
accelerate the development of molecular-defined low-dimensional materials which
may enable new organic, inorganic, and bioorganic electronics devices, organic
logic devices, single-molecule transistors, dipolar logic, and other devices
where the electronic properties depend on the behavior and the polarization of
single molecules. Developing an accessible technology like inkjet printing for
energy creation materials could further the future of energy independence and
resilience. IRES KIT-UBT students will (1) receive rigorous training in
preparation for research; (2) conduct publishable research in materials for
molecular electronics; (3) increase individual cultural competency; and (4)
receive enhanced professional development that promotes scientific literacy,
college success, and pursuit of STEM careers. Students will be well-prepared to
conduct research at KIT and UBT through pre-departure activities, including a
semester-long research preparation course that includes language and culture
instruction, a week-long site visit at Doane from host faculty, and
participation in a research orientation session at Doane. Continued mentoring
and professional development after the research experience will be achieved
through participation in STEM seminars, local and national STEM conferences to
present research results, continued research with mentors at students' home
institutions or new research projects, and the publishing of research results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organic materials explored in the research projects
are expected to be relevant for the development of nanoscale molecular
electronics. Students will utilize scanning probe lithography, dip-pen
nanolithography, inkjet and slot-die printing, in-situ absorption and
photoluminescence spectroscopy during spin-coating, self-organizing liquids, and
instrumentation to create and investigate properties of nanomaterials such as
graphene nanoribbons, ferroelectric organic thin films, and functionalized
organic polymer films and functionalized graphene. The outcomes of this research
are expected to yield general design principles and new strategies that will
guide the development of new materials. Through communication of results and
promotion of the program by the students and faculty involved, expanded public
knowledge of material development for molecular electronics, STEM research, and
the IRES program will result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.