* 1952583
* Post-Synthetic Modification of Macromolecules via Photoredox Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Gary Molander, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Gary A. Molander of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania to develop new ways to modify
macromolecules. Macromolecules are made up of a large number of atoms that are
organized into building block subunits. Biological examples include proteins and
enzymes (made of amino acid subunits), and DNA (formed from nucleotide
subunits). Non-natural examples of macromolecules include carbon-based
nanostructures used in photovoltaics and transistor materials, as well as metal-
organic frameworks used as catalysts and drug-delivery systems. To efficiently
create macromolecular materials for a diverse range of applications, it is
necessary to modify macromolecules without disturbing their core structure and
to do so in a manner that places the added groups in precise locations along the
macromolecular backbone. Professor Molander and his research group are designing
ways to use light as the sole energy source to activate catalysts that can be
used to modify biomolecules, carbon-based nanostructures, and metal organic
frameworks selectively and efficiently. The projects impact economic growth and
quality of life through collaboration with a cohort of pharmaceutical and
agrochemical companies to speed innovation and bring goods to market under more
sustainable and environmentally benign conditions. The students involved in the
project are trained and provided with industry-relevant research experience
through collaborations with industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
photoredox processes are being developed as enabling reactions to modify a
variety of important macromolecules post-synthetically. The macromolecular
targets for these transformations include biomolecules, metal-organic
frameworks, and carbon-based nanostructures (graphene, carbon nanotubes, and
fullerenes). The focus of these efforts centers on the use of photoredox
catalysis and photoredox/transition metal dual catalysis to allow unprecedented
transformations to be conducted under extremely mild conditions, providing
access to modified materials in a straightforward manner. Thus, the research is
unlocking a virtually unlimited range of modifications that can be made on these
materials, allowing practitioners in diverse fields of science to custom-design
structural variants of their target molecules for any applications that might be
envisioned. The protocols being developed allow these transformations to be
carried out at room temperature in a matter of minutes to hours, permitting them
to be utilized in any laboratory setting. The implementation of this technology
is providing a significant impact to diverse areas of science, including
biotechnology, energy research, and material science. The translational nature
of the synthetic project is also providing important training experiences to the
next generation of synthetic chemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.