* 1952957
* All Optical, Tunable THz Magnonic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Dario Arena, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2024
* USD 424,601.00

The terahertz portion of the spectrum is the challenging boundary region between
higher frequency optical (infra-red) technology and the microwave realm. The
terahertz spectrum offers many potential advantages across a range of
applications and industries, including communications and information
technology, biological imaging and health sciences, chemical sensing and other
security applications, and even spaceborne astronomy. This project will examine
the fundamental properties of a class of materials called ferrimagnets and use
those materials in novel ways to develop a new kind of terahertz source for very
high speed communications and information processing applications. This project
will examine the properties of ferrimagnets in thin films, at different
temperatures and at very high magnetic fields. Furthermore, the unique qualities
of ferrimagnets will be used in a novel magnetic device that achieves
unprecedented speed by using extremely short pulses of light to excite motion of
the magnetic properties of the ferrimagnet. The scientific understanding of the
fundamental properties of these materials and their implementation in devices is
crucial for the next generation of magnetic devices and ultra-high speed
information technology that supports the evolving 21st century digital economy.
The research will support two graduate students from under-represented groups in
Physics, will expose up to six undergraduates in advanced research, and will
help foster collaboration with the graduate program of a Minority Serving
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One promising approach to realize practical
terahertz (THz) electronics relies on spintronics, which extends and amplifies
the properties of conventional electronics via the manipulation of electron
spin. The proposed novel device architecture will significantly narrow the
bandwidth of spintronic THz sources of while also providing for wide tunability
of the carrier frequency. The core of the proposed device is a magnetic tri-
layer system consisting of a Polarizer layer, a non-magnetic spin transport
layer, and an Emitter layer, all grown on optically transparent substrates. The
THz carrier frequency is governed by spin wave modes in the Emitter layer and
the frequency of the spin waves is determined by magnetic properties (saturation
magnetization, g-factor, spin wave stiffness, etc.) of the Emitter.
Ferrimagnetic materials enable a very large degree of control of magnetic
properties of the Emitter and hence in the frequency of the THz emission. The
THz scale dynamics of these prototype all-optical devices will be studied with
fs time-resolved magneto-optic Kerr effect [tr-MOKE] and slower spin dynamics
will be investigated with ferromagnetic resonance [FMR]. Moreover, the
ferrimagnetic dynamics will be examined in detail using element-specific
spectroscopic techniques (x-ray detected FMR [X-FMR] and fs-scale high harmonic
generation [HHG]). The research will address three fundamental issues: (1)
Understanding in detail the competing exchange interactions that give
ferrimagnets their unique properties; (2) Harnessing these properties for the
improvement of spintronic THz emitters; and (3) Modifying the THz-scale magnetic
response using extreme magnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.