* 1952389
* Pre-TI:  Expansion of the Science Discipline at the Nebraska Indian Community Project
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Kristine Sudbeck, Nebraska Indian Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 04/30/2022
* USD 109,282.00

The goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to support
Native-serving institutions of higher education in building their science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and research
capacities. The project directed by Nebraska Indian Community College (NICC)
titled “Expansion of the Science Discipline at the Nebraska Indian Community
Project” addresses this goal through the implementation of a planning grant to
assist in guiding the college in the development of a long-term STEM capacity-
building plan. The project’s objectives are to conduct a needs assessment and
feasibility study to gather information about the types of STEM programs that
would most benefit the college and community and NICC’s readiness to deliver
those programs. Findings will be used to guide the college in directing
resources and applying for future funding to support the expansion of their STEM
offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing quality higher education and lifelong
educational opportunities to all learners is NICC’s mission. One way to advance
that mission is through the expansion of the STEM degree and research programs
at the college. This project’s work will support that agenda through a
comprehensive assessment of NICC’s existing STEM capacity and compilation of
data about tribal community and student interest in STEM program expansion.
Findings generated will be applied to informing the college’s future steps for
expanding their STEM capacity through the addition of new STEM baccalaureate
programs and STEM research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.