* 1952616
* IRES Track 1: RUI: Monitoring of Marine Life Coastal Habitats via Autonomous Robot Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Christopher Lowe, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Understanding the motion behaviors of sharks, turtles and other marine life is
essential for maintaining our natural coastal resources. Over the past decades,
technology for tracking such marine life has matured to the point where fish and
sharks can be tracked for months to years and their geo-positions resolved with
meter level accuracy. To accomplish such tracking for aquatic species, sharks
and other fish are often tagged with acoustic transmitters that can be tracked
with a group of receivers placed in coastal environments. More recently, these
acoustic receivers have been attached to Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs),
underwater robots that can be programmed to autonomously follow the marine
animal being tracked, while simultaneously measuring oceanographic conditions
surrounding the animal of interest. This IRES Track I award supports 18 U.S.
students from Harvey Mudd College and California State University Long Beach to
participate in research to extend the development of AUV technology, and apply
it to a marine life monitoring study. Students will contribute to the active
tracking of nurse sharks and sea turtles within their habitat located in Bahia
Santa Elena, Costa Rica. This location is ideal to not only test and develop
robotics technology that is required for such sampling, but also to produce new
data regarding the motion behaviors of these relevant species within complex
coastal habitats. The contributions of this work includes development of new
robot tracking technology that can be applied to other applications like marine
public safety surveillance, new data that will increase our understanding of how
sharks and sea turtles migrate along the coast, and training a diverse group of
U.S. students for research and cross-cultural collaboration. A benefit of this
work is that the students involved gain extensive professional training in
topics outside their field of study, but still highly relevant for research
progress. These activities include opportunities for high engagement with
several members of the local community including NGO leaders, school children,
fishers, and researchers from Costa Rica. The specific contributions of this
work are highly interdisciplinary and include 1) shark and turtle habitat
mapping, 2) multi-AUV-single-transceiver system development, 3) novel acoustic
tag development, and 4) nurse shark and sea turtle tracking experiments in Costa
Rica. To facilitate this research, the PIs are running a 3-year cohort-based
program, with each cohort consisting of 3 Harvey Mudd College engineering/cs
students, 3 CSU Long Beach biology students, and 3 University of Costa Rica
biology students. Each summer a new cohort of HMC and CSULB students travels to
Costa Rica for up to 6 weeks to work with hosts Dr. Mario Espinoza and Maike
Heidemeyer, as well as their students from UCR. The cohort is trained in both
robotics and the culture of the host country. Unique to the program associated
with this award is 1) a focus on training LatinX students, and 2) leveraging
interdisciplinary aspects of the students' academic backgrouds in the
cohorts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research includes
contributions to both underwater robotics and marine biology. The development of
a multi-AUV system that uses single hydrophone receivers for active tracking of
marine life itself generates new objective function formulations, new algorithms
to optimize such objective functions, new approaches to decentralize the
algorithms across multiple AUVs, and new methods of systems integration. With
respect to contributions this makes to marine biology: the fine scale movement
patterns of both the nurse sharks and sea turtles have been largely unknown.
Also, their habitats have never been mapped, as the nation of Costa Rica has
less access to some of this technology. Combining these two new data sets,
motion patterns and habitat maps, helps answer some of the most basic but
unanswered questions regarding how these species use their
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.