* 1952745
* Dynamic and thermodynamic mechanisms of desert amplification in a warming climate
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Liming Zhou, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 696,071.00

Since 1979, the largest increase in the observed air temperature over land has
occurred over the deserts which cover a third of the Earth’s surface. As the
world’s largest and driest deserts, the combined Sahara Desert-Arabian Peninsula
(SDAP) region has experienced the greatest and most persistent warming with the
increased heating due to the elevated greenhouse gas concentrations. Known as
desert amplification (DA), this accelerated warming can alter regional and
large-scale climate over SDAP and surrounding regions, impacting the African
rainforests, water availability, biodiversity, agriculture, and human health. To
the north of SDAP, these changes may lead to the retraction of the Mediterranean
ecosystem and increased desertification. To the south, they may influence the
rainfall patterns associated with the West African Monsoon in Sub-Saharan
countries. The Sahelian rainfall and weather could also be modified, thereby
directly affecting the United States in the form of hurricanes and dust clouds.
Hence, uncovering the nature and cause of DA is essential for understanding
large-scale atmospheric processes and the impacts of climate change. However,
the major processes and mechanisms of DA are still largely
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study the thermodynamic and
dynamic causes of DA in the 20th and 21st century. The overarching hypothesis is
that DA is a near-universal feature of climate change primarily due to steeper
temperature lapse rates over drier surfaces and the large-scale atmospheric
coupling of wet and dry regions. The investigators will explore the mechanisms
and feedbacks of DA by combining observational analyses with climate modeling.
They will analyze various observational data sets to quantify first-order
factors controlling DA. They will employ models of varying complexity including
a single column radiative-convective model, a regional climate model, and
comprehensive global climate models. Such hierarchical modeling approach is
essential for tackling this complex problem, isolating key interactions, and
achieving a deeper insight on causal mechanisms of climate change. Understanding
DA will be of great interest to the public, policy makers, governments and
scientists across various disciplines. This project will provide training for
graduate students in research at the interface of remote sensing, data analysis,
numerical modeling, and climate theory. It will also contribute to the further
development and documentation of the open-source CLIMLAB software, already in
use by researchers and instructors worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.