* 1952627
* EAR-PF: Uncovering climate-driven impacts on high-latitude aquifer-ocean exchange
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Julia Guimond, Guimond, Julia
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2022
* USD 217,500.00

Dr. Julia A. Guimond has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
study coastal high-latitude hydrology at Dalhousie University in collaboration
with the Water Cycle Branch of the U.S. Geological Survey. Through field data
collection and numerical modeling analyses, this research will investigate
interactions between high-latitude groundwater reservoirs and the coastal ocean.
In the Arctic and subarctic, water flow patterns and storage are rapidly
changing due to pronounced atmospheric warming. Alterations in groundwater flow
and aquifer-ocean connectivity due to permafrost thaw will have profound impacts
on global climate and high-latitude coastal zones, including marine and
freshwater resources. Coastal systems are particularly vulnerable to climate-
induced change due to changes in sea level and sea ice in addition to permafrost
distribution. The primary goal of this research is to identify the mechanisms
mediating aquifer-ocean exchange in permafrost regions to better understand how
these processes will be modified under changing climatic conditions. Results
from this study will help inform water and marine-resource management and
climate adaptation strategies for Indigenous communities and northern
governments and identify where coastal water resources are most vulnerable to
climate change-induced contamination mobilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
integrated field and modeling study undertaken by Dr. Guimond aims to unravel
the feedbacks between climate change and aquifer-ocean exchange in high-latitude
permafrost regions. Results will identify the factors influencing Arctic and
subarctic submarine groundwater discharge and saltwater intrusion and
characterize the spatial and temporal scales over which they occur, improving
predictive capacity under changing climatic and hydrologic conditions. Results
of this study will enhance our knowledge of 1) present-day rates of groundwater
discharge to the ocean, 2) processes controlling aquifer-ocean exchange in
permafrost-bound regions, and 3) aquifer-ocean exchange response to climate-
induced change (e.g. permafrost thaw). The field portion of this study will be
conducted in Sanikiluaq, Canada and in Cambridge Fjord, Baffin Island, Canada. A
suite of hydrogeological and geochemical field tools and methods will be used to
assess present-day conditions, such as conductivity, temperature, depth loggers
and radium isotopes. Also, numerical, hydrological models with freeze-thaw,
coupled surface-subsurface processes, and variable density capabilities will be
used to expand understanding in space and time. The processes and mechanisms
elucidated through this integrated study will promote development of new
conceptual and quantitative models that predict feedbacks between climate-change
driven permafrost thaw and land-sea water exchange in high-latitude coastal
systems that can inform groundwater management policies. The PI will help
develop a cyber-seminar series as educational outreach to the broader geoscience
community on climate-change driven issues in Arctic and subarctic regions. The
Hydrological Science program in the Earth Science division provided co-funding
for this fellowship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.