* 1952140
* SCC-PG: Toward Disease-Resistant School Communities by Reinventing the Interfaces among Built Environments, Occupants, and Microbiomes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Qiang He, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 04/30/2022
* USD 149,998.00

Schools are hubs connecting the constituent groups of communities. This very
nature of schools combined with the high concentration of vulnerable populations
make schools hotbeds for the transmission of pathogens. In addition to the
staggering death toll and burden on healthcare systems, infectious diseases such
as seasonal flu and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) also lead to prolonged
and repeated school closures, causing massive loss of education and productivity
in communities. There is an urgent and critical need to build resilience for
schools and connected communities against diseases. This project leverages the
NSF big idea “Harnessing the Data Revolution” and proposes a transformative
paradigm “Disease-Resistant School Communities”. Intelligent technologies will
be created to reinvent the interactions among school environments, occupants,
and microbiomes to control pathogen transmissions and reduce infection risks. In
addition, stakeholders will be engaged to develop management strategies to make
schools healthier, smarter, safer, and more sustainable for education and
community well-being. If successful, this project could enhance the resilience
of the 130,000 public and private schools used by 55 million K-12 students and 7
million adults in the nation against infectious diseases, reduce the enormous
societal costs that would result from school closures, and significantly improve
public health and economic prosperity. In addition, this project will also
improve public scientific literacy by engaging community stakeholders in
research, and raise community awareness for effective practices to prevent
disease transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this planning
grant is to develop intelligent technologies to model and monitor the
environment-occupant-microbiome interactions in school communities, and exploit
the unprecedented information for school management to reduce the risks of
spreading infectious diseases. This project will explore: 1) disease-resistant
designs based on the prediction of microbiome colonization and succession; 2)
disease-resistant operations based on the monitoring of interactions among
environments, occupants, and microbiomes; and 3) more effective hygiene
practices and interventions to reduce disease transmission based on smart and
connected informatics. By linking the microbial contamination patterns and
transmission pathways with quantifiable design attributes and controllable
operation paradigms, this research will lay a computational foundation for
parametric design and operation control for reduced exposure to pathogens in
schools. The information needs and effective information communication venues
among different stakeholders will be identified to develop smart interfaces for
connected decisions and actions to reduce contamination and transmission risks.
This project will also lead to a novel community engagement model, through which
students, teachers, school administrators, parents, healthcare providers,
scientists, and engineers are all involved in the development of intelligent
technologies and discovery of new knowledge to establish citizen-centric living
laboratories for idea generation, data collection, prototype validation, and
solution evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.