* 1952302
* IRES Track-1: I/O Research for Data-Intensive Analytics and Deep Learning
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Weikuan Yu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,963.00

Applications of data science are becoming increasingly diverse. These
applications include computation, input-output analysis, deep learning and
several other fields. These diverse applications tend to generate and process
their datasets in very different patterns. Their complex I/O patterns pose
numerous challenges due to contention, congestion, and performance variabilities
at multiple layers of the I/O stack including I/O middleware libraries, parallel
file systems and storage devices. This IRES project aims to organize an
international collaboration between Japan and the U.S. for research on I/O
performance efficiency and data reliability for data-intensive analytics and
deep learning applications. The IRES Track-1 site will be hosted at the Florida
State University (FSU), through close collaboration with the RIKEN Center for
Computational Science (R-CCS) in Kobe, Japan. As a world-renowned national lab,
R-CCS has hosted the fastest K supercomputer in Japan and has been chosen as the
site to host Japan’s future exascale computer, Fugaku. This project leverages
such facilities for research and training of IRES participants and enriches the
portfolio of international collaborations between the U.S. and Japan. Each year
for the duration of the project, five (4 graduate and 1 undergraduate) U.S.
students will be selected to participate in the IRES program to visit and do
research at the R-CCS for 10 weeks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues
cross-layer optimizations on I/O middleware libraries, parallel file systems,
and storage configurations, serving data-intensive analytics and deep learning
applications. The project consists of a number of research activities, including
(1) I/O characterization of large-scale data-intensive applications and parallel
file systems on large-scale supercomputers, (2) application-oriented I/O
pipelining for deep learning applications and data reduction through
compression; (3) user-level cross-layer optimizations of file and storage
systems; and (4) development of multi-level checkpoint/restart with optimal
checkpoint/restart intervals across hierarchical storage devices. The research
can lead to many insights on how to develop efficient and reliable I/O
techniques on high-performance computing (HPC) systems. The experience and
lessons learned through this research can benefit the development of storage
systems on leadership HPC systems for data analytics and deep learning
applications and is expected to enhance the professional development of
participating students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.