* 1952641
* Volatiles in silicate melts: From geophysical detection to primordial reservoirs
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Alisha Clark, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 332,830.00

Seismology is a major tool when investigating Earth’s deep interior. By
analyzing the velocity and form of seismic waves, scientists can visualize and
interpret structures and compositions at depth; a technique which is comparable
to medical sonograms. The presence of partial melts in the Earth’s mantle is
characterized by anomalously low seismic velocities. Low velocities have been
observed under tectonic plates, at the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary. They
are also observed in subduction zones where one plate dives underneath an other.
Melting is suspected to occur in several other regions of the mantle, notably
above and below the transition zone which extends from 410 km to 670 km depth.
However, in many of these regions the estimated temperature is below the melting
temperature of rocks; unless rocks contain volatiles (water or CO2) which lower
their melting temperatures. Here, the scientists are carrying out experiments at
the extreme pressures and temperatures of the deep Earth. Their goal is to
determine if the observed seismic anomalies can be attributed to the presence of
volatile-rich silicate melts. They use state-of-the-art techniques to compress
and heat up glass specimens while measuring their density and elastic
properties. These properties are directly linked to seismic velocities. The high
pressures are produced at the tip of two opposing diamonds or generated by huge
electric and magnetic power pulses in the Thor and Z machines at Sandia National
Laboratories (SNL, New Mexico). The results address fundamental questions in
Earth Sciences. Can hydrous silicate melts be detected in the mantle? What are
their physically properties and possible impact on mantle evolution? Could
silicate melts generated during large planetary impacts retain primordial
volatiles? This project supports an early-career female scientist. It provides
support and training to graduate and undergraduate students at University of
Colorado Boulder, and outreach to underrepresented groups in science. It also
fosters an interdisciplinary collaboration between academia, SNL and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In silicate minerals water is mostly stored as
hydroxyl (OH) and charge balanced by defects. At one atmosphere, this leads to
lower elastic wave velocities and softer elastic moduli with increasing water
content. However, on compression, volatile-rich silicate glasses are stiffer
than their anhydrous counterparts. This unexpected effect has been attributed to
the ability of volatile species to fill interstitial voids and/or bond as
silanol (Si-O-H) groups. The dependences on pressure, temperature and
composition of this effect is currently unknown. Yet, quantifying these
dependences is critical to constrain equation-of-state models for amorphous
silicates in the Earth‘s mantle. Here, the working hypothesis is that hydrous
silicate glasses and melts are elastically stiffer at mantle pressures than
their anhydrous counterparts. To test this hypothesis, the team uses a
combination of static and dynamic compression methods. GHz-ultrasonic
interferometry measurement are carried out in situ (at high pressure and
temperature) in the laser-heated diamond-anvil cell. SNL Thor and Z machines are
used for ramp and shock-ramp compression experiments up to pressures of one
million atm (100+ GPa). Ramp-compression is a new method of dynamic compression
that follows isentropic paths rather than the Hugoniot, which is usually probed
in shock experiments. During dynamic compression in SNL machines, powerful
pressure waves generated by the machines allow probing in situ (at high pressure
and temperature) the elastic properties of the compressed amorphous silicates by
laser interferometry (e.g. VISAR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.