* 1952792
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Leveraging Smart Technologies and Managing Community Resilience through Networked Communities and Cross-Sector Partnerships
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Christopher Zobel, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,233,000.00

This Smart &amp; Connected Communities grant will leverage existing community
partnerships and resources and evaluate the information technology applications
aided by artificial intelligence in enhancing community resilience management.
The east central Florida region (including 8 counties and 78 member
towns/cities) is selected as a testbed for this project to improve community
resilience practices through a regional data platform â€“ Community Resilience
Data Depot (CoRD2). Built on an interdisciplinary team with synergistic
contributions from Emergency Management, Public Administration, Geography,
Computer Science, Civil Engineering, and Operation Management, the project aims
to augment the information and communication capacity of the east central
Florida region and the Orlando metropolitan area to the next level via a
sustainable partnership. The metrics to assess the extent and speed of achieving
appropriate post-event functionality will help address a nationwide community
capacity building need to quantitatively evaluate resilience increases by
public-private partnerships. The research design assessing resilience changes
will help decision makers in governments, businesses, and nonprofits to obtain a
deeper understanding of how artificial intelligence-aided information
technologies can advance collective decision making to reduce community
vulnerability and enhance resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves
developing an integrative framework to evaluate smart technology advances that
foster community partnerships and enhance community connectedness in resilience
management; filling research gaps in modeling community partnership
characteristics and examining design and implementation networks among cross-
sector partners for community resilience efforts; creating a holistic approach
to comparing community resilience functionality changes by research intervention
and an actual hazard event; and building CoRD2 for resilience data sharing and
integration among public, private, and nonprofit sectors to support real-time
collective decision making. The novel methodologies include collecting and
calibrating multi-dimensional data from behavioral surveys, policy and plan
documents, social media posts, and an in-house drill with pre-/post-surveys;
creating converged metrics for evaluating community resilience from an
organizational perspective; providing next-generation computational solutions
for processing disaster response data flowing in the regional data platform as
peak influxes; developing real-time machine learning algorithms and software
capacities for social media big data analytics (texts and images); and modeling
organizational resilience capacity and multidimensional community resilience
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.