* 1952903
* GEM: Quantifying the Role of Radial Diffusion on the Energy-dependent Acceleration of Ultrarelativistic Electrons in the Center of Outer Radiation Belt
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Hong Zhao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 347,266.00

In the radiation belts surrounding the Earth, electrons are accelerated to
ultrarelativistic speeds. How this process occurs is a fundamental unanswered
question. The project addresses the relative importance of two main acceleration
mechanisms, inward radial diffusion and local acceleration. Using a novel
approach to calculate the radial diffusion coefficients, this study will
quantify the contribution from radial diffusion to ultrarelativisitic electron
acceleration and its dependence on electron energy. The results of this project
will contribute to updating space weather forecast models, which is a priority
set out in the National Space Weather Action Plan. An early career researcher
and an undergraduate student will receive support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses a novel approach to calculate event-specific radial diffusion
coefficients and quantify the role of radial diffusion in ultrarelativistic
electron acceleration in the center of the outer radiation belt (L~3 – 6). Using
observations of electron flux oscillations and electric/magnetic fields,
combined with particle-tracing simulations, the radial diffusion coefficients
will be calculated from the radial displacement of the traced particles during
selected events. Combining with the radial diffusion model using the Fokker-
Planck equation, the contribution of radial diffusion in the ultrarelativistic
electron acceleration will be quantified, and its dependence on electron energy
will be revealed. Specifically, the following science questions will be
answered: (i.) How often do the ultrarelativistic electron periodic flux
oscillations occur and what are the associated radial diffusion coefficients for
ultrarelativistic electrons with different energies? (ii.) For selected electron
flux enhancement events, quantitatively, what is the role of radial diffusion to
the ultrarelativistic electron acceleration in the center of outer belt (L~3 –
6)? (iii.) How does the relative contribution of radial diffusion to the
ultrarelativistic electron acceleration in the center of outer belt vary with
electron energy?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.