* 1952007
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Overcoming the Rural Data Deficit to Improve Quality of Life and Community Services in Smart &amp; Connected Small Communities
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Zhengyuan Zhu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,532,000.00

Many small and rural communities in the United States are shrinking and evidence
shows that this trend is unlikely to be reversed in many places. Previous
research on rural decline has focused on observing these changes or promoting
uncertain growth strategies to try to revive economic activity and reverse
population loss. This project offers a different approach by encouraging
communities to manage shrinkage rather than fight against it. The project team
calls this approach rural smart shrinkage. The goal is to mitigate the negative
effects of population loss on quality of life and community services. The team
is developing and testing new educational resources and digital tools to support
the implementation of strategies for rural smart shrinkage in a group of Iowa
communities. The research team includes faculty and graduate students from the
disciplines of architecture, art, community and regional planning, sociology,
and statistics and professional staff at the Iowa League of Cities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are to develop and test a rural smart
shrinkage curriculum and assess its implementation in a group of Iowa towns. The
team is using a prototype of a community information ecosystem that will
increase small-town capacity for data utilization. Shrinking towns showing signs
of decline since 1994 will be paired with similar mentor communities that are
also losing population, but which have reported improving perceptions of quality
of life in longitudinal polling over the same period. Many small communities
experience a rural data deficit, defined as the absence of systematic local data
collection and utilization of existing data in their decision making. The
project seeks to overcome this deficit by designing new user-friendly methods to
collect, analyze, and visualize data. To prepare local leaders to effectively
use these new resources, the team is developing curricula to enhance local
knowledge and skills in community visioning, project planning, and data
analysis. This combination of smart shrinkage strategies, better data
utilization, and leadership skills will help small and shrinking rural
communities manage population loss and become more resilient. The project builds
on strong foundations in three areas: rural demography and quality of life,
smart shrinkage in European and American cities, and translational data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.