* 1952395
* RCN-SEES: Predictive Modeling Network for Sustainable Human-Building Ecosystems (SHBE)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/19/2019,08/31/2022
* Yong Tao, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 65,621.00

1338851 (Tao). The objective of this RCN is to develop a collaborative research
platform centered on overcoming bottlenecks in engineering, software and
social/economic sciences that impede wider application of sustainable building
technology. The network activities will focus on defining an innovative, new
interdisciplinary area, "Sustainable Human-Building Ecosystem (SHBE)," that
integrates human behavioral science, social and economic sciences in tandem with
sciences of building design, engineering, and metrology for data validation of
building energy consumption and occupant comforts. The developed collaboration
strategies and standardized data platform will lead to significant reductions of
the uncertainty in predicting human adaptation to energy efficiency and
sustainability of building ecosystems, which will also address fundamental
questions such as "what are the benefits of sustainable building investment to
people at a personal, business, or urban planning level?" The activities of the
new SHBE-RCN include: collectively develop a consensus-based mechanism for an
IT-enabled, data-networked research platform that allows sharing the
connectivity methods from different models of building ecosystem elements;
create the networking mechanism to recruit additional participants or update the
working groups; develop the new research directions for identified subareas;
evaluate the success of the SHBE network; and develop an innovative learning
program for graduate students of diverse backgrounds. The steering committee
members are from engineering, architecture, computer science, construction,
environmental science, business and social science with national and
international collaboration experience and access to data from various
sustainable building projects: Yong Tao, Derrick D?Souza, and Ruthanne Thompson
of the University of North Texas, William Tolone and Mirsad Hadzikadic of the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, David Cartes and Richard Feiock of
Florida State University, Yimin Zhu and Thomas Spiegelhalter, of Florida
International University, Wei Yan of Texas A&amp;M University, Kee Poh Lam of
Carnegie Mellon University, and Carol Menassa of the University of Wisconsin-
Madison. The SHBE RCN aims to foster a new understanding of the complex
interactions among the key elements of human-building ecosystems and to work
towards a set of new theories for integration of predictive models to explore
the following hypothesis: Integrating occupant behaviors with built environment
performances validated from large field data sets can lead to significant
reductions of the uncertainty in predictive models for human adaptation to
energy efficiency and sustainability of building ecosystems. It will bring
together researchers from different fields, who otherwise would not be able to
network together, to form working groups focusing on understanding the
interoperability (or inputs and outputs) of predictive models from different
disciplines within the five thematic frameworks: I-Building physical system and
environment modeling; II-Human behavior modeling; III-Social/policy impact
modeling; IV-Dynamic life cycle assessment (LCA) and business ecosystem
modeling; and V-Model integration and validation. All five themes are linked in
such a way that no single theme will produce meaningful outcomes without the
significant input from other themes. This network?s research agenda will allow
researchers to work towards solutions impacting people, their communities, and
future of their lives. Providing a viable platform for meaningful research
collaboration in quantifying the sustainable building ecosystem will enable the
development of new theories and methods that could help city planners and
political and financial decision makers to develop the most balanced sustainable
solutions for both human and natural environment. The network management team
will also implement a mechanism to promote diversity by recruiting graduate
assistants and network participants through workshops and lab visits. This will
be achieved by working with the Center for Diversity in Engineering and
Computing at Florida International University, a Hispanic Serving Institution
(HSI), and similar initiatives in the participating institutions. The network
participants will also contribute to the development of a unique
interdisciplinary learning program, based on the concept of an outcome-driven,
diverse, and individualized learning mechanism.