* 1952011
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Mobility for all - Harnessing Emerging Transit Solutions for Underserved Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Mina Sartipi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,266,898.00

Public transportation infrastructure is an essential component in cultivating
equitable communities. However, public transit agencies have historically
struggled to achieve this since they are often severely stressed in terms of
resources as they have to make the trade-off between concentrating service into
routes that serve large numbers of people and spreading service out to ensure
that people everywhere have access to at least some service. A solution that
holds great promise for improving public transit systems is the integration of
fixed-route services with microtransit systems: multi-passenger transportation
services that serve passengers using dynamically generated routes and may expect
passengers to make their way to and from common pick-up or drop-off points.
However, most microtransit systems have failed in the past due to the lack of
community engagement, inability to handle the uncertainty of operations when
integrating the fixed transit, and inability to handle the system-level
optimization challenges. The project takes a socio-relational approach to
community engagement in collaboration with the Chattanooga Area Regional
Transportation Authority (CARTA), design a community-centric micro-transit
service that augments fixed-line public transit networks (improving transit
accessibility), and demonstrate its effectiveness in the representative city of
Chattanooga. The outcome of the project will be a deployment-ready software
system that can be used by an agency to design and operate a micro-transit
service effectively. The algorithmic toolchain will be complemented by
mechanisms to optimally select the parameters and sustainably manage the data
required by the algorithms. In addition, this project will provide a set of
exemplar case studies and a validated social methodology to engage the community
and learn their requirements, which will be fed into the algorithms. This will
potentially impact a wide range of cities in the U.S. that do not have well-
developed transit systems as the project will not only provide a reusable
operations system but also demonstrate how integrated socio-technical research
and strong community engagement can provide a pattern for sustainability and
expansion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
the novel community engagement approach and combined operations research and
data-driven, learning-based integrated system optimization. Towards this goal,
the project will make four key contributions. First, the project will develop a
novel targeted outreach approach that uses the relational networks of social
capital (e.g., outreach to community centers, congregations and faith
communities, schools, and similar organizational structures) and builds a
categorical demand model to design an innovative micro-transit system. The
project's hypothesis is that the behavioral impact on public-transit ridership
with the proposed method will be significantly higher than with an approach that
focuses only on the economic or time-saving benefits of the improved transit
system. Second, the project will introduce a sustainable and resilient data-
integration platform that dynamically adjusts the location of the sensor data
used to affect the design parameters and assess performance of the transit
system. This is crucial because cloud computing is still very expensive for
community partners, especially for real-time high-velocity and high-volume data
analysis. Further, this data store provides us an opportunity to take a privacy
by design approach for the datasets collected during the project. Specifically,
the project will develop novel integrated anonymization mixers for multi-modal
datasets (e.g., mixing information of different modalities, such as location
traces and transactions, together in a spatiotemporal-transactional mixer) that
achieve a given level of privacy (quantified using the notation of differential
privacy) while maximizing the accuracy of transit queries, relying on not just
the privacy-properties of the data but also on the needs of the queries. Third,
the project will develop uncertainty-aware fleet management and dispatch
algorithms that incorporate demand aggregation and environmental uncertainty
caused by congestion, incidents, and their impact on the system (both for the
users and fleet operations). Fourth, the project will leverage recent advances
in active learning for non-stationary environments with contextual side
information to design algorithms that will aid in the exploration and optimal
selection of hyperparameters for microtransit
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.