* 1952523
* IRES Track 1: Advancing materials and combustion technologies for next generation propulsion and power generation systems at the German Aerospace Center (DLR)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Seetha Raghavan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2023
* USD 297,225.00

Worldwide efforts to meet next generation propulsion capabilities for hypersonic
suborbital and reusable space vehicles rely on interdisciplinary and
transformational technologies. This IRES provides focused opportunities of new
and disruptive research in advanced materials and combustion that culminate in a
2-month experience for U.S. students, both at the graduate and undergraduate
levels, every year for 3 years at the German Aerospace Center (DLR). The
collaboration offers experiences in manufacturing and testing using large-scale
unique facilities at DLR including a state-of-the-art high-temperature coating
deposition system and high-pressure shock tube. Students gain an insight to how
interdependencies operate where different physical mechanisms in combustion
affect materials and how this integrates with the overall engine system
performance. A unique partnership with the Argonne National Laboratory sets the
stage for joint synchrotron experiments ensuring a two-way exchange for
experiences of significant scientific impact and excellent mentorship from both
German and US-based scientists. The project has far reaching societal benefits
in creating next generation energy, propulsion and transportation technologies.
The educational broader impact of the international research is achieved through
i) opportunities for a diverse group of students to experience collaborative
research in highly advanced facilities with mentoring from world-known
scientists and peers ii) training of the next generation of interdisciplinary
global scientists to support advanced gas turbine and hypersonic initiatives
iii) outreach through activities with local high school and middle school
students, interactive blogs and podcasts as well as through a new initiative of
interactive Skype sessions which connects German scientists to US classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project facilitates international experiences
for U.S. students, through collaborative research between the German Aerospace
Center (DLR) and the University of Central Florida (UCF) to extend the
durability and high temperature capability of material systems for leading
edges, turbine and combustor components and to elucidate impurities and diluents
on combustion performance of new fuels. Meanwhile, such directed efforts can
also enhance the area of power generation, removing pathways to NOx, combating
CO2 emissions and increasing efficiency through sequestration. The advancement
of transformational technologies in these areas can be met through dedicated,
interdisciplinary research focus on i) new combustion strategies including
exceptional fuel reactions; ii) design and characterization of materials that
can withstand high and ultra-high temperatures with integrity and durability and
iii) thermal management strategies that leverage additive manufacturing to
support both materials and combustion needs. Results serve to enhance the design
of optimized combustion performance that need reliable material systems to
enable advanced technologies in propulsion and energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.