* 1952652
* EAR-PF: Investigating the Explosive Effect of External Water on Volcanic Eruptions: Developing a Scalable Simulation of Explosion Energetics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Erin Fitch, Fitch, Erin Piper
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Erin Fitch has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to develop a
scalable, numerical simulation of explosive magma–water interaction during
hydrovolcanic eruptions. This work will be pursued under the mentorship of Dr.
Josef Dufek at the University of Oregon. During hydrovolcanic eruptions, magma
interacts with external water or ice, resulting in vigorous steam explosions.
Almost 30% of volcanic eruptions are known to involve magma–water interactions
and can occur with very little warning, like at White Island in 2019 and Ontake
in 2014, necessitating the development of forecasting tools that account
specifically for magma–water interactions. The complexity of magma–water
interactions and the hazardous conditions they create make this a difficult
process to study, and especially difficult to quantify by traditional field
methods. We will therefore develop and validate a new numerical simulation of
magma–water interactions, which takes into account the progression of micro-
scale heat transfer and fragmentation that drives macro-scale explosive
expansion, fragmentation, and dispersal of ejecta (solidified magma). The
simulation will allow us to estimate magma–water explosion energy to inform
volcanic hazard assessments. Additionally, the PI will be actively involved in
educational activities at the University of Oregon by developing educational
material specifically focused on tying field and laboratory observations to
numerical simulations, which is an underdeveloped area of academic education.
The research and education goals of this work directly impact the hazard
assessment of the Cascade Volcanic Arc, known for hydrovolcanism and explosive
eruptions, where the host institution is located.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order
to improve hydrovolcanism hazard assessment, this work focuses specifically on
the quantification of processes occurring during magma–water interactions.
Previously, the energetics of magma–water interactions was quantified based on
deposit characteristics, which can involve a significant amount of uncertainty,
because magmatic gas expansion and external water both contribute to the
fragmentation and dispersal of tephra. However, explosive magma–water
interactions are driven by the same mechanism as lava–water explosions and
explosive melt–water experiments, so we can use the latter to understand the
former. This mechanism is Molten-Fuel-Coolant Interaction (MFCI) where the
“molten fuel” is magma or lava and the “coolant” is external water. In order to
take observations of micro-scale MFCI processes and determine how they progress
during magma–water interactions, we use the breadth of new and existing data on
laboratory experiments and lava–water explosions to develop the first scalable
numerical melt–water mixing simulation, using flexible industry-standard
software. Our expected results address processes that are still poorly
understood for natural systems, namely (1) the factors affecting interfacial
mixing and instabilities, especially vapor film collapse, (2) the relationship
between the conversion ratio and water/melt mass ratio, and (3) the production
of active particles, which drive the explosion through rapid heat transfer.
Ongoing development of this simulation will enable it to be used as a tool to
understand and forecast hazards associated with lava–water explosions and
hydrovolcanic eruptions. Educational aspects of the fellowship include
developing educational materials that include laboratory experiments used in
conjunction with numerical simulations. This fellowship received co-funding from
the Petrology and Geochemistry program in the Earth Science
division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.