* 1952008
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Smart Air: Informing Driver Behavior through Dynamic Sensing and Smart Messaging
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Elizabeth Joy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,247,580.00

High concentrations of energy use from fossil fuels can lead to poor air
quality, resulting in adverse health effects as well as economic consequences. A
prime example is found where large numbers of idling vehicles congregate (e.g.,
schools and hospital drop-off/pick-up zones), leading to microclimates of
unhealthy air. Workers, such as valet parking attendants, can spend their entire
workday in these microenvironments, and children passing through these zones can
experience up to 60% higher levels of pollution than adults, because of their
height. These vehicle-caused, poor-air-quality microclimates offer a compelling
opportunity for communities to engage with emerging technologies to take
ownership of their air and the behaviors that impact its quality. This project
sociotechnical approach, called SmartAir, will synergistically integrate dynamic
air-quality information with social-norm feedback to positively influence
decisions that affect the well-being of vulnerable individuals working in or
passing through polluted microenvironments. The feedback approach for decreasing
idling mirrors the feedback provided by digital speed displays, which has been
shown to positively influence driver behavior (reduced speeding) and thus reduce
health-impacts of that behavior (reduced traffic accidents). The proposed pilot
demonstrations will take place in Northern Utah, a region that periodically
experiences the poorest air quality in the country. The project SmartAir employs
a comprehensive community engagement approach â€” from the development of the
sensing and display technologies to cocreation of culturally sensitive
messaging, cooperatively conducted pilot studies, and efficacy
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SmartAir will produce novel technological and
behavioral-science developments. First, this project will develop wearable,
calibrated, low-cost air quality sensing nodes that will support members of
smart and connected communities to minimize pollution exposure. Second, this
project will enable the rapid integration of sensor measurements with local
meteorological information and data-screening algorithms to dynamically provide
feedback to individuals about idling behavior and to workers that seek to
minimize pollution exposure. Third, the SmartAir system will be integrated into
behavior-change experiments and the co-creation of community-crafted messaging
to influence individual choices. Comprehensive involvement of the community
partners will be critical to co-develop and pilot solutions to address poor air
quality and ultimately ensure a highly scalable and sustainable system. The
broader impacts of this work are multifold, including the following. SmartAir
will serve as a framework for closing the loop between air quality measurements
and individual decision making. It will also help drive institutional decisions
that reduce worker pollutant exposure and improve worker performance, career
longevity, and job satisfaction. Anonymized data will be made available to
support numerous personal and community-driven needs, such as health-effects
studies, anti-idling campaigns, school drop-off policies, and urban/traffic
planning. Additionally, this project will have a substantial outreach effort
that involves community members in message crafting, data collection, and
interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.