* 1952959
* 7th Lake Michigan Workshop on Combinatorics and Graph Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Dhruv Mubayi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 11/30/2022
* USD 18,998.00

The 7th Lake Michigan Workshop on Combinatorics and Graph Theory will be held at
the Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science at the
University Illinois at Chicago (UIC) on April 4--5, 2020 (Saturday--Sunday).
This annual workshop is targeted towards researchers in discrete mathematics at
institutions in the area around Lake Michigan. This award will support travel
expenses for workshop participants. The workshop will be centered around two
series of three tutorial lectures each, focusing on state-of-the-art techniques
in combinatorics. There will also be closely related short talks by students and
early-career researchers. There will be ample unscheduled time during the
workshop to allow new research collaborations to commence and active
collaborations to be continued. The workshop will particularly benefit
undergraduates, graduate students, and early-career researchers by introducing
them to new research directions and helping them establish valuable connections
with more senior colleagues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorics and graph
theory are two very active areas of research within the broader field of
discrete mathematics, with important ties to disciplines such as statistical
physics, probability theory, algorithms, and network science. The confirmed
tutorial speakers, Wojciech Samotij (Tel Aviv University) and Cynthia Vinzant
(North Carolina State University), will speak about some of their own recent
breakthroughs in combinatorics. Samotij will speak about entropy methods in
combinatorics and probabilistic combinatorics while Vinzant will speak about the
log-concavity of polynomials and probabilistic and algorithmic applications. The
two lecture series will cover a broad spectrum of combinatorics and graph theory
ranging from extremal combinatorics to probabilistic combinatorics and algebraic
combinatorics, but the two topics nevertheless share some common themes, notably
fundamental properties of discrete probability distributions For more
information please consult the workshop website:
https://willp.people.uic.edu/lakemichigan2020/ .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.