* 1952719
* SCC-PG: Co-designing AI-Driven Fire Preparedness Assessment Tools to Meet Community Needs in the Wildland-Urban Interface.
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Carrie Levine, Conservation Science Partners, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,014.00

Wildland fires have increased in number and area across the western US as a
result of hotter, drier climates and higher fuel loads. In addition to the
environmental factors contributing to increased wildfire risk, rapid growth in
the US wildland-urban interface (WUI) has raised the risk of loss of lives and
homes. A key aspect of promoting socio-ecological resilience in the WUI is
incentivizing actions that limit the destructiveness of eventual fires. Creating
defensible space by reducing vegetation (fuel load) to prevent or slow fire
spread to and from structures is a widely supported strategy for reducing the
risk of loss to wildfire; however, novel analytical methods are required to
quantify fuel loads, and thus wildfire risk, at the spatial scales relevant to
mitigation planning. Wildfire hazard mitigation is greatly needed in communities
throughout the WUI in the American West, but resources for mitigation are
limited. Wildland fire risk intersects with social vulnerability, where
residents with higher social vulnerability are less likely to be able to afford
expensive fuels reduction treatments or engage with wildfire mitigation
programs. It is critical not only to ensure that fire-prone communities have the
scientific information needed to mitigate fire threat, but also that
development, delivery, and application of this information is tailored to the
unique social needs of each community. Perceptions of fire risk, attitudes
toward fire preparedness, and vulnerability to wildfire impacts vary within and
among WUI communities, driven by socioeconomic status, place dependency,
experience with fire, and other factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes technological advances in mapping forest structure at fine spatial
scales (&lt;30 m) employing artificial intelligence (AI) approaches can be used
to estimate fire risk at the spatial scales relevant for mitigation planning.
The fuels information will be integrated into tools and applications which will
be designed to address the information needs of communities, co-developed with
communities, piloted in communities, and evaluated by communities. The project
proposes to scope and pilot co-development of AI-based fire preparedness
assessment tools in communities in Nevada County, CA. Ultimately, the co-
development of these tools will inform the deployment, evaluation, and
application of fire preparedness assessment tools to community planning and
policy and scaled up to a broader range of communities in diverse western U.S.
geographies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.