* 1952923
* EAR-PF: Windows into Ancient Impacts: Examining Meteoritics Research with New Approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Melissa Sims, Sims, Melissa
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Melissa Sims has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education activities at Johns Hopkins University under the
mentorship of Professors June Wicks and Sabine Stanley and at Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory guided by Dr. Minta Akin. The research will focus on
understanding meteor impacts and subsequent cratering; as these processes played
an important role in the formation and evolution of the Earth. Dr. Sims will
conduct a series of 10 high-pressure shock experiments aided by in-situ X-ray
diffraction and imagining techniques to better understand of deformation
mechanisms and phase transition kinetics in shocked olivine and plagioclase.
These minerals are important igneous minerals in the Earth and other rocky
planetary bodies. Additionally, impact processes are relevant to national
defense, which is another of the broader impacts of this project. Dr. Sims will
mentor undergraduate students at minority serving institutions where she will
also serve as a role model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use high
pressure experiments to investigate the conditions under which buried or eroded
craters are formed. This information often lost subsequent to impacts due to
erosion or weathering. The ultimate goal of this proposal is to produce a more
complete picture of natural shock processes. Dr. Sims will examine shock on
experimental timescales and extrapolate the types and extent of mineral
transformations which are possible on natural timescales. This project will
complete two types of experiments, rapid compression using diamond anvil cells
and shock experiments using gas guns. New analytical tools have recently become
available to investigate shock processes in-situ. Dr. Sims will apply
diffraction and scattering analysis to identify the deformation and phase
transformation processes that occur during the experiments. By varying
experimental conditions, such as peak pressure and temperature, it is possible
to understand natural events. The research will be completed with the assistance
of undergraduate students from a minority-serving institution who will be
involved with experiments at national laboratory facilities. This project
received funding from the Geophysics and the Geochemistry and Petrology programs
in the Earth Science division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.