* 1952922
* Spectrin as a mechanosensitive hub integrating polarity, growth and trafficking
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Claire Thomas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 862,674.00

This project will increase our understanding of how cells coordinate their
structure and their growth. Cells, which are the fundamental unit of life, have
a defined shape built by a set of internal structural proteins known as the
cytoskeleton. Cells also grow, divide, and sense their mechanical environment.
Some of these functions are also dependent on cytoskeletal proteins. In this
project, the researches will examine the mechanism by which spectrin, a giant
cytoskeletal protein, performs its functions in cell growth, division and
mechano-sensing. Associated with this research, the principle investigator and
her team will engage in outreach activities that promote STEM careers including
leading an effort in the College of Science to bring a mobile science classroom
to central/eastern Pennsylvania and working with a local science museum. These
activities will provide high-impact STEM experiences to K-12 students, as well
as bring teacher professional development to rural and inner-city areas. The
principle investigatorâ€™s lab will also participate in programs that promote
women, minority and LGBTQ+ undergraduate participation in research, and bring
research projects into undergraduate teaching laboratories, enhancing
undergraduate education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cellular growth must be
integrated with the mechanical properties of cellular structures. Spectrins are
giant cytoskeletal proteins with two contrasting activities. They are best known
for their ability to form fishing net-like structural networks with F actin at
the cell cortex that can undergo mechanical stretching. However, spectrins have
recently also been shown to modulate protein trafficking in the endosome system.
The molecular regulation that balances these two activities is unknown. Through
the study of Beta-H-spectrin in epithelial cells of Drosophila melanogaster,
this project will test two competing hypotheses to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms by which spectrins coordinate mechanosensing and growth control in
the cell. One approach will test the hypothesis that tension in the spectrin
network plays a role in the relocation of the membrane protein Crumbs and in its
control of the growth-inhibiting Hippo pathway. The second approach tests the
hypothesis that spectrin networking contributes to the regulation of
Crumbs/Hippo control of cell growth in endosomes. The project will use advanced
STORM imaging and protein biochemistry to determine the geometry of the spectrin
network and the extent to which it is stretched by changes in Myosin II-
generated tension. Protein biochemistry, genetics and cell biology will also be
used to further understand the role of spectrin and its associated proteins in
the regulation of endosomal protein trafficking. Overall the results of this
project will generate new paradigms for how spectrins function in the control of
cellular growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.