* 1952646
* EAR-PF: Closing the gap between analogue studies and numerical lava flow models using insights from the 2018 Kilauea eruption
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Elisabeth Gallant, Gallant, Elisabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Elisabeth Gallant has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and educational activities at the Hawaiian Volcano
Observatory, USGS Alaska Volcano Observatory, alongside Dr Matt Patrick, Dr
Hannah Dietterich, and Dr Janine Kavanagh at the University of Liverpool (UK).
This project seeks to advance numerical lava flow models by using data collected
during the 2018 eruption of Kilauea and novel analogue modeling techniques to
better understand controls on lava flow emplacement. Lava flows, although
generally less deadly than other volcanic hazards, can be extremely disruptive
because they displace populations, destroy property, and damage vital
infrastructure. The 2018 lower East Rift Zone (LERZ) eruption of Kilauea
Volcano, Hawaii, covered a residential area two-thirds the size of Manhattan,
destroyed 716 structures over a period of four months, and cost $800 million to
recover from. One way to help mitigate negative impacts of lava flows is by
forecasting the potential paths of future eruptions to help guide evacuation
planning and land use decisions. Computational modeling has become the
established method to forecast the impact of lava flow hazards. The computer
models developed during this fellowship will take into account factors we know
are critical for determining inundation patterns, specifically how changes in
the amount of lava erupting at the vent over time (effusion rate) determines
what happens further down in the flow (e.g., the ability of the lava flow to
forge a new inundation path by channelizing or breaking out up-flow). The 2018
LERZ eruption provides an unprecedented opportunity to improve our knowledge of
the relationships between effusion rate, flow channelization, and breakouts due
to extensive monitoring and data collection. New techniques in analogue
modeling, developed at the University of Liverpool, will quantify these
relationships and help address problems of scaling between laboratory models and
the real world. Insights from these analogue models will then be used to improve
computational lava flow models. This project will advance the fundamental
understanding of lava inundation through the use of multi-scale models to
investigate hazards, addressing one of the grand challenges in volcano science
established by the National Academy of Science. This work also aligns with the
goals of the US Volcano Science Center. Outputs from this project will be used
to help design accessible educational materials to increase hazard communication
through the USGS Volcanic Hazards Program and would complement existing USGS
Geonarratives for volcanic landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
advance the development of lava flow forecasting tools by using new analogue
modeling techniques and high-resolution data from the 2018 LERZ eruption to
further quantify the impact of dynamic eruption source parameters (ESPs) on lava
flow emplacement patterns. The 2018 LERZ eruption of Kilauea Volcano provides an
unprecedented opportunity to improve our knowledge of the processes that govern
lava flow emplacement and advance our ability to model flow field evolution.
Specifically, it will focus on the impact that variations in ESPs have on
channel evolution and breakouts, which is notably absent in the current
computational forecasting landscape. Channels help control where the lava goes
and how fast it arrives, which are important factors in assessing inundation
hazards. Approaching this problem from the analogue, numerical, and real world
scale of the problem provides a robust foundation for advancing the field of
lava flow inundation forecasting. This work will combine insights from the
robust suite of data acquired by the USGS during the 2018 LERZ eruption and new
techniques pioneered by the MagmaLab at the University of Liverpool that allow
for 4D imaging of analogue flow models to develop open-access numerical lava
flow models. Educational materials will be developed to augment hazard
communication materials at the USGS Volcano Hazards
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.