* 1952815
* EAR-PF: The impact of varying sediment supply on Arctic delta-front transport processes
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brandee Carlson, Carlson, Brandee Nicole
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,000.00

An NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship has been awarded to Dr. Brandee N. Carlson to
carry out research and education activities under the mentorship of Dr. Irina
Overeem at the University of Colorado, Boulder. The project seeks to assess how
enhanced sediment supply from melting ice sheets and glaciers, and thawing
permafrost impacts the growth of Arctic deltas. The sand delivered to Arctic
deltas, particularly those in West Greenland, is recognized as a potential
resource for coastal restoration efforts and for industrial use (primarily
concrete production) worldwide. This project will investigate the processes that
control sediment retention along Arctic coastlines using field observations and
remote sensing. This work will inform policy and economic decisions for sand-use
in Greenland. Furthermore, the information gained from this project will be used
to develop a learning module geared toward introductory undergraduate students
that allows the user to explore controls on delta growth. The model will be
housed at SedEdu, which is a suite of educational tools related to geomorphology
and sedimentology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subaqueous delta-front
sediment transport processes are an important control on coastal evolution.
Rivers and subaqueous density flows are the largest mechanisms for sediment
redistribution on Earth's surface. Subaerial coastal evolution is easily-
observable through historical and satellite imagery, however quantifying
subaqueous sediment movement is inherently difficult because it typically
requires observation in the field. Delta-front sediment transport processes
become especially important to consider for rapidly growing deltas with high
sedimentation rates. Under warming climate conditions, Arctic deltas,
particularly those in Greenland, are rapidly growing as they receive enhanced
sediment supply from melting and retreating glaciers and thawing permafrost.
While there is evidence for delta-front failures that transport substantial
volumes of sediment, it is unclear to what degree they influence delta
progradation rates and sediment retention along coastlines. This study links
readily observable data (images of subaerial delta activity) to subaqueous
sediment transport processes. The objectives of this study are to determine how
subaerial delta activity links to sediment transport at the subaqueous delta
front and how enhanced sediment supply impacts marine sediment transport
processes on Arctic deltas. In turn, the influence of delta-front failures on
delta topset dynamics will be evaluated. These questions will be addressed over
different temporal and spatial scales. Dr. Carlson will evaluate individual
delta-front transport events at one field location during variable discharge
conditions, using repeat bathymetric data. During this field campaign, changes
in the subaerial delta topset (e.g. wetted area) will be evaluated using
satellite imagery. Correlations between delta topset activity and delta-front
transport timing/location will be used to infer relationships under past
conditions (evaluated using 34 years of Landsat data) and to consider delta-
front sediment transport under future conditions (e.g. how do Arctic delta-front
failures vary under higher water and sediment discharge conditions in a waring
climate?). These findings may offer insight into the conditions and potential
effects of shifting sediment delivery for other fjord deltas in Greenland. The
Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics program in the Earth science division is co-
funding this fellowship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.