* 1952507
* IRES: Track I: Exploring Biobased Plastics and Materials through Collaborative Research in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Matthew Green, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,913.00

Part 1: &lt;br/&gt;As global concerns over the environmental impacts of plastic
waste continue to grow, new solutions for providing sustainable materials are
desperately needed, along with globally-minded scientists and engineers to
deliver them. This IRES Track I project seeks to develop such solutions while
exploring new frontiers of biobased plastics and materials and training the next
generation of innovative problem solvers. Through the proposed program, U.S.
graduate and undergraduate students from at Arizona State University (ASU) and
Navajo Technical University (NTU) will travel to and participate in hands-on
research projects in the Department of Biobased Materials at Kyoto Institute of
Technology (KIT) in Kyoto, Japan. For 10 weeks each Summer, this project will
provide training opportunities for 3 graduate and 6 undergraduate student
participants; or 9 and 18 total participants, respectively, over the duration of
the 3-year project. Students will be embedded into the labs of KIT faculty,
collaborating and working closely with them and their students. By engaging
students in a series of meaningful research experiences, this project seeks to
spark and/or further cultivate their interest in biotechnology, materials
science, and sustainability, while strengthening their enthusiasm for advanced
studies and careers in STEM disciplines. Through partnership with NTU, along
with a conscientious overall recruitment strategy, this project will also
provide important STEM research opportunities for students from under-
represented groups. In addition to impactful research experiences, tours of
industrial sites and government research facilities will be offered to improve
the professional preparation of students and their understanding of future
career opportunities in this field. Student participants will also take part in
a series of unique cultural activities. Ultimately, by offering this project
internationally at a university with world-class faculty and research facilities
and in a city with unparalleled cultural amenities, this program will also help
to strengthen student identities as members of a global scientific community,
while impressing upon them the importance of collaboration for providing
solutions to complex global problems. By enhancing the production of
bioplastics, outcomes of this project offer the promise to reduce dependence on
non-renewable oil and natural gas as well as, in many cases, the potential to
positively impact the carbon cycle by consuming atmospheric CO2, a greenhouse
gas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the specific projects
to be offered via this program span the continuum of relevant research
challenges facing the production of biobased plastics and materials, including
from upstream conversion, to polymer synthesis and materials development, to
characterization of the resulting products, to their ultimate biodegradation.
Students in the program will receive comprehensive training in one or more the
following areas: i) applied microbiology and bioprocess engineering to enhance
the availability of diverse, bio-derived monomers; ii) polymer chemistry and
engineering for producing new bioplastics from bio-derived monomers; iii)
engineering of novel fibers and materials from diverse sources (e.g., bamboo and
silk) and for various applications; iv) synthesis and characterization of novel,
functionalized biomaterials for biomedical applications; v) development of new
analytical techniques for high-throughput screening of novel monomers and
nanostructural characterization of biobased materials and plastics; and vi)
investigation of sustainable methods for bioplastic degradation. This program
will also provide numerous opportunities for direct engagement between faculty
members across schools, enabling it to serve as an effective platform for
fostering long-term, multi-disciplinary research collaborations between
institutions. Ultimately, enhanced bioplastics production offers the promise to
reduce dependence on non-renewable oil and natural gas while positively
impacting the carbon cycle by consuming atmospheric
CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.