* 1952567
* Evolution of segmentation in chordates: dissecting the genetic mechanism of somitogenesis in the basal chordate, amphioxus
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Linda Holland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 775,000.00

Non-technical. Understanding how the thousands of genes that make up an
organism’s genome (the genotype) interact to create the tissues and organs that
together make up that organism (the phenotype) is one of the five ‘grand
challenges of 21st century biology’ identified by the National Research Council.
Dissecting this genotype-phenotype relationship is of great practical importance
and is the focus of enormous research efforts. Importantly, it is key to
understanding how organisms evolve and has wide-ranging implications for the
health sciences, agriculture, biotechnology, and ecology. To address the
genotype-phenotype relationship, this research uses amphioxus, a simple fish-
like animal whose ancestors separated from the evolutionary line leading to
vertebrates half a billion years ago. The specific question asked is how the
amphioxus genome produces the segmented body muscles (similar to the repeating
muscles along each side of a vertebrate such as a fish that allow side to side
movement). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical. The research will elucidate the gene
network mediating muscle segmentation, and show at the single-cell level how
this network controls the partitioning of cells into discrete segments
(somites). Comparisons with vertebrates will show how this genetic mechanism has
changed as vertebrates became larger and more complex. In amphioxus, muscle
segments extend the full length of the body, but in vertebrates, there are none
in the head. It is controversial whether vertebrates lost head segments or they
are an amphioxus novelty. Much of the gene network for muscle segmentation
appears to be conserved between amphioxus and vertebrates—in both, a “clock”
specifies when segments will form, and Notch/Delta signaling mediates
segmentation. However, in vertebrates, gradients of secreted proteins, chiefly
Fgfs, specify where segment boundaries will form, but in amphioxus only the head
segments, not those in the trunk or tail, require Fgfs. To test the theory that
as vertebrates grew larger and lost head segments, the Fgf gradient was co-opted
from the head to the posterior segments, key signaling pathways (Wnt/β-catenin;
Fgf, Notch) in developing amphioxus will be perturbed with chemical inhibitors
and activators at specific developmental times. Gene knockdown and
overexpression will show gene hierarchy. Effects on morphology of segmentation
will be reconstructed in 3-D by serial blockface scanning electron microscopy
(SBSEM), which when done at intervals can show the steps in morphogenesis at the
single cell level. Researchers will involve undergraduates and high school
students directly in the project and also partner with the Birch Aquarium at
Scripps Institution of Oceanography and the San Diego County Office of Education
to lead workshops for high school teachers. These workshops will use locally-
available marine invertebrates to show teachers how to instruct students in
experimental design and data analysis—skills that are fundamental to training
the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.