* 1952726
* Collaborative Research: Referential alarm calling as a window into the mechanisms and evolution of a complex cognitive phenotype
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Sharon Gill, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 440,935.00

In avian brood parasitism, birds lay their eggs into others’ nests, leaving the
foster hosts to look after the parasitic young. Some hosts combat such
parasitism by actively defending their nests from adult parasites. Yellow
Warblers (Setophaga petechia) produce unique "seet" calls to warn about the
presence of Brown-headed Cowbirds (Molothrus ater). In response to seet calls,
female warblers return to sit tightly on the nest to prevent cowbird parasitism.
This means that, much like words in human languages, seet calls symbolize
cowbird parasitism for the warblers. The project’s aim is to understand how
hosts perceive and process the acoustic and functional meaning of these symbolic
signals by studying the behavioral responses (in the field) and
neurophysiological patterns (using fMRI) of warblers to the cowbird’s own calls,
seet calls, and other sounds typical of the warbler’s habitat. The grant will
train a postdoctoral fellow, three PhD students, one Master's student, and at
least eight undergraduate researchers, including students from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. The researchers will write and share case
studies based on their research as open online educational resources for
undergraduate courses in organismal biology. Additional broader impacts will
include bird banding workshops for the general public, especially during the
vibrant migratory seasons in central Illinois and Michigan. Finally, a short 3D
virtual reality film-feature will be produced entitled "A Day in the Life of the
Cowbird", featuring characteristic daily activities of parasitic birds and their
interactions with hosts, as seen from the parasite's own eyes'
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current and past research on alarm calling in
animals has often focused on the detailed discovery and characterization of the
meaning of referential communication signals. However, the sensory-perceptual
abilities of animals to recognize referential calls and the potentially high-
level neural processing that ultimately leads to a specific behavioral response
have not yet been fully explored. Through integrating field and laboratory
experiments and levels of analyses, this research aims to test the overarching
hypothesis that referential signaling requires high-level cognitive abilities.
Using Yellow Warblers’ anti-brood parasitic alarm calls to Brown-headed Cowbirds
as a study system, four specific predictions will be assessed regarding that
referential calling (i) involves perceptual equivalency of alarm calls and their
referents, (ii) is socially acquired but may be modified by personal experience
with cowbirds, (iii) involves mental imagery, episodic-like memory, and mental
time travel, modifying future behavior so as to decrease risks to fitness, and
(iv) is a functionally specific response to obligate brood parasitism. The
project couples behavioral and population-level predictions of Yellow Warblers'
responses to seet calls with probing of developmental trajectories and neural
substrates of referential communication in wild birds via in vivo imaging (fMRI)
to repeatedly collect data across development. This integrative research will
provide new perspectives on the cognitive ecology and mechanisms of referential
communication, including potentially transformative understanding of the neural
substrates underlying the perception of symbolic calls, the existence of mental
time travel in novel contexts, and the functional substrates of referential
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.