* 1952644
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Robust, Efficient, and Private Deep Learning Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Jack Xin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 140,247.00

This project develops robust, accurate, and efficient next-generation deep
learning algorithms with data privacy and theoretical guarantees for solving
challenging artificial intelligence (AI) problems. The methods will have
robustness to adversarial attacks with theoretical guarantees. The project will
push artificial intelligence gains in performance and privacy to mobile devices.
A broad range of applications includes autonomous driving, drug and material
discovery, medical treatment planning, national defense, privacy-preserving
machine learning at the edge, federated learning, and also blockchain. Moreover,
the developed tools will significantly scale the existing scientific simulations
to ultra-large scale and high-dimensional scenarios. This project will partially
support one graduate student per year at each campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
approach toward trustworthy deep learning is theoretically principled by modern
partial differential equations and optimization algorithms and theories. The
project involves new algorithmic and theoretical techniques to tackle graph
representation in high-dimensional non-convex, non-smooth AI settings. In
particular, the project will study (1) developing adversarial robust deep
learning algorithms and their theoretical foundations; (2) improving the
accuracy of deep learning leveraging new stochastic optimization and principled
neural network unit design assisted neural architecture search; (3) advancing
deep neural networks compression with algorithms and hardware co-design; (4)
designing new data privacy mechanisms to optimally tradeoff between utility and
privacy; (5) inventing new quantitative analysis tools to decipher the mysteries
of deep learning theoretical challenges; (6) quantifying uncertainties of
sophisticated deep learning algorithms. The project trains a diverse body of
graduate and undergraduate students at UC Irvine, UCLA, and University of Utah
through collaborative education and research activities in applied mathematics,
computer science, data science, and general biological, physical, and
sociological disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.