* 1952757
* Collaborative Research: Optimal-Complexity Spectral Methods for Complex Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Alex Townsend, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 120,000.00

Complex fluids, such as microbial suspensions in biology or quantum fluids in
physics, exhibit a wealth of intriguing phenomena, ranging from spontaneous
transport and non-equilibrium pattern formation to the emergence of superfluid
and superconductive currents. Computational techniques for simulating and
predicting the dynamics of these fluids in realistic 3D configurations found in
laboratories are not keeping pace with the recent breakthroughs in experimental
design and mathematical modeling. The Principal Investigators (PIs) will develop
a collection of computational advancements that are urgently needed to validate
current mathematical models and explore relevant parameter regimes to guide
current and next-generation experiments. These efforts will pave the way for a
better understanding of biological and physical transport phenomena, promising
improved designs of micro-fluidic and quantum-fluidic devices. The project also
provides research training opportunities for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will be developing highly efficient numerical
methods based on a hybrid of Fourier/ultraspherical spectral methods that are
ideally suited for accurately and robustly treating the high-order derivatives
that appear in the complex fluid models. This computational framework will
enable the fast simulation of non-equilibrium fluid flows through scientifically
relevant geometries composed of cylinders, spheres, and ellipsoids. The
algorithms will be parallelizable for efficient simulation on next-generation
hardware accelerators. Working with two experimental collaborators, the PIs will
investigate chaotic mixing, transport properties, and topological nature of
geometrically confined non-Newtonian fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.