* 1952817
* EAR-PF: Mechanisms Influencing Arsenic speciation and bioavailability at the plant-soil interface on Native American lands
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Cherie DeVore, DeVore, Cherie
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2022
* USD 174,000.00

An NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship has been granted to Dr. Cherie L. De Vore to
conduct research and training initiatives at Stanford University under the
mentorship of Dr. Scott Fendorf. The project seeks to identify mechanisms
affecting the uptake and bioavailability of arsenic in culturally relevant
plants from Native American communities. By better understanding arsenic uptake
using controlled laboratory experiments, it will be possible to determine
strategies for immobilizing metals and limiting exposure routes to the
environment and to humans. This work uses community-driven partnerships and
interdisciplinary collaborations that will ultimately contribute to reducing
arsenic exposure to protect the health of Native American communities, which is
one of the main broader impacts of this project. The results of this project
offer a unique opportunity to translate knowledge about arsenic uptake to
benefit underserved tribal communities with the goal of promoting social equity.
Direct educational benefits include environmental research and training for a
Native American Postdoctoral researcher and community partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive abandoned mine waste sites in the western United
States near tribal lands are poorly managed. The detection of arsenic in plant
tissues grown in mining-impacted sediment drives the investigation of Dr. De
Vore aimed at better understanding of the role of fungal endophytes and natural
organic matter (NOM) on the accumulation of arsenic in relevant plants used by
Native American communities. The integration of aqueous chemistry, DNA
sequencing, spectroscopy and microscopy techniques will allow the identification
of biogeochemical mechanisms affecting arsenic speciation and bioavailability in
plant-soil micro-zone environments that are currently not well understood.
Results from this initiative will be useful to help identify potential exposure
pathways and enhance risk reduction strategies for communities living near these
sites. Further, advancing knowledge of the biogeochemical processes can then
steer remediation efforts that may require a sizable federal investment. The
results of this study have relevant implications for informing tribal and
regulatory decision makers, as well as environmental risk assessments and
phytoremediation efforts for communities located near abandoned mine waste
sites. This project was co-funded by the Geobiology and Low-Temperature
Geochemistry program in the division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.