* 1952599
* IRES Track I - URM - Undergraduate - Materials Science - New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Timothy Usher, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,991.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;This IRES award will expand research and mentorship access for
undergraduate students at California State University San Bernardino (CSUSB) by
partnering with Victoria University Wellington (VUW) in New Zealand. The
proposed project offers opportunities that are invaluable in training the next
generation of research leaders thereby enhancing U.S. leadership in research and
strengthening economic competitiveness. Students from (CSUSB)will travel to New
Zealand to engage in high quality international research and professional
development experiences in Materials Science. Specifically, fifteen students
(five for three consecutive years) will participate in original research in the
area of Advanced Functional Materials for 10 weeks (June - August) at the
Robinson Research Institute, VUW. The research focuses on the magnetic,
electric, and multifunctional properties of materials. A further goal is towards
specific aerospace applications of high temperature superconductors. CSUSB is a
Minority and Hispanic Serving Institution, and there will be a focus on
including women and students from underrepresented groups in this program. The
project will strive to inspire all student participants by a truly
transformative international research experience, which would prepare them to be
future leaders and mentors for subsequent students in STEM research and
education. The CSUSB Center for Advanced Functional Materials (CAFM), with major
funding from the NSF-CREST program has an established track record of success in
preparing STEM research students. We anticipate building on these successes,
enabling student participants to excel in STEM fields. CSUSB's main service
area, with its low educational attainment and high poverty rates will
particularly benefit from the degree completion and advanced training of all
students. In addition, the international collaboration will provide expertise
and facilities access through expanding professional collaborations with
researchers in New Zealand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;The research
embraces a Materials Genome inspired approach for rational development of
advanced functional materials. Research methods include:
Theoretical/computational materials genome, database mining, and first
principles calculations: synthesis of thin film, nanoparticle, and crystal
growth; and experimental characterization by, for example NMR, EPR, XRD, TEM,
PFM, magnetic, dielectric, Raman, magnetoelectric. The primary goal is to create
new materials with advanced properties or combined (preferably interacting)
properties including: piezoelectric, ferroelectric, ferromagnetic, non-linear
optic, multiferroic and magnetoelectric. These materials include thin films,
nanocomposites, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), single crystals or polymers,
and bulk formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.