* 1952914
* EAR-PF: Nitrogen processing in Arctic deltas and role of channel network orientation on flux to the coast
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Deon Knights, Knights, Deon H
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2022
* USD 194,667.00

An EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship has been awarded to Dr. Deon Knights to work at
West Virginia University to undertake research and educational activities. The
research will examine how deltas control the flux of terrestrially derived
nitrate to the Arctic Ocean, which contains only 1% of global ocean volume but
receives 10% of global river discharge. Consequently, the Arctic Ocean is
sensitive to high riverine flux of particulates and nutrients, with implications
on global carbon cycling, marine biogeochemistry, and fishery health. Although
Arctic deltas may alter the nutrient composition of river water discharging to
the ocean, almost all discharge and nutrient data for Arctic rivers are based on
measurements upstream of deltas, so the extent to which Arctic deltas alter
nutrient fluxes to the ocean remains largely unexplored. Through field
measurements, laboratory analyses, and modeling efforts, this research will
investigate the capacity of Arctic deltas to remove nitrate that would otherwise
discharge to the Arctic Ocean. Findings will give insight into the response of
nutrient processing in Arctic deltas in response to potential scenarios of
climate change which may be used to improve global climate ocean and atmospheric
models. This project relies on new field and remote sensing techniques which
will be used as a teaching tool for laboratory and field-based courses at West
Virginia University at the undergraduate and graduate level. With assistance
from project mentor Professor Christopher Russoniello, Dr. Deon Knights will
lead seminars through service organizations at West Virginia University aimed at
mentoring and supporting underrepresented students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to use a multi-scale approach to
investigate how the morphology of channel networks within Arctic deltas
influences nitrate retention and transport under current and future climate
scenarios. Three main objectives will be met: (1) measure how the percent
nitrate removal within delta channels varies as a function of channel size, (2)
quantitatively relate nitrate retention in large Arctic deltas to structural
differences between deltas to inform the potential of different Arctic delta
types to act as nitrate removal hotspots and (3) explore and compare nitrate
retention under future climatic scenarios in the six Arctic Great River deltas.
The relationship between stream size and nitrate removal will inform the removal
kinetics necessary for upscaling to network-wide models. Morphologic and
hydrologic models of the six largest Arctic deltas will be developed based on
remotely-sensed surface water observations and delta morphometrics will be used
to compare nitrate retention between deltas of differing structures. Except for
insight from a few studies, nitrate processing downstream of delta apexes and
upstream of the coast are virtually unknown. This study provides a necessary
step to understanding nitrate removal across vast remote areas of the Arctic by
using remotely-sensed surface water observations coupled with removal kinetics.
This project received co-funding from the Hydrologic Science program in the
Division of Earth Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.