* 1952247
* SCC-IRG-Track2: Creating an Extensible Data Exchange and Analytics Sandbox for Smart Water infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Sharad Mehrotra, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,499,943.00

The importance of water to civilization is unquestionable; over centuries, this
critical community lifeline has become complex with multiple subsystems
(drinking water(DW), wastewater(WW), and stormwater(SW)) to import, deliver and
haul away water. Today, these infrastructures are designed and operated
separately by an array of local governments, water districts, and regulatory
agencies - all subjected to stress caused by aging, urbanization, failures,
extreme events, and demand/supply variabilities. This proposal brings together
an interdisciplinary team of researchers and practitioners in computer science,
civil engineering, public policy, and social ecology to create a Smart Water
data-exchange framework, SWADE, that will serve as a repository and sandbox for
collecting, sharing, exploring, analyzing, and curating information about
diverse community water systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SWADE will utilize recent
advances in IoT and big data systems to create a holistic understanding of these
interacting platforms - the framework integrates static and dynamic data from
infrastructures and communities with domain-specific models/simulators and
analytics services to create new levels of efficiency and resilience in co-
executing systems. Innovative research will address tradeoffs (e.g. cost,
accuracy) in data collection, develop semantic approaches for joint data
representation and storage, explore data cleaning and refinement mechanisms,
promote community engagement to drive policy-based exchange to address data-
sharing barriers and design novel analytics to understand resilience and
societal impact of water policies. Innovations to existing infrastructures
require public acceptance; to achieve this, the team includes practitioners at
water agencies in Southern California (e.g. Orange County, Irvine, Los Angeles)
and Illinois who will help create and instantiate the SWADE framework;
interactions with agencies in Florida and Maryland will help ensure
transferability of SWADE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through SWADE, communities around
the nation can learn and share lessons with each other, experiment with sample
data/networks to understand design choices as they plan future investment in
water systems. This project can help guide policy research on information
interchange in other complex community infrastructures (e.g. water-energy-food
nexus, transportation networks) where socioeconomic and geopolitical constraints
play a role in determining what can be shared and exchanged. Educational
outreach will leverage efforts of the Water UCI Center, and campus programs
including RET, REU, K-12, and women in STEM programs at UCI and SDSU. Our
programs will focus on promoting broader participation by allowing citizens from
diverse backgrounds and perspectives to contribute to the essential research
mission of ensuring safe and reliable water services for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.