* 1952878
* Flexible and Scalable Moment Method Simulations for Radiation Transport and Nuclear Medicine Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Benjamin Seibold, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 243,199.00

This project develops computational methods and software tools to enable faster
and more robust simulations of radiation transport, as well as the visualization
of simulation results via virtual reality. Radiation transport and the transport
of charged particles are central processes in many important complex systems,
and they are crucial to incorporate in simulations for nuclear reactors, nuclear
medicine, plasma, astrophysics, nuclear waste storage planning, and climate
models. A particular application in this project is radiotherapy in cancer
treatment. Novel computational approaches that facilitate optimal treatment
planning in nuclear medicine will be produced in the form of publicly available
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds and extends the open-source
StaRMAP software through: (A) fundamental numerical analysis research, including
new moment closures that combine simplicity with robustness, and efficient time-
stepping approaches that automatically yield effective steady state radiation
solvers in the diffusion limit; (B) high-performance computing research, by
casting StaRMAP into a stencil code framework to obtain highly scalable 3D
radiation solvers on high performance computing clusters; (C) interactions with
new cyberinfrastructure, by coupling the software with virtual reality
visualization; and (D) application research, by extending the StaRMAP code to
nuclear medicine simulations, particularly radiotherapy with charged particles.
The research is augmented and facilitated by community-building efforts around
the StaRMAP project and training for students at the interface of computing,
simulation, and virtual reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by the MPS/DMS/CDS&amp;E-MSS program and by the CISE/OAC
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.