* 1952823
* IIBR Instrumentation: Multiscale Multiplex Nanomechanical Stimulus and Sensing of Living Cells on 3D-Cell Culture
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Qingze Zou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 831,270.00

An award is made to Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey to develop a
sensing platform to achieve rapid, broadband nanomechanical mapping of live
cells. By integrating this sensing platform with a scanning probe microscope
(SPM), time-elapsed nanomechanical evolutions of multiple cells on a three-
dimensional (3D) cell culture can be mapped. Such a sensing platform can be used
as a powerful tool in various biology studies to gain a better understanding of
the correlation between molecular signaling and biomechanical physics in tissue
remodeling. The research outcomes of this project will be disseminated through
patent applications, technical demonstration and presentation in biological
conferences, and journal publications. Joint summer workshops will be organized
to introduce nano/bio-mechanical sensing to both graduate and undergraduate
students. Well-established programs at Rutgers such as the Rutgers Society for
Women Engineers will be leveraged to recruit under-represented students
including women and African American at both undergraduate and graduate levels,
and to reach out to middle- and high- school students through open lab-tours.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to achieve a wide
variety of nanomechanical measurements of a 3D-cell culture, including rapid and
broadband nanomechanical property mapping of multiple cells, mechanical stimulus
and cell poking with precision force control, and simultaneous mechanical
stimuli and mechanical measurement of cells. This research goal will be
accomplished through the following four objectives: (I). A nano-manipulator with
four degree-of-freedom (DOF) motions (two translational and two rotational) will
be designed and built, and then integrated to a SPM system equipped with an
inverted optical microscope. (II). A multi DOF nano-positioning stage will be
designed and built to manipulate a cantilever probe, and integrated to the SPM
system; (III). A suite of algorithms will be developed to integrate the above
two manipulators with the SPM system to fulfill the desired cell stimuli and
measurement functions; and (IV). The new sensing platform will be demonstrated
and evaluated through time-elapsed viscoelasticity mapping of 3D cell culture in
plant biology and cell biology benchmark experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.