* 1952503
* Long-Term Impacts of Institutionalized Inequality on Household Wealth and Well-Being
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Jessica Munson, Lycoming College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 237,925.00

Dr. Jessica Munson will lead a team of researchers to investigate the long-term
impacts of institutionalized inequality on household wealth and well-being in
ancient society. Inequality is an intrinsic element of large-scale human
societies but understanding how disparities in wealth and power differentially
impacted the human condition in the past is not well studied. With its long-term
perspective, archaeology is poised to make significant contributions to
examining the impacts of permanent institutionalized inequality on the everyday
lives of past people. This project will analyze disparities in household wealth,
social well-being, and health within an ancient community to develop a more
detailed understanding of how increasing political power impacted socioeconomic
disparities over the span of about 2000 years. Understanding how ancient
societies responded and adapted to political instability and socioeconomic
differences in the past can provide important lessons as one confronts similar
challenges today. This research is designed to improve quality of life concerns
for local communities near the field site and project laboratory as well as
provide educational opportunities for students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying the distribution of wealth and well-being
in ancient societies requires a large dataset that is representative of the
range of socioeconomic differences that were present in the past. Combining new
archaeological investigations with analyses of legacy data that spans an
approximately two thousand year period, this large-scale excavation project will
sample between 40-50 households identified in recent settlement surveys.
Multiple quality of life indices will be calculated using data from burials,
domestic artifacts, and residential architecture to investigate the impacts of
increasing political power on the distribution of household wealth and well-
being disparities over this period. The data generated from this project will
facilitate an innovative conceptual framework and methodology to analyze
multiple kinds of household inequality, providing an important dataset for
future comparative studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.