* 1952781
* Data-Enabled Acceleration of Stochastic Computational Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Yen-Chi Chen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 160,000.00

This project will advance the ability to accelerate stochastic computational
experiments with the aid of heterogeneous data (for example, empirical
observations, multi-fidelity simulations, and expert knowledge). This work is
motivated by the trend of computational experiments in science and engineering.
These experiments increasingly rely on probabilistic models to represent
epistemic uncertainties (such as those in physics-based model specification) and
aleatory uncertainties (noise in experiments and observational data). To date
crude Monte Carlo simulation dominates such stochastic computational experiments
mainly due to its simplicity. Efforts to accelerate the experiments have
generally been ad-hoc and narrowly applicable to a particular science or
engineering problem. This project will produce methods and tools for domain
scientists and engineers with a potential to expedite or even enable
breakthroughs based on stochastic computational experiments. These methods will
help overcome the computational challenge associated with investigating unusual
strings of events (for example, nuclear meltdown, cascading blackout, and
epidemic outbreak) that are critical to the nation's economy, security, and
health. To maximally reach out to domain scientists and engineers, this project
will design and implement an open-source software package of the methods. An
online workshop will be designed and conducted to demonstrate the software and
train researchers and practitioners. To build the capacity of the next
generation of researchers and practitioners, the project team will recruit and
engage with college and high-school students, especially those from
underrepresented backgrounds, through a partnership with diversity enhancement
programs in the university. Graduate students will be directly involved in
designing and executing research, while undergraduate students will participate
in software development and testing, being mentored and trained as data-enabled
computational researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though comprehensive
consideration of uncertainties in a scientific or engineering study is
commendable, an unguided computational investment on crude Monte Carlo
simulation often results in an enormous waste of time and resources.
Furthermore, to attain a required accuracy of probabilistic analysis, the
associated computational burden can be a major bottleneck or even a barrier to
scientific and engineering discovery, especially when the event of interest is
extreme, rare, or peculiar. To address this challenge, this project will
innovate a unified methodological framework that leverages heterogeneous data
for speeding up stochastic computational experiments without compromising the
accuracy of probabilistic analysis. The framework will include methods for
identifying and exploiting a low-dimensional manifold (naturally appearing in
science and engineering) of high-dimensional simulation input space to speed up
stochastic computational experiments by addressing the curse of dimensionality.
For the accelerated probabilistic analysis, asymptotically valid confidence
bounds will be constructed to ensure the desired analysis accuracy. The
framework will prescribe how to adaptively allocate computational resources for
exploring the simulation input space while exploiting the important input
manifold to minimize the computational expenditure while maintaining the desired
analysis accuracy. The project will validate the methods and verify the open-
source software developed for broader impacts, based on two engineering
simulation case studies, namely, structural reliability evaluation of a wind
turbine and cascading failure analysis of a power
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.