* 1952096
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Socially Informed Services Conflict Governance through Specification, Detection, Resolution and Prevention
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jing Jin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,316,000.00

Smart services are deeply embedded in modern cities aiming to enhance various
aspects of citizens' lives, including safety, wellness, and quality of life.
Examples include intelligent traffic control and air quality control. Given
these services, monitoring a city's safety and performance collectively is
crucial, yet also challenging due to many potential conflicts among the number
increasing of services deployed. Researchers have accumulated abundant knowledge
on how to design these services independently. However, underlying expected or
unexpected couplings among services due to complex interactions of social and
physical activities are under-explored, which leads to potential service
conflicts. Developing approaches of reducing conflicts is essential for ensuring
social inclusion and equity of city services because when conflicts occur, their
impacts are likely to be concentrated in some sub-communities (e.g., specific
geographic locations, specific user groups like patients with respiratory
illness, etc.) meaning that some citizens will experience lower quality services
than others due to the diversity. Put differently, service conflicts contribute
to a digital divide in service provision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
intellectual merit of the proposed project is the development of a socially
aware conflict management theory and its deployment for smart cities, consisting
of 5 sequential components as follows. (1) a novel, template-based requirements
specification component/tool that integrates social and technical requirements
to formally define a conflict; (2) a social diversity aware detection approach
that utilizes machine learning and conflict correlations to detect conflicts in
practice; (3) a multi-objective yet equity-centric resolution method that
accounts for socially acceptable trade-offs, behavioral models, and control
theory to resolve existing conflicts; (4) a participant-based conflict
prevention solution that employs Game Theory and Reinforcement Learning in a
scalable, decentralize fashion to prevent future conflicts; (5) a social
intervention approach based on education outreach and professional training to
disseminate the proposed technology to empower the community. The real-world
implementation of this theory by working with the city partners in Newark NJ
will show its effectiveness and broader impacts on a diverse set of stakeholders
of conflict management from city operators, to service providers, to average
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.