* 1952833
* The Mathematics Teacher Training Institute (MTTI)
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Lawrence Potter, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 03/31/2022
* USD 199,522.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities – Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to principal investigators who undertake an institutional
self-analysis in preparation of efforts that specifically address institutional
transformation. Institutions are expected to conduct scientific studies that
yield results on critical pedagogies and culturally sensitive interventions that
contribute to the success of HBCUs in educating African American STEM
undergraduates, the likes of which will be broadly disseminated to the
scientific community. The project at University of the District of Columbia
(UDC) seeks to plan the essential research questions, experimental designs and
programmatic activities for developing a Mathematics Teacher Training Institute
(MTTI) that would support a larger, institutional initiative for producing more
STEM graduates from underserved communities in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish MTTI at UDC based
on the content conceptualization framework and delivery method developed by the
Southern Initiative Algebra Project. The institute’s purpose is to equip higher
education faculty with tools to train mathematics teachers at the secondary
schools that primarily serve underrepresented minority populations in the
region. As such, the institute will also develop professional development
training sessions that are grounded in culturally appropriate and responsive
STEM pedagogies for mathematics instructors at the middle school, high school
and college-level. The impact of the proposed approach will be evidenced via
mathematics outcomes of participating students attending UDC and partnering K-12
schools. Activities of this project include: formalizing partnerships with area
high schools and the Educational Testing Service; training of undergraduate
students to serve as mathematics tutors in the UDC partner schools; training of
mathematics teachers from partner institutions; and assessment and study of MTTI
training strategies. The project will be guided by an external advisory
committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.