* 1952736
* Ocean Temperatures Through Early Cenozoic Climate Maxima Across a Latitudinal Transect from the North to the South Pacific - A Multi-Proxy In Situ Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Reinhard Kozdon, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 509,253.00

Records of Earth’s past climate hold important clues to our future climate. For
example, the early Eocene (56 to 49 million years ago) was characterized by
higher-than-modern atmospheric greenhouse gas levels and much warmer mean global
temperatures. This period may be a good analog for the 21st or 22nd century. By
that time, climate models predict that greenhouse gas emissions will produce
warmer conditions than the Earth has experienced for at least 35 million years.
One common feature of all past periods of warm climate is the exceptional warmth
of high latitude regions. However, current climate models fail to reproduce
these warm polar temperatures. This disagreement between paleoclimate records
and model simulations poses a major challenge in climate research. Are the
paleoclimate data biased, are the climate models inaccurate, or both? Testing of
climate models is currently limited by the scarcity of robust paleoclimate data.
For instance, many records of past sea surface temperature are based on the
isotopic and chemical composition of fossil shells of planktic foraminifera.
These microorganisms live throughout the surface ocean and their shells are
preserved in seafloor sediments. However, these fossil chemical records can be
degraded by sedimentary processes acting over millions of years. High-resolution
microscopic imaging now allows for the identification of better-preserved areas
within fossil foraminifera shells. And recent analytical developments make it
possible to measure the chemistry of these tiny areas. The proposed study will
use these new methods to re-assess equator-to-pole sea surface temperature
gradients in the Pacific Ocean during the early Eocene warm period. These data
will shed new light on the data-model mismatches and help improve the climate
models’ accuracy. The study will support a graduate student. The project results
will be highlighted in a science outreach display to introduce paleoclimate
studies to non-scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
ability to accurately simulate warm climates in Earth history provides one of
the most important tests of our understanding of the Earth’s atmospheric system.
Of particular interest is the early to middle Eocene 56 to 49 million years ago)
which is the last time that greenhouse gas levels exceeded ~600 ppm CO2 (modern
412 ppm, increasing more than 2 ppm/year). A puzzling feature of this time is
the exceptional warmth of high-latitude regions associated with relatively cool
tropical temperatures and a weak latitudinal temperature gradient. However, even
current climate models fail to simulate such a climate regime. This data-model
mismatch may be partially caused by diagenetic alteration of paleoclimate
archives. After millions of years in the sediment, diageneses may alter the
original isotopic and chemical composition of foraminifer shells, sand-grain-
sized marine microfossils that are – by far – the most important recorders of
the Earth’s past climate. Within the past years, it was found that minute (just
tens of microns) domains within these foraminifer shells are better preserved
than the remaining material. Recent developments and improvements of in situ
(‘in place’) analytical approaches in combination with high-resolution imaging
now allows for the identification and analysis of these better-preserved domains
within foraminifer shells. By using these new and emerging in situ technologies,
we aim to re-asses meridional temperature gradients through early Eocene climate
maxima across a South Pacific longitudinal transect. Thereby, we will focus on
three time intervals that are of highest interest for climate modeling
community: (1) The Early Eocene Climate Optimum (~53 – 51 Ma); (2) The
Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM, ~56 Ma), (3); The period just before the
PETM to assess to pre-warming background conditions. State-of-the-art imaging
approaches to identify better preserved domains within foraminifer shells will
be used in combination with Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) for oxygen
isotope analysis, Electron Probe Microanalysis (EPMA) for the determination of
Magnesium/Calcium (Mg/Ca) ratios, and Laser-Ablation ICP-MS for multielement
depth profiling through foraminifer chamber walls (chemical ‘fingerprinting’ of
diagenesis). The in situ data will be paired with conventional oxygen isotope
measurements to assess the potential bias of previously published
paleorecords.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.