* 1952791
* EAR-PF Continuous vs. mixed-mode deformation during construction of the southern central Andes: Investigating the spatiotemporal scales of Cordilleran tectonic regimes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Chelsea Mackaman-Lofland, Mackaman-Lofland, Chelsea
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 205,000.00

Dr. Chelsea Mackaman-Lofland has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship
to conduct research, professional development, and educational activities at the
University of Connecticut (UConn) under the mentorship of Professors Julie
Fosdick and Michael Hren. This project investigates the spatial and temporal
scales of crustal deformation during construction of the southern central Andes
(~30°S) in South America. Project results will improve scientific understanding
of the forces and geodynamic mechanisms driving subduction-related mountain
building. The Andes define key examples of mountain building during the
subduction of oceanic crust beneath a continental plate, and are integral to
Earth systems including ocean/atmospheric circulation patterns, biological
diversity, and natural hazard and resource distribution. At ~30°S, contrasting
models of Andean mountain building invoke continuous crustal shortening vs.
episodic shortening, extensional, and possibly neutral conditions in the
overriding plate. This project integrates structural mapping, basin analysis,
geo/thermochronology, and paleoaltimetry of bedrock and hinterland basin fill at
~30°S to (1) resolve conflicting shortening, extensional, and/or neutral
deformation mode interpretations and (2) quantify the timing, magnitude, and
rates of deformation, crustal evolution, surface uplift, and establishment of
the Andean Cordillera. Research and professional development will involve
geological field training for Argentine undergraduate students and training for
an undergraduate thesis project at the host institution. The UConn undergraduate
will be recruited through the newly funded GEOPAths internship and career-
mentoring program, which emphasizes the recruitment and retention of
underrepresented student groups. Project results will be incorporated into a
field trip for Argentine and Chilean students and activities for the “Mountains,
Rivers, and Carbon” and “Paleogeography, Tectonics, and Global Climate”
educational outreach programs at UConn.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Subduction-related
mountain building has long been attributed to continuous shortening and
thickening of the overriding plate following margin-scale changes in plate
convergence. However, an increasing body of structural, stratigraphic, and
magmatic evidence points to episodic deformation, with potentially regional
shortening, extension, and/or neutral regimes during the construction of
Cordilleran orogens. Along the transition from central to southern Andes
(~25−35°S), upper-plate deformation involved an apparent shift from continuous
shortening to mixed-mode deformation. Characterizing the nature of this
transition is fundamental to understanding the timing, tempo, and spatial
continuity of convergent margin processes, but existing reconstructions invoke
conflicting tectonic conditions most apparent along a single orogenic transect
at ~30°S. This research seeks to resolve conflicting deformation mode
interpretations and provide geographic and timing parameters with which to
interrogate potential regional or plate-scale mechanisms controlling Cordilleran
deformation. Combined zircon Lu-Hf (Lutetium-Hafnium) and U-Pb (Uranium-Lead)
geochronology, low-temperature thermochronology, and stable isotope
paleoaltimetry analyses will establish quantitative relationships between
deformation, exhumation, crustal thickening, and surface uplift. Reconstruction
of precursor deformation and sedimentation history will provide a framework with
which to investigate the influence of inherited tectonic regimes and basin
architectures on Neogene growth of the modern Andes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.