* 1952645
* EAR-PF: Plant Wax Transport and Integration Through the Late Holocene in Guatemala
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Wesley Parker, Parker, Wesley George
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 06/30/2022
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Wesley Parker has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans under the mentorship of Dr. Peter Douglas at
McGill University. The rainforests of Central America are being lost at an
alarming rate, and this has significant impacts on regional precipitation,
natural resource availability, and the global carbon cycle. These environmental
changes are expected to continue in the future, adversely impacting both human
and ecological communities across Central America. Therefore, investigation of
changing vegetation and precipitation regimes will complement and expand
knowledge surrounding natural variability in tropical forests and constrain the
impacts of human activities on these endangered forests. The proposed research
will analyze modern plant waxes (abundant and long-lasting hydrocarbon
molecules) preserved in sediment cores from lake basins in Guatemala to
investigate geospatial transport and integration of plant waxes in the modern
tropical forests of Central America. The results will establish a 9,000 year
profile of carbon and hydrogen isotope variability that will develop knowledge
surrounding long-term changes in vegetation and precipitation. This hypothesis
driven research will test the ideas that changing vegetation types in Central
America can be assessed through plant wax analysis, and that plant waxes will
accurately track climate perturbations in the Western Hemisphere. This project
will be conducted in collaboration with local conservation groups in Guatemala
to help inform their activities and will be coupled with community education
programs in the USA, Canada, and Guatemala. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is accomplished in two phases. First, the hydrogen and carbon isotopes in long-
chained plant waxes (n-alkyl lipids) from modern leaf material and sediments are
analyzed using compound specific isotope analyses to characterize plant wax
transportation pathways and vegetation balance (C3/C4 plant ratio) in the Lake
Izabal and Petén Basins of Guatemala. Then, plant waxes retrieved from sediment
cores covering 9,000 years are analyzed to reconstruct changes in vegetation and
precipitation through the middle and late Holocene in both basins. These plant
wax-derived isotope profiles are then compared to independent proxy data to
identify signals of known Holocene climate events (e.g. 8.2 kyr event) and track
the magnitude of these signals in tropical Central America. This research
enhances the overall quality and applicability of ongoing paleoclimatic research
in Central America by generating the first middle and late Holocene hydrogen and
carbon isotope profiles for the focal basins. This research can inform
policymakers responsible for the generation and implementation of regional
conservation and climate adaptation strategies that will benefit human
populations, ecological systems, and financial investments in Central America.
Additional broader impacts of this research include outreach educational
activities in the USA, Canada, and Guatemala. This project received co-funding
from the Earth Science section of the Paleo Perspectives on Climate Change
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.