* 1953648
* RET Site: Next-generation Clean Energy Sources and Storage
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hanif Livani, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,796.00

Due to climate change, supply scarcity, and an impetus to expand access to
electricity and improve energy system resilience, there is an increasing need
for new types of renewable energy sources (RESs) and energy storage devices
(ESDs) that are environmentally friendly, efficient, sustainable, and
affordable. Simultaneously, there is an urgent nation- and state-wide need for
educated scientists and engineers to generate new ideas and technologies, due in
part to inadequate student enrollment in the science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields. The main goals of this Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) Site project are therefore to (1) immerse middle and high school
science teachers in a hands-on research experience; (2) promote discoveries and
innovations in this field among middle and high school students and expose them
to STEM career opportunities; and (3) increase awareness of society’s need for
environmentally-friendly sustainable energy sources. The goals of the project
will be achieved through the following objectives: (1) train a cadre of middle
and high school teachers in the fundamental concepts of RESs and ESDs and engage
them in hands-on research experiences; (2) help teachers develop curriculum
knowledge units and introduce those units to their students; and (3) expose K-12
students to current energy and environmental concerns and STEM career
opportunities. The impacts of the proposed RET Site project extend well beyond
the specific research and curriculum development activities described above.
First, the problem of discovering environmentally-friendly RESs and ESDs is
timely, since the impacts of climate change and manufacturing waste on human and
animal health are becoming increasingly obvious. Second, the proposed activities
will have direct and indirect impacts on research, education, training, and
professional development for science teachers and the developed materials will
be used to attract K-12 students to STEM disciplines. This RET Site project will
develop a sustainable and interactive research and education program, expose
middle and high school students to STEM research and career opportunities, and
narrow the gap in the workforce by equipping students with necessary skill
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to train a cohort
of middle and high school teachers and renovate middle and high school science
curricula. This is accompanied by the overall goal of the proposed integrative
research and education activities to make RES and ESD technologies more clean,
sustainable, accessible, and efficient and to seamlessly integrate them into
power grids. The site will have five research projects, led by eight faculty
from different engineering departments, that are carefully selected to advance
the state-of-the-art technologies by (1) developing new fabrication methods and
materials for RESs and ESDs; (2) developing control and operation architectures
for seamless integration of RESs into the power grid; and (3) reducing the
environmental impacts of manufacturing and degradation of RESs and ESDs. While
the potential for any individual teacher participant to advance the state-of-
the-art through this RET Site is small, as a group, the individual projects have
innovative potential, and the teachers’ contributions to these projects will be
essential to the research teams’ success. The proposed research activities will
contribute to the development of a transformative mathematical framework and
methodology that will enable—both through direct consequences and through
promotion of further research—solutions to hurdles that presently impede the
development and integration of RESs and ESDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.