* 1953468
* IRES Track II: Advanced studies institute on water quality and harmful algal blooms in Lake Victoria
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Kefa Otiso, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,863.00

The North American and African Great Lakes are vital global freshwater
resources. These lakes contain nearly half of the world’s available surface
fresh water and therefore the security and health of these lakes is critically
important especially as freshwater supplies continue to dwindle globally. One of
the most prevalent concerns is human-influenced nutrient (nitrogen and
phosphorus) pollution that causes a phenomenon known as a harmful algal bloom.
Harmful algal blooms are overgrowths of algae that can have negative impacts to
the environment and/or the health of humans, pets or cattle due to the toxic
compounds that can be produced. Freshwater harmful algal blooms have become more
prevalent worldwide over the past few decades. They occur in lakes, ponds,
rivers and reservoirs across all 50 states and in many of the world’s most
socioeconomically-important waterbodies. Lakes Victoria (African Great Lake) and
Erie (North American Great Lake) are the 3rd and 11th largest lakes by surface
area and both have regions that are plagued by toxic harmful algal blooms.
Western Lake Erie and Kisumu Bay, Nyanza Gulf, Lake Victoria are similar in that
they are both shallow systems that experience heavy nutrient pollution, which
results in annual Microcystis-dominated toxic harmful algal blooms. However,
they are different in that Lake Erie is a temperate system dominated by
agricultural nutrient pollution, whereas Kisumu Bay is a tropical system that
receives a mixture urban and agricultural nutrient pollution. While much is
known about the ecology of the Microcystis-dominated blooms in western Lake
Erie, little is known about the ecology, spatial distribution and toxicity
patterns of the Microcystis-dominated harmful algal blooms in Kisumu Bay. The
Advanced Studies Institutes will provide US graduate students the opportunity to
expand their research on water quality and harmful algal blooms in Lake Erie to
Lake Victoria. Their research will help fill critical knowledge gaps on the
similarities and differences between the blooms that occur in each lake to help
us better understand the ecological strategies that Microcystis uses to be able
to form blooms in fresh waters across the globe. Furthermore, the graduate
students will have the opportunity to learn about Kenyan culture and begin to
develop their international collaborations by conducting joint research projects
with their Kenyan peers and mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth’s surface fresh
waters, including the Laurentian and African Great Lakes, are under assault from
multiple stressors. One of the most prevalent concerns is increased
anthropogenic nutrient pollution into these waters leading to many negative
effects including harmful algal blooms. Under these conditions, cyanobacteria,
commonly referred to as blue-green algae, can grow to dense concentrations in
fresh waters across the globe forming what are known as cyanobacterial harmful
algal blooms (cyanoHABs). Many cyanoHABs can produce toxins that can sicken or
kill humans, cattle and other domestic animals. Indeed, in the last decade major
cities in China, the United States, Africa and other parts of the globe have
suffered from impaired drinking water due to cyanoHABs. Notably, many of these
events are dominated by a single cyanoHAB-forming genus, Microcystis spp. This
is important since Microcystis–dominated cyanoHABs form in lakes in temperate to
tropical latitudes. Therefore, Microcystis must be able to adjust its ecological
strategies to maintain dominance in lakes transcending major latitudinal
boundaries. Lake Victoria (Africian Great Lake) and Lake Erie (Laurentian Great
Lake) are two socioeconomically-important systems that have regions (Nyanza
Gulf, Kenya and western Lake Erie, respectively) that experience annual toxic
cyanoHABs dominated by Microcystis. As such, they are ideal comparative sites to
study the differences in ecological strategies employed by Microcystis in a
tropical and temperate system. The proposed Advanced Study Institutes (ASIs)
will provide the opportunity for 10 US graduate students per year (30 US
graduate students total) to participate; each ASI will have the duration of
three weeks. Each ASI will include lectures by US and Kenyan scientists, two
5-day research cruises, followed by laboratory analysis of samples. Every US
student will be teamed with a Kenyan graduate student who has a mutual research
interest. The student teams will collaborate with their US and Kenyan mentors to
develop experimental plans and the teams will give joint presentations during
the ASI. Each team will co-author a scientific presentation that will be given
by the US student at an international conference post-ASI. The impact of the
ASIs will be broadened by developing innovative contributions to STEM education
including training STEM educators. Students participating in the ASIs will help
develop a case study that explores the top-down and bottom-up controls of
cyanoHABs in Nyanza Gulf. This will include discussing culturally-relevant
topics such as the influence of point- and non-point nutrient sources, while
incorporating all results from the ASI projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.