* 1953992
* CSEDI Research: Investigations of Volatile Acquisition During Earth's Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Zachary Sharp, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2024
* USD 234,862.00

The singular most important criterion for a habitable Earth-sized planet is the
existence of water and other volatiles (e.g., CO2) critical for life. How Earth
acquired its water is a hotly-debated field of research, with a number of very
different ideas being explored. As the astronomical community continues to find
large numbers of Earth-sized exoplanets, the processes by which such bodies
acquire volatiles becomes crucial moving forward. It is generally accepted that
Earth’s volatiles were sourced by some combination of ingassing from the early
solar nebula and delivery from comets and asteroids. The goal of this proposal
is to develop a machine learning-based algorithm that uses the abundance and
isotopic compositions of multiple volatile elements, including H, He, Ne, N, O,
Ar, Kr and Xe to constrain the relative contributions and timing from these
potential volatile sources. In doing so, the scientific community will have a
better road-map of how volatiles are acquired and how better to search for
potential extraterrestrial life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research plan
is to quantify the amounts of volatiles delivered to the Earth early in its
history by each of four major sources: chondrites from the asteroid belt, comets
from the outer limits of the solar system, direct ingassing from the solar
nebula, and radiogenic decay. The research will be performed in three phases.
The first phase is development of a comprehensive model of volatile acquisition
and loss during Earth’s accretion based on these sources. The model includes a
primitive atmosphere derived from the solar nebula, a proto-mantle with magma
oceans, and a proto-core. Critical processes include atmosphere gas exchange,
water production at the magma surface, core-mantle exchange, late additions from
volatile-rich chondrites, comets, radioactive decay, and modifications by the
moon-forming event. The second phase places bounds on the contributions of each
source, using measurements of present-day volatile abundances and fluxes as
constraints in an inversion for source magnitudes. Volatiles to be considered
are the isotopes of hydrogen, helium, neon, oxygen, argon, nitrogen, krypton,
and xenon. The third phase uses machine learning to train the accretion model to
reproduce the observed volatile inventories using the source magnitudes from the
second phase. The expected result of this project is a mapping of Earth’s
volatiles to their original sources that can serve as a guide for assessing
habitability on distant terrestrial exoplanets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.