* 1953843
* Probing the Nature of the Single-Atom Sites in Single-Site Alloy (SAA) Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Francisco Zaera, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 510,000.00

Solid catalysts - used to speed up chemical reactions - are very common in
industry and used in approximately 80% of all chemical processes. Solid
catalysts are applied to increasingly complex reaction systems. The main
challenge of catalyst selection and use is the need to better control which
product or products are formed (selectivity). In this project, Professor
Francisco Zaera of the University of California, Riverside is exploring the use
of single-atom alloy (SAA) catalysts as a way to improve reaction selectivity.
This new class of catalysts is a new and promising approach towards both high
selectivity and high activity in important classes of industrially reactions.
The ability to promote the selective hydrogenation of chemical compounds
promises to impact processes in the food, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and fine
chemicals industries. In general, more selective catalytic processes lead to
important benefits such as lower raw material consumption, increased efficiency,
and waste minimization - all requirements for more environmentally-friendly
processes. The knowledge derived from Zaera's research is used to illustrate
basic principles in kinetics, catalysis, and materials synthesis in
undergraduate and graduate classes. Professor Zaera is collaborating extensively
with Latin American research groups. He encourages student participation from
groups underrepresented in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Francisco
Zaera of the University of California, Riverside is developing a fundamental
understanding of how single-atom alloy (SAA) catalysts function, with special
focus on the use of CuPt bimetallics to promote the selective hydrogenation of
unsaturated hydrocarbons. His main hypothesis is that, rather than acting as
isolated single atoms as the present state-of-the-art research suggests, the
single atoms of the minority component (Pt) may alter the electronic properties
of the surface atoms. The Zaera group is probing this idea by following two
parallel experimental approaches. His group studies model systems using high-
flux molecular beams to emulate the atmospheric pressure conditions needed for
catalysis. The team is employing a so-called "high-pressure cell" to carry out
in-situ reflection-absorption infrared spectroscopy (IR) experiments during
catalysis. Professor Zaera also studies realistic supported catalysts under
catalytic conditions, performing in situ IR titrations to identify and quantify
the Pt atoms that may segregate to the surface. In-situ X-ray absorption (XAS)
spectroscopy is used to evaluate any possible changes in the coordination sphere
around the Pt atoms as well as the nature (oxidation state) of the Cu atoms.
Professor Zaera emphasizes the recruitment of women and minorities including
visiting international students and scholars from Latin America in STEM
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.