* 1953945
* Probabilistic and Analytic Aspects of the Loewner Energy
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Scott Sheffield, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 172,713.00

This project concerns research in the areas of probability and complex analysis.
The Loewner energy is a quantity measuring the roundness of a simple planar
loop. It arises from the asymptotic behaviors of the Schramm-Loewner evolution
(SLE), a model of random fractal curves. SLE plays a central role in random
conformal geometry and two-dimensional statistical mechanics that study the
macroscopic geometry of systems with given information on the microscopic level.
Surprisingly, this probabilistically motivated Loewner energy can be described
using fundamental concepts from seemingly disparate branches of mathematics and
mathematical physics, including geometric function theory, Teichmüller theory,
conformal field theory, and string theory. These links suggest deep connections
between random conformal geometry and those branches. This research project aims
at revealing these connections and exploring how the variety of perspectives
around the Loewner energy can bring new insights to probability theory and other
fields. The results are expected also to reveal new facets of the mathematical
architecture underlying theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Loewner
energy of a Jordan curve is defined as the Dirichlet energy of its driving
function via the Loewner differential equation. Finite energy curves can,
therefore, be viewed as the Cameron-Martin space of SLE, which has a multiple of
Brownian motion as driving function. This definition of both Loewner energy and
SLE depends strongly on the parametrization of the curves. However, an
equivalent and intrinsic description of the Loewner energy was discovered using
determinants of Laplacians and is known to be the Kähler potential of the Weil-
Petersson metric on the universal Teichmüller space. This research project first
aims to provide similar intrinsic descriptions of SLE loops via the canonical
measures on the welding homeomorphisms, then studies generalizations of the
Loewner energy to other scenarios involving multi-chords or higher genus
surfaces, analytic identities inspired by results from random conformal
geometry, and the relation to minimal surfaces in the hyperbolic
3-space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.