* 1953155
* CAREER: Adding to the Future: Thermal Modeling, Sparse Sensing, and Integrated Controls for Precise and Reliable Powder Bed Fusion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2019,08/31/2024
* Xu Chen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 480,461.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will enable
substantially higher accuracy and greater reproducibility in additive
manufacturing (AM) processes. In contrast to conventional machining, where parts
are made by cutting away unwanted material, additive manufacturing -- also
called 3D printing -- builds three-dimensional objects of unprecedented
complexity by progressively adding small amounts of material. Powder bed fusion
(PBF), in which new material is added to the part being fabricated by applying
and selectively melting a powdered feedstock, is a popular form of AM for
fabricating complex metallic or high-performance polymeric parts. This project
supports fundamental research to create new thermal modeling, sensing, and
control algorithms that will lead to precise and reliable PBF. The modeling task
will enable fast and accurate prediction of heat flow and temperature
distribution during powder fusion. The resulting knowledge on directing heat
flow is essential for achieving a desired three-dimensional shape. The sensing
task will formulate new signal processing algorithms that discard unnecessary
information to make full use of data-intensive sensor sources like high-speed
video. Finally, these results will be integrated with new control algorithms in
order to counteract process variations and provide repeatable, low-cost, high-
quality parts. AM offers untapped potential in a wide range of products for the
energy, aerospace, automotive, healthcare, and biomedical industries. PBF parts
are increasingly preferred in applications ranging from advanced jet-engine
components to custom-designed medical implants. Therefore, the outcomes of this
project will facilitate fabrication of products to benefit the US economy and
improve quality of life. Broader impacts of the project will be augmented by
dissemination of educational results via a network of twenty-four collaborating
universities, to inculcate skills for innovative problem solving into
undergraduate engineering education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The powder bed fusion
process exploits precision heating and rapid solidification, together with
layer-by-layer adjustments to feedstock application, and scan speed and path of
lasers or electron beams. This project will expand knowledge at the interface of
modeling and process controls, to consider the main obstacles to precision
manufacturing with AM. Specifically, the project will address (1) the lack of
tractable online models that capture multi-scale thermomechanical interactions,
and (2) the need for control strategies in the presence of limited-bandwidth
sensor feedback. A dynamic real-time model will be produced through separation
of the cross-scan and cross-layer dynamics, allowing currently intractable
powder fusion dynamics to be treated in real time, using computation-friendly
primitives. Then the structure of the process dynamics will be used to enable a
feedback controller for laser energy deposition. Controlling the proper energy
deposition is critical for ensuring quality and reproducibility. The approach
will be based on modeling and adaptation methods originally developed in
precision mechatronics, in conjunction with a formulation of multi-rate control
that can reject structured thermal disturbances at a fast, user-configurable
sampling rate. Collectively, the project will add the needed new knowledge on
quality assurance to future repetitive and layer-by-layer thermomechanical
processes, by (1) establishing a physics-based, control-oriented modeling
approach to understand and engineer the layered thermal interactions, and by (2)
creating a foundation for closed-loop control solutions to produce desired
uniform temperature fields in periodic and near-periodic deposition of thermal
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.