* 1953623
* Collaborative NSF Session at the ASEE Annual Conference
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Amber Genau, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 03/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by organizing a dissemination
outlet for grant holders from NSF programs that support engineering education.
Specifically, it will support a poster session at the American Society for
Engineering Education's (ASEE) Annual Conference in 2020 through 2023. Such a
poster session has been held at the ASEE annual conference since 1986, with NSF
support since 1992. NSF grant programs from which awardees have been invited in
recent years include Advanced Technological Education, Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education, Professional Formation of Engineers, Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers, and Scholarships in STEM. In the fall of
the year preceding the ASEE conference, NSF grant recipients with active awards
are invited to submit an abstract for inclusion in the poster session. Upon peer
review, if abstract is accepted, an invitation is extended to the
investigator(s) to submit a paper for the ASEE conference proceedings. Following
acceptance of the paper, another invitation is extended to present in the ASEE
conference poster session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASEE NSF Grantee Poster
Session is a central and well-attended event at the ASEE Annual Conference.
Continuation of the session at future conferences will enhance the broad and
rapid dissemination of innovative, research-based engineering education
developments. The papers associated with all posters will be freely available
and searchable via the ASEE webpage. This exchange of ideas promotes the
adoption of effective engineering education tools, resources, and practices by
engineering educators nationwide. The session also fosters interaction between
engineering education practitioners, education researchers, and institutional
administrators. These interactions can lead to new collaborations and project
ideas to address emerging challenges in engineering education. This project is
supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education
and Human Resources. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.