* 1953500
* Workshop on Open Questions Towards The Success of INDUSTRY 4.0; Prague, Czech Republic; June 17-19, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2022
* USD 49,788.00

This award supports a workshop on open questions towards the success of Industry
4.0, to be held in Prague, Czech Republic on June 17-19, 2020. The three-day
workshop will bring together key thought leaders from industry, academia and
government from the USA, Germany, and the Czech and Slovak Republics to identify
both open problems with and opportunities to advance the program of Industry
4.0. In particular, the workshop will concentrate on defining the requirements
for creating an open source of parts and components that are widely produced and
used in a variety of industries. This is in realization of the fact that new AI
techniques cannot be broadly applied in the manufacturing environment unless an
efficient data repository and the associated abstractions of the component
models and their compositions are created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal models
representing the capabilities of various manufacturing machines and processes
will enable manufacturers to match design models with manufacturing processes
and to automatically update essential characteristics of design models from 'as
designed' to 'as manufactured,' thereby improving the effectiveness of both
product design and manufacturing by enabling a fully integrated treatment of
design and manufacturing. This allows manufacturing considerations to be brought
forward into the design process by characterizing designs from the point of view
of manufacturability. The framework that the realization of this possibility
requires can only be achieved through the collaborative efforts of researchers
in manufacturing, computer science and engineering, and artificial intelligence.
The workshop will bring such experts together to discuss: (1) formalisms for
part representation, (2) methods for search, optimization, logistics and
planning, and (3) model selection and data access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.