* 1953740
* CPS: Medium: Detecting and Controlling Unwanted Data Flows in the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Nicholas Feamster, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 481,060.00

Many emerging Internet-connected devices are not personal computers. They are
special-purpose commodity consumer electronic devices such as, for example,
smart thermostats and smart door locks. Collectively, these devices are known as
the Internet of Things (IoT). They are increasingly used in smart homes, smart
cities, intelligent transportation systems, industrial networks and more. The
promise of IoT is to improve the quality of everyday life and make society more
productive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IoT devices however are not without
technological and societal risk. The technological risk derives in part from
software and security vulnerabilities. The vast diversity and number of IoT
devices make overall consistency problematic and contribute to various
inefficiencies. There are risks over the life cycle of some deployed IoT devices
that their software may never be patched and their hardware never repaired;
i.e., these devices will effectively remain vulnerable indefinitely. The
societal risk derives in part from the massive data that is now possible to
collect using IoT devices from most anywhere, which violate privacy norms.
Moreover, compromised IoT devices might serve as a large-scale highly
distributed platform to flood the Internet, disrupting many vital services for
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops technologies that ensure
that IoT deployments remain secure and protect user privacy in the face of the
widespread deployment of connected smart devices. Network-based defenses against
common attacks and device owners' ability to inspect, audit, control and share
data are essential capabilities to mitigating technological and societal risks.
This project focuses: (1) protecting the devices from vulnerabilities that are
often introduced through the use of untrusted software libraries, (2) detecting
when devices exhibit anomalous behavior that would suggest an unauthorized data
leak or device compromise, relying on statistical anomaly detection of network
traffic patterns, and (3) controlling unwanted data leaks and attacks in the
network using network firewall rules, outputs from these anomaly detection
systems, and software systems that let the owners of these devices inspect and
determine the data sent and received. This project advances the theory and
practice of network traffic analysis, anomaly detection, and secure segmentation
of networks that ensure IoT deployments remain secure despite insecure connected
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.