* 1953402
* Using systematic computational approaches to elucidate the molecular and network dynamics underlying a circadian clock
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Aaron Dinner, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2024
* USD 505,640.00

Circadian clocks govern the daily rhythms of organisms across the kingdoms of
life, and clock defects can impact the health of both individuals and
ecosystems. This project uses computational models tied closely to biochemical
experiments to better understand how circadian clocks work at the molecular
level. Pursuit of this research objective will contribute to interdisciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students. This, in turn, will enable
efforts to expose younger students to STEM topics: continuation of a highly
successful program that places high school juniors in laboratories at the
University of Chicago for summer research and the update of a course for
Illinois public school teachers that presents inexpensive, hands-on ways of
engaging their students and helping them understand the physical laws underlying
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remarkably, the core circadian clock of
cyanobacteria can be reconstituted in a test tube. This permits well-controlled
studies that can be used to tease apart complex behaviors and connect clock
function with specific molecular events. By leveraging this system and recent
advances in computational methods, major outstanding questions about the clock
will be addressed: Does the slow switch of a participating protein’s fold set
the timing of the clock? How is information communicated between the part of the
clock that encodes the time of day and the motor that keeps it advancing
steadily forward? How does the clock maintain a near-24-hour period across
conditions that can lead to dramatic changes in elementary reaction rates (i.e.,
what makes the clock so robust)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.