* 1953472
* Supporting HSI STEM Departments to Achieve Transformative Inclusion in Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* Omayra Ortega, Sonoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 2,440,912.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to increase the
participation and success of STEM students, particularly Hispanic students, by
transforming STEM department cultures. In this way, the project plans to address
the persistent under-representation of Hispanic students in STEM. To accomplish
these goals, the project will develop, test, and publish a two-year departmental
equity transformation pathway. This pathway will include workshops and
exploration of factors that contribute to Hispanic under-representation in STEM,
such as stereotype threat and implicit bias. The pathway will introduce faculty
to culturally responsive pedagogies. The project will support the collaborative
implementation of high impact practices in gateway STEM courses to increase
students' sense of belonging in STEM fields. The collaboration will include
teamwork and iterative course improvements through Lesson Study, a teacher-led
research and observation protocol to improve student learning. The work will
include a review of institutional barriers and opportunities to increase STEM
students' connections to campus resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of the
project are to develop programming that will assist HSI STEM departments to
improve student experiences and outcomes in STEM, and to advance understanding
of the effects of department-level work to increase equity and inclusion of all
students. The project will support implementation of practices known to reduce
experiences of marginalization, especially of Hispanic students, and will
examine the impacts of department-wide implementation of culturally responsive
pedagogy on students' persistence, success, and sense of belonging in STEM.
Research methods include interviews, student and faculty focus groups, student
surveys, and collection/analysis of student success data such as persistence and
graduation. Anticipated results include implementation of department-level
interventions that improve students’ success in STEM and development of a
greater understanding about how to support the success of Hispanic students in
STEM. The project will directly improve the STEM learning experience of at least
2000 students per year at Sonoma State University. In addition, it has the
potential for broader impact at other institutions that implement the published
pathway. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.