* 1953473
* I-Corps:  Deep Learning for Solar Energy Systems to Optimize Whole System Performance
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Janet Roveda, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
secure and high-performance solar energy to reduce pollution and energy cost,
and help establish self-sustainable micogrids. As the proposed new deep
learning-based controller taps into both hardware and software sub-segments for
microgrids, the commercial opportunity is considerable. The proposed technology
has the potential provide a large-scale microgrid system with affordable off-
grid capability and establish a reliable microgrid system with cyberprotection.
It offers a cost-effective energy solution to homeowners, schools, business
owners, hospitals and clinics, military facilities and other organizations with
significant power demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a new microgrid controller integrated with a deep neural
network algorithm to optimize the system performance with both output and
security. The model will help redesign photovoltaic (PV) filters, boost
converters and micro-inverters by setting different parameters. Comparing with a
simulation-based model, the deep neural network algorithm has a 15% margin on
prediction accuracy and speeds up the response time from minute-level to
millisecond-level. As a result, 4700 kWh of electricity can be saved annually
for a 2000 sq ft house in a state with 80% sunny days. Due to the millions of
parameters used in the algorithm, the new controller is able to support hundreds
of users in a single grid. The core of the proposed project includes two deep
neural networks (DNNs) using internet of things (IoT)-based sensors for the
microgrid data processing. By leveraging the deep learning model and IoT
sensors, the proposed system can monitor and detect abnormal usage pattern for
the entire system in real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.