* 1953699
*  Developing a Technology, Cyber Security, and Culturally Inclusive Pathway to Increase Student  Participation and Persistence in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Margie Massey, Colorado State University-Pueblo
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,811,490.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to use technology and
cybersecurity as catalysts to increase the STEM graduation rate, particularly of
Hispanic and other underrepresented student groups. The project seeks to develop
a seamless pathway from high school to two-year institutions, and then to a
four-year institution. This pathway includes alignment of STEM curricula to
enhance the transition from an associate degree to bachelor's degrees in STEM,
with a focus on cybersecurity. The project aims to increase student enrollment
and engagement in STEM coursework at two-year institutions, improve the
transition from lower- to upper-division coursework, and develop culturally
based educational and support practices that contribute to student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing a transition pathway in technology
and cybersecurity, the project seeks to increase the enrollment, retention, and
graduation rates of STEM students, particularly of Hispanic students and
students from other groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields. To enhance
their engagement in STEM, students will participate in the National Cyber League
boot camp training and cybersecurity competitions. The project will facilitate
professional development in cultural responsibility and sensitivity for
teachers, advisors, coaches, and administrators at participating high schools,
community colleges, and universities. The project will use quantitative and
qualitative metrics to investigate how the project activities impact student
enrollment and graduation rates in STEM, with emphasis on technology and
cybersecurity programs. Data from this research project will be analyzed using
structured equation modeling methodology to reveal significant path coefficients
and goodness-of-fit model indices for both the community college and university
research models. The project aims to develop a model that may be implemented at
other institutions seeking to develop associate-to-bachelor degree pathways.
Results and findings will be shared via conference presentations and academic
journal publications. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.