* 1953492
* Field-based Undergraduate Research Experiences and Professional Development to Increase Diversity and Inclusion in Conservation and Environmental Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,710,059.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project seeks to serve the national
need for a well-prepared and diverse workforce in conservation and environmental
sciences. Nationally, there is low diversity among professionals in conservation
and environmental science. Increased diversity can support greater innovation in
solving a range of environmental problems, many of which will have
disproportionate impact on more diverse and often underserved communities. The
overarching goal of the project is to create an integrated program that will
support inclusive excellence in environmental, conservation, and ecological
sciences. To support this aim, the project will implement inclusive mentoring,
early and immersive exposure to field-based science and tools, and extensive
professional skills development and career experiences. This project expects to
increase involvement of students, particularly for Hispanic students, in
environmental sciences and contribute knowledge about the importance of field
and research experiences in fostering careers in environmental science.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the project are to: 1) assist
undergraduate students in making critical transitions in progressing towards an
environmental sciences career; 2) engage undergraduate students in career and
research opportunities in environmental sectors throughout their undergraduate
career; 3) foster a sense of identity among students as environmental
scientists; and 4) explore how these interventions affect career choice, sense
of identity, and perception of the role of environmental science in serving
their community. Specifically, this program intends to develop a sequence of
research and professional development experiences relevant to conservation and
environmental sciences that span all four years of undergraduate education.
These experiences will include an intensive research experience, a methods-
focused field trip, a career internship, a service-learning experience, as well
as mentoring and career exposure. Evaluation components that focus on social and
personal identity will be integrated throughout the project activities, so that
the project can examine the impact of these efforts both in shaping a studentâ€™s
sense of identity as a scientist and in improving retention in the STEM
ecological sciences workforce. The project will test the hypothesis that early
intensive interventions, extensive mentoring, and immersive experiences can
overcome existing barriers to participation in environmental science. The
project will support the development of courses and a mentoring framework that
will persist within the university after the end of the funding, facilitating
long-term increased participation of students, particularly Hispanic students,
in environmental science. The knowledge generated in this project may also be
useful for successful implementation of similar intervention efforts at other
locations. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.