* 1953645
* RET Site: Providing Research Experiences and Practicum on Cyber-Physical Systems for Regional Community College Faculty (PREP-CPS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Bradley Harris, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2024
* USD 591,489.00

This award creates a new RET Site: Providing Research Experiences and Practicum
on Cyber-Physical Systems for Regional Community College Faculty (PREP-CPS) at
the University of Tennessee Chattanooga (UTC). Each summer, ten community
college faculty teaching in Science/Technology/Engineering/Mathematics (STEM)
fields will participate in research activities with engineering faculty at the
University of Tennessee Chattanooga. The community college faculty will be
recruited from 5 feeder colleges in the greater Chattanooga region. Participants
at the site will receive basic training in cyber-physical systems, along with
specific knowledge on how to use these tools to address the pressing problems
and needs of the future. A key enabler for future technology developments,
cyber-physical systems is an interdisciplinary research area that engages a
broad spectrum of disciplines and could bring about revolutionary changes in
domains such as energy, environment, and healthcare. This technology has the
potential to transform our everyday lives (e.g., smartphones, activity
trackers), our communities (e.g., self-driving cars, smart cities), and even our
future (e.g., clean energy, space exploration). The participating community
college faculty will translate their experience and knowledge by developing
instructional modules and course materials that leverage cutting-edge technology
and better prepare students for in-demand research and career fields. These
activities all contribute to the strengthening of the multi-institutional
consortia of the UTC and its feeder colleges in order to promote curricular
alignment for a seamless engineering transfer pathway that can be replicated
across the state and nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RET site will provide
participants with much-needed discovery and lab-based research experiences
involving cutting-edge technology in cyber-physical systems. Participants will
conduct research on cyber-physical systems applied to engineering challenges for
smart and sustainable urban infrastructure and industries. These efforts will
lead to new knowledge, technology, and process optimization in algal biofuels
and biohydrogen production, geothermal systems, solar energy harvesting, and
rocket propulsion systems. Objectives include: (1) Increase participants’
research skills and practical knowledge of CPS; (2) Increase participants’ self-
efficacy in creating and implementing laboratory-based experiments using
cutting-edge technology with students in the classroom; (3) Help bridge the
preparedness gap between what is exhibited by community college transfer
students and what is expected by university engineering faculty. Coached by a
STEM Education faculty member, participants will develop lesson plans for two
types of modules: lab-in-a-box modules, in which students conduct inexpensive
high-tech laboratory experiments on site, and remote modules, in which students
conduct laboratory experiments remotely with state-of-the-art technology at the
University of Tennessee Chattanooga. The modules developed through this Site
will incorporate threshold concepts that will help ensure community college
students in the greater Chattanooga region transfer smoothly to the University
of Tennessee Chattanooga and other four-year
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded by the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR), Advanced Technological
Education (ATE) Program and the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), Division of
Engineering Education and Centers (EEC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.