* 1953170
* DEB: Genomics of Sexual Selection in Pipefishes and Seahorses
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Adam Jones, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,028,242.00

Sexual selection is an important evolutionary mechanism that results in the
evolution of extravagant ornaments, strong mating preferences, and differences
between the sexes. Sexual selection also sets the stage for sexual conflict, a
situation in which the evolutionary interests of the two sexes fail to coincide,
resulting in traits or genes that can be beneficial to one sex but harmful to
the other sex. While the effects of sexual selection and conflict on traits are
well understood, little is known about how these mechanisms affect the genome. A
key test of theory relating sexual selection, sexual conflict and genome
evolution would entail genome comparisons in groups of related species in which
some have had a history of strong sexual selection and some have had a history
of weak sexual selection. In this project, the researchers will use seahorses
and the related pipefishes to conduct such a test. Seahorses and some pipefishes
are monogamous with long-term pair-bonds, and this mating system results in weak
sexual selection and little sexual conflict. Other pipefishes have independently
evolved polygamy (multiple mating by one or both sexes), which results in strong
sexual selection and substantial conflict. The researchers will apply modern
sequencing methodologies to delineate the impacts of sexual selection and
conflict on genome evolution in these species. This project has significance
well beyond seahorses and pipefishes, as many species, including humans, have
had a recent evolutionary history involving sexual selection and conflict. This
history can explain why the sexes are different at the level of the genome and
why the same gene can have different effects in the sexes. This project will
also train a new generation of graduate students and undergraduates in cutting-
edge genomic techniques and statistical methodologies. In addition, it will
expand the pipefish and seahorse research community by offering week-long
workshops and a new wealth of publicly available genomic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve a total of twelve taxa,
including three seahorses and nine pipefishes, chosen for their phylogenetic
relationships and known patterns of sexual selection. The seahorses (genus
Hippocampus) and three of the pipefish species (genus Doryrhampus) are
monogamous with pair-bonds, and the other six pipefish (three each from the
genera Syngnathus and Nerophis) are polygamous with a history of strong sexual
selection. The project will involve (1) the complete sequencing of the genomes
of all twelve taxa, (2) comparative transcriptomics, which will examine patterns
of sex-specific gene expression, and (3) comparative population genomics, which
will detect contemporary genome-level selection. Data will be integrated across
these three levels of approaches to understand the genome-level effects of
sexual selection and sexual conflict in light of evolutionary
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.