* 1953102
* Research Experiences for Teachers: Civil Engineering Instruction for Secondary Education Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Beena Ajmera, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 540,649.00

The goals of this Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) program are to (1)
provide a deeper understanding of civil engineering with tangible hands-on
curriculum and (2) develop better abilities among middle and high school
(secondary education) teachers in North Dakota (ND) to prepare their students to
become future leaders in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) fields. The objective of this proposal is to create and establish a RET
Engineering site at North Dakota State University (NDSU) for secondary educators
to deepen their knowledge on how civil engineering can be used to mitigate
natural disasters in the region and globally. The target audience for this
program is 6th to 12th grade educators teaching in the STEM fields from schools
that serve large populations of underserved and underrepresented groups
including females, Hispanic, African American and Native American students.
Teachers will be engaged in hands-on authentic research experiences revolving
around the theme of “mitigating natural disasters” in the labs of NDSU Civil and
Environmental Engineering (CEE) to help address issues impacting the region and
globally from natural disasters including extreme weather, flooding, extreme
temperatures, landslides, earthquakes, drought, wildfires, and volcanic
activities. These activities will allow them to bridge research experiences to
improve content knowledge which will translate to improved secondary STEM
education in their classrooms. Teachers will work with faculty and graduate
students on these continuing projects during the six-week summer experience
towards two outcomes: (1) gain proficiency in the technical content through
their research and (2) develop a curricular module related to that research
focus. An additional focus of this RET program is to foster mentorship between
current teachers and pre-service teachers primarily interested in STEM
education. The program will provide pre-service teachers with a unique
opportunity to create their own lessons based on research and teach the
curriculum in the classrooms of the current STEM teachers. This will result in
more hands- on classroom teaching experiences to better prepare pre-service
teachers for their future careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated broader
impacts of this RET program are to inspire young minds to continue to solve
real-world problems related to natural disasters. As this program focuses on
teachers that serve in under- represented and under-served populations relative
to the engineering discipline, the curricular modules will directly contribute
to an increased exposure and interest to STEM opportunities that these students
would otherwise not receive. Another impact of this program is to foster better
relationships and networking between secondary educators, university faculty,
and the civil engineering industry that will extend beyond the duration of the
RET program. Ultimately, the program will improve curriculum and student
preparedness for research and leadership within STEM disciplines. The theme of
the RET program is to “mitigate natural disasters.” Publications and
presentations from the authentic summer research experiences will disseminate
solutions to issues faced during natural disasters including rapid assessment of
at-risk infrastructure, real-time analyses of efficient evacuation routes,
better simulations and models for flood protection, and evaluate potential
secondary threats to the infrastructure. The knowledge created from the research
conducted as part of this program will help to rescue and save lives during and
after a natural disaster, improve resource allocation, and create more resilient
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.