* 1953113
* Transforming Reduced-Order Models of Fluids with Data Assimilation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Traian Iliescu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Computational models augment expensive physical experiments and play a
significant role in many modern science and engineering fields such as
automotive and aerospace industries, numerical weather prediction, and ocean and
environmental modeling. However, computational models often require large
computational resources, which limits their use in many practical applications.
For example, designing an optimal shape for an automobile or an airplane
requires a large number of simulations with complex computational models. This
project is on reduced order models (ROMs), which are surrogate computational
models of much lower complexity than traditional models, but which may suffer
from lower fidelity. The proposed research takes advantage of data from
observations within a data assimilation (DA) framework and fuses both
observational and numerical data to develop a novel robust DA-ROM
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accuracy is one of the fundamental barriers that
prevent current ROMs from being widely used on a large scale for fluid flows in
industrial processes, uncertainty quantification, and ocean modeling. Modeling
the interplay between the few resolved ROM modes and the many unresolved ROM
modes (i.e., the ROM closure modeling) is critical for ROM accuracy.
Furthermore, assimilating available physical observations, for example, data
from measurements of the underlying physical system, is also needed in
developing accurate ROMs. However, this insight is not available in todayâ€™s
ROMs, which are constructed using exclusively numerical data. The proposed DA-
ROM framework utilizes state-of-the-art DA algorithms and observational and
numerical data to take a major leap toward the ROM simulation of realistic fluid
flows. Accurate ROM closure models of two different types are constructed: (a)
structural ROM closure models, in which the entire structure of the model is
discovered from data; and (b) approximate deconvolution ROM closure models, in
which ideas from image processing are used to build the ROM, and where the DA is
used to infer the parameters. Furthermore, information from both observational
and numerical data is fused in order to construct novel ROM closure
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.