* 1953778
* NSFGEO-NERC: CSEDI-On the origin of extreme variations in Earth's magnetic field
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Catherine Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2024
* USD 440,474.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
ivestigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth’s internal
magnetic field is generated deep in the planet’s liquid outer core and provides
many benefits to its human inhabitants. It serves as a protective shield from
the space weather generated by the solar wind, inhibits potentially damaging
cosmic rays from reaching the surface, and has long served as a fundamental aid
for navigation. Knowledge of its current structure is an intrinsic part of the
digital mapping tools embedded in every smartphone, highlighting the importance
of understanding what causes any unexpected changes. Extreme changes in both
direction and strength of the magnetic field have occurred in the geological and
archeological records, in the form of geomagnetic excursions, polarity
reversals, and rapid intensity variations known as geomagnetic spikes. These
will be studied under this project. An integral aspect of the work will be
building synergistic approaches across communities interested in the geological
record of the magnetic field and realistic computational simulations of its
behavior. Understanding the physical origins of these changes will enhance our
basic understanding of Earth’s magnetic field, and enable collaborations with
related geophysical communities interested in Earth’s deep interior and other
planets. New methodologies will be developed to study extreme changes in the
geomagnetic field and this project will enable education, training and research
mentoring for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers, while
developing further international collaborations with NERC sponsored
investigators at Leeds University, UK. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
improve understanding of what drives extreme events using two synergistic
components. A multi-scale modeling approach based on spherical triangle
tessellations (STT) on the surface of Earth’s core will improve regional
resolution in global magnetic field models. A new suite of geodynamo models will
access the rapidly rotating regime appropriate to Earth’s liquid core. The
results will be combined to assess potential physical interpretations of
empirical signatures of extreme events. Extreme field variations present a
challenge to standard regularized spherical harmonic representations which rely
on trade-offs between data misfit and global measures of spatial and temporal
complexity. The STT representation will allow finer spatial and temporal
resolution in regions of high data density and lower resolution with limited
data, enabling robust imaging of extreme regional field behavior. A new regime
diagram describing the behavior of non-magnetic convection with Earth-like
geometry, buoyancy forcing, and heat flow heterogeneity at the outer boundary
illuminates the parameter combinations needed for simulations to realize the
rapidly rotating and turbulent dynamics that are thought to arise in the liquid
core. Recent advances in dynamo theory will be used to devise simulations that
produce strong magnetic forces as likely occur in the core, following a distinct
path towards Earth-like rotation rates and diffusivities while remaining in the
rapidly rotating regime. Both new and existing tools will be used to assess the
morphological and temporal similarity between these simulations and new
geomagnetic field models, characterize extreme changes in intensity and
direction of the observable field, and relate these to the underlying
magnetohydrodynamic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.