* 1953014
* Cytoskeletal regulation of immunity
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Sheng He, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2024
* USD 919,819.00

The ability of plants to respond to environmental threats – including both
abiotic and biotic stress – requires the function of multiple cellular-genetic
processes. Among these include processes that are not only associated with the
immune system, but those also required for growth, development, reproduction and
senescence. In this regard, plant immunity is not a narrowly defined process,
but rather, a broader, integrated mechanism that uses the entire cell (and
organism) to respond to pathogen infection. This research will ultimately define
how plant stress signals are recognized, decoded, translated, and communicated
to the whole plant. From this, insight into how signals from the outside are
perceived and lead to the generation of genetically-encoded responses,
internally, will be gained. The project employs a combination of microscopy-
based techniques and biochemistry to uncover the signals that plants use to
defend against pathogen infection. With this knowledge, the investigators will
learn how plants determine if a signal is from a friend or a foe, and from this,
determine how plants regulate the immune system. The ultimate goal of this
research is to uncover the mechanisms that plants use to survive in environments
where the threat of pathogen infection is high, and moreover, when environmental
conditions favor the pathogen. The research team will also actively communicate
to the public the link between basic research and agriculture. To do this, the
scientists working on this project, including experts in heath and nutrition at
Michigan State University will partner with the Lansing Capital Area library
system to will educate young children – and their families – on topics related
to food production and nutrition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a key component of the
surveillance function of the immune system of both plants and animals, the actin
cytoskeleton is required for cellular response to a variety of pathogen-derived
elicitors. Additionally, a role for actin is emerging which includes the
coordinated regulation of cellular processes that signal host defense,
resistance, susceptibility, and cell death. While conclusive evidence
demonstrating that the plant cytoskeleton directly interacts with individual
immune receptors is lacking, an abundance of data in mammalian systems does
exist; this includes a role for the pathogen-recognition receptor nucleotide-
binding oligomerization domain protein 1 (NOD1), which requires F-actin for
proper PM localization. Further, the interaction(s) between NOD1 and actin
serves as an immune interface which influences actin-remodeling and control of
downstream signaling, including the phospho-dependent activation of the actin
depolymerizing factor cofilin. This project will define the relationships that
link the first line of plant defense (pattern-triggered immunity) to a complex
and pervasive macromolecular structure – the cytoskeleton – to drive
surveillance. The proposed research will contribute new insights in cell
signaling across eukaryotic systems through the characterization and definition
of the poorly understood mechanism by which cell structure and orchestration of
pathogen recognition regulates signaling and immunity in plants. High school,
undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate students will be involved in the
proposed work, and engage in cross-disciplinary training in the biological
sciences utilizing traditional and contemporary methods necessary for success in
modern biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.