* 1953073
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Semantics-Oriented Binary Code Analysis Learning from Recent Advances in Deep Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Lannan Luo, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 416,947.00

Given a closed-source program, such as most of proprietary software and viruses,
binary code analysis is indispensable for various tasks, such as vulnerability
discovery and malware analysis. Some analysis techniques scale well but cannot
accurately capture the program semantics, while others are more accurate but
limited in scalability. How to improve both the accuracy and scalability of
binary code analysis is an intriguing unresolved problem. The objective of this
research is to build novel binary code analysis approaches and techniques based
on recent advances in deep learning to achieve both high accuracy and
scalability. This project will not only advance cross-architecture binary code
analysis, but also propel its applications in vulnerability discovery,
plagiarism detection, and malware understanding, especially in the context of
heterogeneous IoT devices. Educational resources from this project will be
disseminated through a dedicated web site. This research will foster new
research and education opportunities at University of South Carolina. The
outreach and educational activities that engage students from Benedict College
(HBCU) in the research will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
in computer security research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research emphasizes
code semantics-oriented learning by building deep learning based code analysis
in a bottom-up approach, aiming to extract semantic information from binary code
layer by layer. The technical aims of the project are divided into three
thrusts. First, inspired by Neural Machine Translation, instructions and basic
blocks are represented as embeddings (i.e., high-dimensional vectors), just like
NMT represents words and sentences as points in high-dimensional spaces to
facilitate further handling. Second, the captured code semantics at the
instruction and basic-block layers are used for analysis at the control flow
graph level. The layered learning process fits the hierarchy of semantics
inherent in code from instructions, basic blocks, to control flow graphs. Thus,
it minimizes the loss of semantic information and keeps scalable. Third, whether
and how the proposed techniques can be extended to handle certain obfuscations
will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.