* 1953890
* I-Corps: Artificial Tissue Scaffolds and Cell Cultures Interlaced with Vasculature-like Micro-Channels
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Roman Voronov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a novel
engineered tissue culturing platform that will accelerate the translation of
regenerative medicine technologies to the clinical market. According to the U.S.
Dept. of Health &amp; Human Services, only 10% of the 115k people in the U.S
needed a lifesaving organ transplant in 2018 received it. A major obstacle to
producing viable artificial tissues is product variability. The proposed
technology overcomes that limitation by enabling non-disruptive control over the
cell behavior at any location within the living artificial tissues as they are
being cultured. Additionally, it allows for nondestructive analysis of the cell
behavior, which will impact the markets where the cultures are used for things
like production of biological molecules, toxicity and pharmaceutical testing,
etc., by lowering experiment costs relative to the conventional (typically
sacrificial) analysis. Lastly, the fact that the culturing platform is automated
solves another major logistical hurdle to the adoption of such technologies, by
allowing companies to provide computer codes to hospital staff instead of having
to teach them custom culturing protocols for each new product.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will allow for better understanding
of how the proposed cell culturing technology can offer solutions to the
clinical market; while also providing technological insight to members of the
tissue engineering industry, and opportunities for significant improvements to
their existing culturing systems and practices. The proposed technology is a
tissue engineering scaffold interlaced with vascular-like microchannels, which
help to overcome major bottlenecks limiting the conventional biomanufacturing
approaches. Additionally, it offers multiple benefits to other market segments
that involve cell culturing. For example, the technology has been demonstrated
to enable new discoveries by allowing researchers to perform localized
collections of mini cell biopsies and effluent for ex-situ analysis; additive
and subtractive cell operations in living cell cultures, tissue patterning and
overgrowth removal; establishing dynamic drug gradients and custom delivery
protocols; overcoming size-limitations by nourishing cells deep within large
cultures and removing metabolic waste from those
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.