* 1953998
* Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications 2020
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Timothy Riley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 30,000.00

This award funds US-participants attending the conference, Geometric and
Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications (GAGTA 2020), to be held at the
International Center for Mathematical Sciences (ICMS) in Edinburgh, Scotland 22
--26 June 2020. Geometric and asymptotic group theory is intra-disciplinary by
nature, with researchers attacking similar problems but using techniques from
vastly different areas (such as topological, geometric, or combinatorial
techniques). The conference series draws top speakers and researchers in the
subject and fosters connections to theoretical computer science, logic,
combinatorics, cryptography, and many more. The conference will be the 14th
iteration of the annual GAGTA meetings. It is the longest-running annual
international conference series on the applications of group theory. The grant
will allow the supported US-participants to learn about new developments in the
field, to communicate their research results, and to spark new research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds will cover travel and local housing
expenses of 15 US-based attendees, including four speakers. Priority for funding
will be given to junior researchers and graduate students with limited sources
of other funding, and among those to underrepresented minorities, women, and
veterans. Geometric group theory enjoys a growing diversity, which this
conference aims to promote further through the selection of the speakers and
participants. The conference will have approximately 25 talks from invited
speakers and an afternoon of short talks from junior researchers. The organizers
strive particularly to have diversity reflected among the organizers and the
speakers. The topics discussed will include: combinatorial structures in
geometric group theory and computer science (e.g. CAT(0) geometry, quasi-median
spaces, partially commutative structures); complexity in computational group
theory (practical and theoretical aspects such as generic complexity, low
circuit complexity, NP-complete problems in group theory); and the first-order
theory of groups and algebras, and arithmetic (e.g. in free groups, hyperbolic
groups, solvable groups etc.). Participants will be given ample time to discuss
with each other, thus forging long-term collaborations and working
relationships. The conference will help disseminate fundamental ideas and newest
research developments. There will be a public lecture on the applications of
Coxeter groups and discrete geometry to the modeling of virus development and
growth of cancer tumors.
https://sites.google.com/view/gagta2020&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.