* 1953815
* Geometry, Algebra, and Topology of Face Numbers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Isabella Novik, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 327,482.00

From antiquity, people looked at and studied objects such as polygons, pyramids,
cubes, and their higher-dimensional generalizations called polytopes. Using
these objects as building blocks and gluing them face-to-face, one may construct
more involved objects known as polytopal complexes. For instance, any object
obtained by gluing triangles, pyramids, and their higher-dimensional analogs is
known as a simplicial complex, while an object obtained by gluing cubes of
various dimensions is known as a cubical complex. The reason to study polytopes
and polytopal complexes is explained by the fact that many continuous objects
can be approximated by these more discrete structures. These objects also often
show up in problems related to optimization, statistics, and engineering. For
instance, the space of motions of a robot sometimes can be described by a
cubical or simplicial complex. Simplicial complexes are also useful in
describing patterns of intersections of convex sets, which, in turn, has
applications in such subjects as neuro-biology (e.g., in the study of neurons
which are simultaneously active in response to some stimulus). This research
project aims to deepen understanding of various aspects of simplicial complexes.
The award provides support of research training of graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project aims to attack several
fundamental questions related to (1) studying the face numbers of centrally
symmetric simplicial polytopes and spheres (2) extending the results on the face
numbers and Stanley--Reisner rings of triangulations of manifolds to the setting
of pseudomanifolds, and (3) exploring the effect of various topological
invariants (beyond the usual Betti numbers) on the face numbers of manifolds and
pseudomanifolds. For instance, while (as of a few months ago), the upper bound
problem for centrally symmetric simplicial spheres is now completely resolved,
there is not even a plausible upper bound conjecture for centrally symmetric
polytopes; while we understand reasonably well the face-vectors of simplicial
manifolds with and without boundary, very little is known about face-vectors of
triangulations of spaces with singularities. While Betti numbers play a
prominent role in the study of face-vectors, our knowledge on how other
topological invariants (e.g., the fundamental group, characteristic classes,
etc.) affect the face-vectors is next to nothing. The aim of this project is to
attack these and related problems and in the process develop the necessary new
combinatorial, geometric, and algebraic tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.