* 1953526
* A Robust and Efficient Statistical Framework for Handling Missing-Not-At-Random Data in Patient Reported Outcomes and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,03/31/2021
* YANYUAN MA, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 03/31/2021
* USD 366,166.00

The patient-reported outcome (PRO), representing the status of the patient's
health that comes directly from the patient without interpretation by the
clinician or anyone else, has the unique feature of describing health status
from the viewpoint of the patient; therefore, the PRO research holds great
promise for informed clinical and policy decision-making, as well as for
improving the quality and efficiency of healthcare. However, the quality and
value of PRO is contingent on a number of factors, and one of them is the
missing-not-at-random (MNAR) issue. For instance, patients might fail to fill in
a depression survey because of their level of depression, or patients who are
sicker may be less likely to complete a quality-of-life questionnaire. In
general, these PROs are missing due to the patient's declining health status,
but the extent of decline is not known because it is not observed; hence, these
missing data are informative and are MNAR. Similar situations also appear in
large-scale health surveys and electronic health records database. In this
project, the PIs will study statistical methodology and computational algorithm
for the MNAR issue in PRO as well as in other similar situations. The research
product has the potential to be applied to various studies, such as Alzheimer's
disease, mental health disorders, orthopedics, and pain research. The PIs will
also engage in education at both disciplinary and interdisciplinary levels, with
beneficiaries ranging from local high school students and undergraduates, to
master and PhD students, and to biomedical investigators. The project will also
provide research opportunities for postdoctoral scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to establish a
groundbreaking and translational statistical methodology framework including
robust methods as well as efficient estimators, where the assumption on the
missing data mechanism is imposed at a minimum level hence the developed methods
can be applied with the largest flexibility. Motivated by the well-recognized
fact that there is no adequate way to test the correctness of the missing data
mechanism, the PIs will adopt the shadow variable approach to achieve the model
identification and essentially make no further assumptions on the mechanism,
thereby provide largest possible protection to model misspecification. The
methodology is robust against the mechanism model misspecification by leveraging
the model-based likelihood and its associated semiparametric structure. The
statistical methods developed in this project will be implemented into efficient
R packages and user-friendly interfaces for researchers whose primary goal is
the analysis of missing data, especially MNAR data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.