* 1953620
* Mean Field Equations and Inverse Wave Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Amir Moradifam, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 198,909.00

This project focuses on the study of mean field equations and inverse wave
equations, two important types of partial differential equations. Mean field
equations arise in the study of several important phenomena in mathematics,
mathematical physics, and biology such as Chern-Simons gauge field theories,
rigidity of Hawking mass in general relativity, and mathematical models for cell
mobility and turbulence. Inverse wave problems investigated in this project have
immediate applications in photoacoustic and thermoacoustic tomography and will
contribute to the advancement of new medical imaging methods with significant
potential in clinical applications. Medical imaging methods are crucial for
early detection, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases. This project provides
research training opportunities for graduate students. Undergraduate students,
and high school students from underrepresented groups and disadvantaged
backgrounds will benefit from the proposed research, educational, and outreach
plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator (PI) aims to study
symmetry and uniqueness of solutions of mean field type equations by developing
new functional inequalities in the spirit of the Sphere Covering Inequality. The
Sphere Covering Inequality was recently discovered by the PI and his
collaborator and has since led to solutions for several open problems. The PI
will develop singular versions of the sphere covering inequality as well as
inequalities with improved constants on non-simply connected regions, and extend
such inequalities to higher dimensions. The project has important applications
to various problems including Nirenberg's problem of prescribing Gaussian
curvature on the sphere, Moser-Trudinger inequalities, self-dual and Chern-
Simons gauge field theories, rigidity of Hawking mass in general relativity,
Keller-Segal type free boundary models for cell mobility, Onsager's vortex
theory, Toda systems, and cosmic string equations. In the second part of the
project, the PI will investigate the inverse problem of determining both the
sources of a wave and its speed inside a medium from the measurements of the
solutions of the wave equation on the boundary, which is a long-standing open
problem and has important applications in medical
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.