* 1953254
* CAS: Developing Methods for Reaction Modeling to Tune Catalysts for Substrate Variability
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Aaron Odom, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Aaron Odom of the Department of
Chemistry at Michigan State University to develop a model to predict catalyst
efficiency. The catalysts that Professor Odom and his research group are
studying are complexes of titanium and vanadium, which are early transition
metals that are earth abundant and offer unique chemical products. This more
sustainable reactivity model will minimize the time and effort required for the
optimization of catalytic systems that are commonly used in industry. While
similar studies have been performed for late transition metal catalysts that are
used for different types of applications, this model has been designed for early
transition metal catalysts. These studies are advancing an initial model
previously developed by Professor Odom to be able to function with a larger
number of reaction variables and different types of catalyst-substrate
interactions. The program is also discovering new ways to adapt the model to
catalysts that are attached to solid supports. A diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students are being trained through their participation in these
activities and a chemical demonstration team is being organized to engage local
K-12 students in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ligand parametrization
methods have recently been established as valuable tools for catalyst
optimization with late transition metal systems. Although early transition metal
catalysts are used in a variety of industrial processes for the conversion of
petrochemical products to value-added commodities, catalytic performance
predictive methods have been slower to evolve in this area. The Odom laboratory
has developed the first model to systematize the factors that control the
reactivity of titanium-catalysts used for hydroamination. These researchers are
now advancing their working model to be able to handle new challenges such as
non-symmetrical ligand systems and multicomponent reactions. In addition, the
method is being designed to accommodate silica-supported titanium catalysts and
vanadium olefin isomerization catalysts that require consideration of new types
of catalyst-substrate interactions. These studies are providing training for
graduate and undergraduate students in the field of inorganic/organometallic
chemistry and chemical experimentation as well as in machine learning with
applications to artificial intelligence in molecular
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.