* 1953323
* LEAP-HI: Tackling Brain Diseases with Mechanics: A Data-Driven Approach to Merge Advanced Neuroimaging and Multi-Physics Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Yongjie Zhang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 2,048,000.00

The human brain has been studied extensively for centuries, but the role of
biomechanics remains mostly unknown. Recent advances in medical imaging,
experimentation, and computational modeling, however, have led to a growing body
of evidence linking biomechanics of the human brain with major processes in
brain development, disease, and damage. Brain biomechanics establishes a
relationship between the brainâ€™s structure, function, and motion using the
methods of applied mechanics. This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity,
Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) project combines novel medical imaging
methods, image analysis, computational modeling, and mechanical testing to
determine the fundamental mechanical properties of living brain tissues and the
differences in properties between healthy and diseased tissues, and may enable
the early diagnosis and prevention of neurological disorders, such as stroke,
traumatic brain injury, and dementia. As such, the project has the potential to
reduce the financial burden on society and increase the quality of life for
millions of people. Outreach activities in brain mechanics will be provided for
underrepresented groups in science and engineering, as well as training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide a novel platform for
investigating the mechanobiology of the human brain in health and disease. The
research team will develop a novel approach to merge advanced neuroimaging tools
and multi-physics brain modeling into a semi-automated pipeline for the in vivo
investigation of brain mechanics. Ultrahigh field magnetic resonance imaging
technology merged with automated imaging-modeling integration will be utilized
to enable the subject-specific investigation of brain mechanics across disparate
spatio-temporal scales. Specifically, ultrahigh resolution mechanical,
structural, and connectomic neuroimaging tools will be developed and integrated
with automatic brain segmentation and mesh generation for finite element and
isogeometric analysis to create multi-scale brain mechanics computer models.
These tools will then be utilized to provide an in-depth characterization of the
mechanobiochemical response of traumatic brain injury, in decompressive
craniectomies for stroke patients, and the coupling between prion-like protein
progression and cerebral atrophy in dementia. By developing a pipeline for the
creation of personalized, data-driven brain models, the research team will
demonstrate the transformative power of combined imaging, modeling, and machine
learning techniques towards better understanding, improved treatment, and
ultimately preventive medicine for neurological
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.