* 1953460
* Research Initiation Award: Cognitive Monitoring Systems using Intelligent Robots and Sensors in Dynamic Extreme Environments
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Renny Fernandez, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,982.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Norfolk State University (NSU) has potential broader impacts in a
number of areas. The goal of this project is to develop cognitive monitoring
systems using intelligent sensors and robots to provide real-time sensing and
wireless localization in metallic oil pipelines. The project is a collaborative
effort between faculty at NSU and Old Dominion University and involves
undergraduate students in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages the cooperation between intelligent underground sensors and in-pipe
robots to enable automated cognitive monitoring of metallic pipelines in dynamic
underground environments. Underground pipeline leakages caused by internal and
external corrosions create significant economic loss and environmental
contamination. Wireless in-pipe robots are used to provide precise internal
inspections and underground sensors to detect leakages and relay wireless data
for in-pipe robots. The specific research aims are to: design reliable through-
metal and through-soil wireless communication systems using magnetic induction;
intelligently control robots' motion and communication; develop robust wireless
networks considering the dynamic change of extreme environments; and design
experimental testbeds. The research makes theoretical and empirical
contributions to wireless sensing and cognitive monitoring in extreme
environments. Findings will improve the accuracy of leakage prediction and
detection for underground pipelines, as well as contribute to a wider vision of
automating dirty, dull, and dangerous tasks in harsh
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.