* 1953829
* Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems 2019: Student Activities and U.S.-Based Students Support
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Goce Trajcevski, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 02/28/2021
* USD 24,500.00

This award provides support for U.S.-based students to attend the 27th
Association for Computing Machinery Special Interest Group on Spatial
Information (ACM SIGSPATIAL) International Conference on Advances in Geographic
Information Systems, November 5-8, 2019 in Chicago, IL. The ACM SIGSPATIAL
conference is the world's premier research conference in Spatial Information and
Geographic Information Systems. The conference brings together researchers,
developers, users, and practitioners carrying out research and development in
novel systems based on geospatial data and knowledge, and fostering
interdisciplinary discussions and research in a wide set of disciplines and
applications, including computer science, geography, urban planning, land-use,
and defense. The ACM SIGSPATIAL conference seeks to foster development of a new
generation of researchers and practitioners in the important area of Spatial
Information and Geographic Information Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACM
SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems 2019 is the 27th event in a series of symposia and workshops that began
in 1993 with the aim of bringing together researchers, developers, users, and
practitioners in relation to novel systems based on geo-spatial data and
knowledge, and fostering interdisciplinary discussions and research in all
aspects of geographic information systems. The conference provides a forum for
original research contributions covering all conceptual, design, and
implementation aspects of geospatial data ranging from applications, user
interfaces, and visualization to data storage and query processing and indexing.
The ACM SIGSPATIAL conference will feature research presentations, workshops,
demonstrations, poster sessions, and student-focused activities, including a
student research competition, a spatial computing competition, and mentoring by
senior researchers. Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems will be available in
the ACM Digital Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.