* 1953414
* IRES Track II: US-Korea Advanced Transportation Infrastructure Informatics Institutes (ATI3)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Kunhee Choi, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2024
* USD 224,614.00

Transportation mobility and safety problems are of extreme importance
internationally. Accordingly, there is an urgent need to develop a means of
correcting and improving urban transportation mobility and safety modeling that
connects these two independent research domains. The failure to meet this need
is a pressing national and international problem because in the absence of
advancements in modeling, safety risk and mobility disruption will continue to
result in wasted time and unnecessary loss of life and remain a burden on the
economy. In light of these, the key research objective is a synergistic US-Korea
collaboration to create a unified data-driven algorithmic framework for
autonomously predicting mobility and safety impacts of highway rehabilitation by
harnessing artificial intelligence (AI). To meet this timely need, the research
team proposes a new initiative: three annual Advanced Transportation
Infrastructure Informatics Institutes (ATI3) to train U.S. students in cutting
edge skills in collaboration with counterparts in Korea. The institutes will
catalyze an international collaboration where the best infrastructure mobility
and safety analysis practices are synergistically integrated into a unified AI
data-driven algorithmic framework that has intellectual merit with regards to
the NSF Big Ideas of ‘Harnessing the Data Revolution’ and ‘Convergence
Research’. This IRES will deploy 15 graduate students from participating U.S.
universities; each student will spend three weeks annually over the three-year
duration at KAIST in Daejeon, Korea. Korea’s unique transportation challenges
and KAIST’s solutions will offer U.S. students truly exceptional, enriching
international high-impact learning and research experiences in this important
research area. The proposed approach is unique because it models the level of
mobility and safety disruption by accounting for big data analytics and AI
techniques (ATI3 I), drivers’ behavior modeling fused from hybrid simulations
(ATI3 II), and high-fidelity prediction that accounts for drivers’ behavior as a
major influence with a reinforcement AI deep-learning algorithm (ATI3 III).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research activities at ATI3 will be tightly
interwoven with a comprehensive education plan, with the overall goal of
promoting students’ transformational learning through a project-based research-
centric environment while widely engaging practitioners and communities in the
project-based research projects. The central hypothesis is that instituting a
three-year annual ATI program for learning new methods and techniques, then
leveraging the techniques to model the level of safety and mobility disruption
due to highway rehabilitation, will allow the IRES fellows to research new
discoveries that may correct and improve the results of work zone safety and
mobility modeling. The new safety-mobility integration system will provide a
rigorous theoretical basis for comparatively analyzing rehabilitation
alternatives so that motorist inconvenience and safety risk can be assessed in a
fundamentally new way. It will provide insights into new interactions between
drivers’ stochastic route choice behaviors and their consequences in traffic
queue delays and crash risks. Once successfully completed, the IRES will result
in the research community and practitioners with the first view of a systematic
estimation method to determine the safest and most economical transportation
plans that would be smarter (better mobility, less travel time, and lower road
user cost) and greener (reduced vehicle operating costs and environmental costs)
than those in existence today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.