* 1953410
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale and Multiphasic Modeling of Single and Collective Migration in Fibrous Extracellular Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* John Lowengrub, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Biological cells sense and respond to physical forces, which can shape and guide
their behavior. Cells can also actively generate forces, to probe and deform
materials in their surrounding environment. These dynamic interactions between
clusters of cells and their environment are critical to an immense range of
activities including early development and cancer progression. In recent years
there has been a growing interest to uncover what drives cells to escape from
growing clusters, either independently or in collective streams. However, a
thorough understanding of the biophysics governing such activity is lacking. To
address these issues, a novel computational and experimental framework will be
developed to investigate how the interplay between cellular forces, adhesion,
and environmental physics drive cells to proliferate, escape, and invade distant
regions of the body. The new tools proposed will impact many areas in biology,
including normal and abnormal tissue development, wound healing, and tissue
regeneration. The innovative mathematical models and methods will advance
computing in biology as well as other fields of science such as bioengineering
and biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current mathematical models cannot
predict why cells invade from a proliferative cluster and migrate either
independently or as collective strands, which determines the metastatic risk of
invading cells during cancer progression. This problem will be addressed through
a novel multi-scale framework that integrates computational models of highly
non- linear matrix mechanics, force-mediated cell signaling, and active cell
contractility. Such an approach will provide a new understanding of the
mechanisms by which matrix properties promote or discourage cell invasion, and
why cells tend to either move collectively or act alone. In particular, the
critical role of cell-mediated matrix remodeling, long range force transmission,
and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) will be uncovered. The kinetics
of cell invasion requires the formation of protrusions, assembly and dissolution
of adhesions, and remodeling of contractile actomyosin fibers. These stochastic
processes will be modelled using Kinetic Monte Carlo methods, that will
explicitly account for fluctuations in the cellâ€™s response to its environment.
Additionally, a novel multi-scale bio-chemo-mechanical model of tissue growth
will be developed to predict formation of arbitrarily shaped cell clusters and
to quantify how complex patterns of cells emerge from such clusters. This
research will lead to a paradigm shift in the mathematical modelling of cell
invasion by explicitly including signalling, non-linear matrix mechanics and the
two-way recursive dialog between cells and the matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.