* 1953428
* RUI: Solvation in Bulk and Confined Polyethylene Glycol
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Markus Hoffmann, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2024
* USD 116,201.00

Water (H2O) dissolves substances like table salt and sugar because the water
molecules bind to the salt ions (sodium cations (Na+) and chloride anions (Cl-))
or sugar molecules and therefore break up the solid lattice of these compounds.
Other liquids (alcohols, liquid ammonia and liquid carbon dioxide, and many
others) can also dissolve chemical substances. An interesting liquid whose
solvation properties have not been well-studied is polyethylene glycol (PEG).
PEG is different from other common liquids because it is composed of long chains
of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen atoms. PEGs are nontoxic and have been
successfully used as environmentally benign solvents in chemical synthesis, but
we still do not know very much about their solvation properties. In this project
supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Markus Hoffmann, his undergraduate students at
the State University of New York, College at Brockport, and international
collaborators in Germany are generating new knowledge about PEG as a solvent.
Professor Hoffmann’s research program utilizes nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy, a technique related to the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) tool
used in medicine. NMR spectroscopy provides information about the structure and
motions of molecules, as well as interactions between molecules. The Hoffmann
laboratory also employs computer simulations of liquid systems. Advanced NMR
spectroscopy and computational studies are being done in collaboration with
Professors Gerd Buntkowsky and Michael Vogel at the University of Darmstadt in
Germany. Professor Hoffmann’s SUNY-Brockport students visit Darmstadt and
conduct research there during the summer. The Brockport students are therefore
gaining valuable experience not only in the specific subject of the project, but
also in international research collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to develop an understanding of solvation in polyethylene glycol
(PEG). To achieve the project goal, the thermophysical properties density,
viscosity and self-diffusion coefficient of PEG solutions are being measured to
verify force fields used in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of the same
solutions in bulk. Verified force fields are then used for MD simulations of PEG
solutions in confinement in mesoporous silica pores with and without surface
modification to develop an understanding of confinement effects on solvation and
to explore the influence of pore surface modification. The research team will
interpret experimental data from several NMR spectroscopic techniques that probe
dynamics and molecular interactions of PEG within the pore confinement. The NMR
experiments include dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) enhanced NMR
spectroscopy; Solutes of interest include polarizing agents. The findings from
the research have the potential to also impact many other research fields
because PEGs and “PEGylated” compounds are widely used in pharmaceutical
technologies to increase the lifetime of a drug in the circulatory system.
Additional broader impacts of the project include the training of undergraduate
students, improving the infrastructure of research and research training at SUNY
Brockport, and the addition of a meaningful international research experience
for the students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.