* 1953636
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Relationship between Foraging Strategy and Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Tristram Kidder, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2022
* USD 28,350.00

When people harvest wild plants, they intervene in the life cycles of those
plants. With time, the resulting dependencies alter the people, the plants, and
the social and ecological systems in which both operate. As most research into
human-plant relationships in the past focuses on the histories of domesticated
crops, less is known about the dynamics of change through time in systems based
on wild plants and the ecological legacy of these systems. Grace Ward, doctoral
candidate at Washington University in St. Louis, will study long-term wild plant
management by investigating the interactions between people and plants living in
the Lower Mississippi Valley roughly 4,000 years ago. This research will provide
context for subsequent land use in the region, and insight into past strategies
employed to live sustainably in the Mississippi floodplain. Through planned
data-sharing and in-field education programs, the project is designed to extend
archaeological training to local and indigenous descendant communities in a
resource-impoverished area of the American South. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
collaboration with geoarchaeologists, Ward and student assistants will excavate
and analyze plant remains from archaeological contexts associated with the
Poverty Point culture. This cultural complex lasted from approximately 4,500 to
3,000 years ago in the Lower Mississippi Valley and is defined by the
fluorescence of a shared material culture and significant innovations in earthen
monumental architecture. Prior work indicates that during this period and for
centuries after, people in the Lower Mississippi Valley hunted and gathered wild
foods and materials without reliance on domesticated plants or animals. While
anthropologists have historically classed hunter-gatherer societies as
inherently simple and static, monumental earthen architecture constructed during
this period indicates social processes involving massive group aggregation and
labor mobilization. Did plant foraging strategies shift in accordance with these
markers of social change? Ward and colleagues will study the entwined histories
of wild plant management and monumental construction to approach this question,
informed by observed patterns in the density, diversity, and morphology of plant
remains identified in samples taken from Poverty Point contexts. While the
monuments of the Poverty Point culture have been included in global surveys of
hunter-gatherer cultural expression, the economy underlying their construction
has not been adequately explained in a manner that facilitates cross-cultural
comparison. Analysis of the relationship between people and plants during this
period will allow for empirical comparison with other regions in which wild
plant management supported complex social structures, deepening discipline-wide
understanding of the many permutations of human-environment
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.