* 1953045
* Molecular Radiative and Relaxation Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Shaul Mukamel, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 534,000.00

Shaul Mukamel of the University of California, Irvine is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to study how light and matter interact. Lasers and other
light sources are tools with which one can probe, measure, and even control the
behavior of molecules. In this project, new ways to interact light with
molecules are designed by incorporating the wave properties of light such as
phase and polarization. Although the interaction of a single small package
(photon) of light with a molecule is quite well understood, multiple photons can
be combined into pulses that influence molecules in new ways. These interactions
of photons and molecules are best described by quantum mechanics, a the
mathematical description of the motion and interaction of subatomic particles,
incorporating the concepts of quantization of energy, wave-particle duality, the
uncertainty principle, etc. The methods developed in this project will provide
new information within this framework. Success in this area could lead to new
technologies such as quantum computers. To benchmark the predictions, the
project includes extensive collaborations and student exchanges with leading
experimental groups all over the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Mukamel
is developing methods to study the response of complex molecules to sequences of
ultrafast optical laser pulses that provide a multidimensional view of
electronic and vibrational dynamics and correlations. Experimental techniques
involving novel pulse sequences are designed. Theoretical and computational
tools for their analysis are developed and broadly applied to molecules in the
condensed phase. Models and practical computational tools are developed for the
interpretation and analysis of these signals. Novel spectroscopic techniques,
which make use of the quantum nature of light, photon entanglement and photon
coincidence detection are explored. These provide additional tools for probing
molecules and chromophore aggregates by providing information that is not
accessible by classical light. Detection schemes that combine coincidence
measurements of individual entangled photons and interferometry are applied to
study the elementary charge and energy migration processes in molecular
complexes. Manipulating molecular properties in microcavities (polariton
chemistry) and coherent control schemes are employed to optimize and refine
nonlinear optical signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.