* 1953151
* 36th Southeastern Analysis Meeting
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Raymond Cheng, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 12/31/2020
* USD 0.00

This award supports the 36th Southeastern Analysis Meeting (SEAM 36), which will
be hosted by Old Dominion University at its regional campus in Virginia Beach,
Virginia, on March 13-15, 2020. There will be parallel sessions for 20-minute
contributed talks. This award will provide partial travel support that will, in
particular, promote the participation of graduate students, early-career
researchers, and members of underrepresented groups. The conference will provide
a dynamic environment for learning about new advances in mathematical analysis,
exchanging ideas, building collaborative relationships, and networking with
other professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEAM 36 will have a scientific focus
on analysis, including functional analysis, operator theory, and harmonic
analysis. Professor Isabelle Chalendar will highlight the deep interplay between
operator theory and complex analysis in her plenary lecture. Professor Irina
Holmes will present a novel application of combinatorial graph theory to
classical measure theory. The plenary talks by Professors Scott McCullough and
Jurij Volcic will cover noncommutative analysis, also known as free analysis.
They will introduce the foundations of the theory, as well as survey its
important applications in engineering and probability. The featured
presentations by Professors Dominique Guillot and Yuesheng Xu will connect
analysis to the rapidly developing and transformative field of data science. The
parallel sessions will enable participants to share their discoveries, learn
about other advances in the field, engage in valuable discussions, and launch
new joint efforts. SEAM 36 will thus help promote the intellectual development
of mathematical analysis, encourage continued activity in function spaces as
concrete realizations in operator theory, and stimulate new connections between
classical analysis and other disciplines. For more information, please visit the
conference website https://www.odu.edu/math/seam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.