* 1953430
* Multipronged Modeling of Subcellular Self-Organization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alexander Mogilner, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 350,307.00

Cells in our body have a certain structure: nucleus and other organelles are not
placed at random, but rather positioned in certain locations to optimize
transport and communication inside the cell. These organelles’ positions are not
pre-programmed; the organelles find their positions through a process of
mechanical self-organization. Specifically, the organelles extend dynamic ‘arms’
made of cytoskeletal proteins, and use these arms to grab, push and pull each
other. The ensuing tug-of-war leads to a complex mechanical equilibrium that
determines organelles’ positions. These positions can be measured in microscopic
images, while underlying mechanical forces are impossible to measure. This
project will solve an inverse problem by reverse-engineering the forces from the
positions of organelles inside the cell. This project will also address this
problem from multiple directions: considering organelles to be tiny rigid
particles interacting by long-range forces, considering an abstract viscous
fluid made of organelles, and finally mimicking dynamics and mechanics of all
essential molecules and organelles in a computer simulation. The project will
use these simulations to screen hundreds of thousands of possible forces, and
experimental data to distill the correct forces in the cell. The mathematical
models will be developed, tested and refined for two fundamental cellular
systems: mitotic spindle (molecular machine segregating chromosomes in cell
division) and multiple nuclei in large muscle cells. The models will help
experimentalists to understand which molecules are responsible for proper
architecture of healthy cells and for defects in aging muscles and dividing
cancer cells. In the process, interdisciplinary researchers will be trained,
novel courses on modeling biosystems will be developed, and K-12 students will
be introduced to quantitative biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
fundamental challenges of cell biology is to define principles of spatial
organization of the cell. Organelle positioning is essentially a mechanical
phenomenon: a set of intracellular forces is responsible for placing the
organelles. These forces are generated by activities of cytoskeleton, a dynamic
scaffold of elastic fibers and molecular motor proteins immersed into viscous
cytosol, more specifically, the microtubule-kinesin-dynein force-generating
system. The main goal is to use experimental data to reverse-engineer the
intracellular forces and understand underlying molecular mechanisms. To achieve
this goal, novel methods to generate multiple models and automatically screen
the models against the experimental data will be developed and applied to two
phenomena: self-organization of a bipolar mitotic spindle in multi-centrosomal
cells, and dynamic nuclear positioning in multinucleated embryonic muscle cells.
Specifically, a computer code will be developed that will generate a wide class
of forces and screen the forces by detecting a small minority of the forces
leading to the observed cell architectures. Multiple models (organelles as
particles driven by pair-wise distance-dependent forces, energy-minimization
models, continuous integro-differential and agent-based models) will be
developed, compared and tested, machine learning will be used to accelerate the
model screening. Collaboration with two experimental labs will result in
discovery of molecular mechanisms of nuclei positioning in developing muscle
cells and of dynamic architecture of mitotic spindle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.