* 1953888
* Collaborative Research: Diverse selective pressure on fruit chemical traits from mutualists and antagonists as a major driver of chemical evolution at the whole plant level
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Susan Whitehead, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 10/31/2024
* USD 538,888.00

Much of the diversity in plant form and function observed in nature can be
understood as the coevolutionary result of interactions with other living
organisms. Plant chemistry represents an underappreciated dimension of diversity
that is critical for mediating plant interactions and, ultimately, plant
fitness. Metabolomics is a rapidly growing field with over 200,000 described
secondary metabolites in the plant kingdom. However, there is a paucity of data
for tropical species, and the vast majority of data are from leaves. The
investigators will take advantage of recent advances in metabolomics and
bioinformatics, long-term ecological monitoring data, and field studies to
interpret the metabolomics data in ways that will provide a new whole-plant
perspective on the evolution of plant defense. All metabolomics data will be
made publicly available because ripe, fleshy fruits dispersed by vertebrates
tend to be toxic to microorganisms and insects but non-toxic to vertebrates,
making them an underappreciated and novel source of potential drugs. Public
archival of these data will contribute to potential drug discovery. Student
scholars will gain experience in research methods in tropical field biology and
chemical ecology. Results will be used to develop student-centered, inquiry-
based course materials for undergraduate biology classrooms. All educational
materials will be translated into Spanish and disseminated in Latin America via
Verde Elemental. To communicate research the investigators will collaborate with
Utah Public Radio and Impact Media Lab to produce multimedia, including public
radio podcasts, short-films, and an interactive website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
fundamental question in plant biology is: why do plants produce so many
different chemical compounds? Most theory and empirical research in plant
chemical ecology has focused on the defense of leaves, yet fruits thread a more
complicated chemical path, simultaneously defending against enemies and
attracting dispersers. Thus, the investigators hypothesize that much of the
secondary metabolite diversity observed in plants has its origins in fruits.
Specifically, the project tests the hypothesis that the diverse selective
pressures on fruit chemical traits are a major driver of phytochemical
diversification and evolution at the whole-plant level. Complementary approaches
of comparative metabolomics, observational field studies, and phylogenetically-
controlled experimentation will be used to test the hypothesis. First,
contemporary patterns of secondary metabolite diversity across plant tissues and
species will be measured to detect a signature of selection from fruit-frugivore
interactions. A metabolomics approach to characterize phytochemistry of 50
phylogenetically-controlled comparisons of tree and shrub species that vary in
dispersal mode will be carried out. Second, how patterns of fruit and leaf
secondary metabolite diversity mediate natural variation in plant interactions
with fruit and leaf consumers will be examined using an observational study of
fruit removal and damage on pulp, seeds, and leaves for these same species.
Third, whether fruit secondary metabolites reflect the adaptations to specific
dispersal modes will be experimentally determined using a phylogenetically-
controlled subset of bat-, bird-, and abiotically-dispersed species. The study
will be conducted in one of the most well-studied tropical forest systems on
Earth, Barro Colorado Island, Panama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.