* 1953242
* A database for an understudied language: A dictionary, grammar, and texts with sound
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* James Rementer, The Delaware Tribe
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 11/30/2021
* USD 33,280.00

The goals of this project are two-fold. First, the project focuses on further
developing the infrastructure of an on-line database that includes a dictionary,
a grammar, and texts of an endangered language. A dictionary, a grammar, and
texts are considered to provide the basic material required for research on a
language, and themselves involve considerable research. Second, the project
further develops the content of the database, adding previously inaccessible
materials, and in particular sound materials, to the database.

This database will serve as a model for other on-line dictionaries, grammars,
and texts. It will also be invaluable to those working on looking to understand
the internal structure of the language family, and how the languages have
developed over time, and the recordings included in it allow for the study of
actual speech, an area of great importance in linguistics today. As a language
from a family with complex verb structure, the database also provides rich
material for its study, particularly in comparison with related languages, to
understand how such complexities change over time and space. It also aids in the
preservation of and access to materials that are irreplaceable today.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.