* 1953407
* Criticality and Nonlinearity in Interacting Particle Systems and Stochastic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Li Cheng Tsai, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 64,714.00

The project concerns the time evolution of large, stochastic systems, with a
focus on their nonlinear and critical behaviors. The systems studied in this
project are representative of natural phenomena, such as crystal growths,
evolution of magnetic domains, paths evolving in a noisy environment, and
randomly stirred fluids. Often these systems exhibit nonlinearity and
criticality. Nonlinearity refers to the behavior that the randomness of the
macroscopic observables are related to the underlying microscopic randomness in
a nonlinear fashion. Criticality refers to the phenomenon that a given system
exhibits drastically distinct macroscopic behaviors when certain parameters in
the underlying microscopic model reach some critical values. Time-evolutionary
stochastic systems form a large body of probability theory, yet the type of
phenomena considered here sits on the frontiers of current standard theories.
The goal of this project is to unveil the mathematical structure pertaining to
the aforementioned scopes, and to refine the existing theories to study these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In concrete terms, the project studies three types
of models: interacting particles with moving boundaries, stochastic partial
differential equaitons (SPDEs) at their criticality, and stochastic six vertex-
types models. Particle systems with moving boundaries give rise to Stefan?s
problem in PDE, and in one particular case those systems relate to the critical
point of a reaction-diffusion particle system. The principal investigator seeks
to develop more robust tools that do not require explicit stationary
distributions and apply to the aforementioned critical point. SPDEs exhibit
criticality for certain parameters, where the solutions become non-measurable
with respect to the driving noise. This research aims at studying the
correlation functions, regularity, and local properties of a few specific
examples of such SPDEs. The stochastic six-vertex model is a specialization of
the ice-type models that can be formulated as a Markov process. It hosts a
number of degenerations, including the totally asymmetric simple exclusion
process. As a first step toward understanding the limiting shape of these
models, the principal investigator plans to study the large deviations utilizing
the Markov structures of these models.