* 1953267
* Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Elastic Shape Analysis with Topological Inconsistencies and Partial Matching Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicolas Charon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 149,998.00

This research project focuses on data structures that are represented as curves
or surfaces. Such structures occur in applications ranging from brain anatomy,
computer vision, and molecular biology to meteorological and financial data.
Data can be either directly acquired by devices such as laser scans or
indirectly reconstructed from microscopy or magnetic resonance imaging. Such
images and analyses appear for example in the study of human anatomy and motion
or in applications to computer graphics and motion. The project lies in the
broad area of statistical shape analysis, in which one tries to quantify
geometric and/or topological variability within and across populations. The work
aims to develop practical methods to characterize the shape of data objects in
order to ascertain their roles in larger systems. The project will involve
graduate students and produce open source software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project relies on the paradigms of elastic shape analysis, which is
traditionally concerned with analyzing the variability in the geometries of the
objects under consideration. At its core is the notion of a distance between two
shapes, which stems from a Riemannian setting using a metric that is invariant
to the action of certain shape-preserving transformations and embeds both the
global nonlinearity of the space as well as its local linearity. The first goal
is to develop a comprehensive theoretical and numerical framework for elastic
shape analysis of curves and surfaces that allows for topological
inconsistencies and partial matching constraints. This framework combines
elastic shape analysis with methods from geometric measure theory and
topological data analysis. The second goal is to apply the framework to a wide
variety of synthetic and real data, in particular to morphological analysis of
high-resolution orthopedic surface complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.