* 1953570
* NSF/MCB-BSF High-resolution mapping of the protein landscape in plant photosynthetic membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Helmut Kirchhoff, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2024
* USD 901,466.00

Life on earth is fueled by photosynthesis, which converts sunlight into
metabolic energy forms. In plants, photosynthetic energy conversion is realized
by pigment-protein complexes that are harbored in highly specialized thylakoid
membranes inside the chloroplasts. The dynamic response of the protein landscape
in thylakoid membranes to unpredictable environmental changes (i.e. fluctuations
in sunlight intensity by clouds, self-shading of leaves in wind) triggers
photoprotective high-energy quenching (qE) that is essential for the survival of
the plant. The project will map qE-induced protein landscape dynamics in
thylakoid membranes with molecular resolution as a basis for understanding key
photosynthetic functions. The intellectual merit of the proposed work is that it
defines an innovative and complete pipeline of methods, ranging from state-of
the art electron microscopy to coarse grain computer simulations, which will
provide a quantitative understanding of photosynthetic light harvesting and
electron transport. This pipeline will lead to urgently needed insights into
dynamic structure-function relationships in thylakoid membranes. Furthermore, it
is raising protein landscape analysis to a new level with unprecedented
resolution to increase our in-depth understanding of photosynthetic energy
conversion. The broader impact of the project is twofold: First, it will provide
hands-on research experience to undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups, and establish a new computer-based teaching tool for a computational
chemistry course. Second, social benefits of the proposed work are expected for
the improvement of crop plants and biofuel prospects since it turns out that
optimization and adjustment of the qE mechanisms by bioengineering could be a
powerful tool to increase plant performances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To generate
high-resolution protein maps of the thylakoid protein landscape as basis to
provide mechanistic understanding for the qE-dependent regulation of light-
harvesting and electron transport, three specific aims will be pursued. Aim #1:
Establishing high-resolution protein maps for different qE states. Plants will
be examined using electron microscopy and compositional analysis which will lead
to detailed coarse grain thylakoid protein landscapes. Aim #2: Determine how qE-
induced changes in protein landscapes impact light harvesting and
photoprotective qE. Coarse grain protein maps of thylakoid membranes will be
used to model photosynthetic light harvesting in order to interpret measured
data. Aim #3: Determine how qE-triggered switches in protein landscapes control
diffusion dependent electron transport. A dynamic protein landscape model for
the entire thylakoid membrane will be developed that allows simulation of the
whole photosynthetic electron transport to understand in vivo data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the
US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.