* 1953727
* An Active Learning-based Educational Program for Hispanic STEM Students through Industry-University Partnership
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Susan Gomez Zwiep, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 2,099,874.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to train skilled Hispanic
STEM students to address the diversity issues in human resource development in
the state of California and the Nation. This will be achieved by increasing the
qualifications and marketability of the students through creating a meaningful
industry-university partnership. Employing the capacity of the program over the
next five years, ~120 participating students will benefit from an active
learning approach through conducting an applied research, guided by a team of
mentors from both academia and industry. Furthermore, the program seeks to
improve the retention and graduation rate of participants by (a) providing
direct guidance from faculty mentors, (b) fostering motivation factor by
enhancing their qualifications towards their future employment, (c) providing
financial support to minimize the negative impact of their socioeconomic
challenges. Furthermore, the faculty mentors will benefit from an opportunity to
expand the scope of their research beyond their traditional scholarly
activities. From a technological/economical point of view, the program aims to
contribute to the advancement of industrial partners by providing low-cost
solutions to their challenges. Moreover, the industrial partners will have
access to the low-cost state-of-the-art instrumentation in the faculty mentors’
research laboratories and in the shared facilities of the university. The
enterprises will also benefit from having direct access to a skillful and well-
trained workforce. In addition, this program will contribute to the various
societally important growing problems i.e. environmental and energy related
challenges, telecommunication and transportation infrastructure, and advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide insight into
effective program design related to the employment and retention of Hispanic
students in STEM fields. The industry and university mentor-partnership design
will contribute to understanding of the role that mentorship plays in Hispanic
students’ persistence in STEM fields. Moreover, the proposed activities in this
program will lead to a better understanding of the impact of the joint
mentorship (from a holistic point of view) on Hispanic students’ success, both
academically and professionally. More specifically, the impact of individual
components of the program on students’ success will be assessed, which will in
turn provide insight into the development of best practices related to
mentorship. The program will also advance knowledge about the effects of
teamwork on Hispanic students' academic success, as well as their overall
personal and professional developments. The curriculum and workshop materials
will be posted on the program website to be available for the public use.
Knowledge generated from the evaluation and conducted research will serve as a
foundation for building effective departmental or college wide cooperative
programs that fulfill institutional goals of time to degree and student
engagement. These findings will be presented in national conferences and will be
published in peer-reviewed educational journals. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.