* 1953300
* CDS&amp;E: Nanoconfined Heating via Ultrahigh-repetition-rate Lasers for Enhanced Surface Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yan Wang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Pulsed laser processing is a manufacturing method that uses ultrafast laser
pulses to precisely fabricate three-dimensional objects. Among the tunable
parameters in pulsed laser processing, the laser repetition rate (the number of
laser pulses per second) has only recently been recognized as essential for
controlling the affected depth of laser ablation, sintering, and melting
processes. This depth limit determines the resolution and efficiency of pulsed
laser technologies for micro-/nano-electronics and aerospace and nuclear
applications. This project aims to explore the minimum achievable depth when the
laser repetition rate increases to the giga-/terahertz regime. A set of advanced
computational tools will be developed and implemented to understand the laser
and materials interactions under extreme conditions. Successful completion of
this project will enable confined heating of ultrahigh-repetition-rate lasers to
the nanoscale, thereby improving the precision and efficiency of ablation,
melting, and sintering of nano-layers at material surfaces. The research team
will also develop education programs on thermal transport and laser
manufacturing at the extremes to impact and inspire broad audiences, from local
K-12 students to students at the University of Nevada, Reno. Open-source code
developed from the project will be deployed at nanoHUB.org and accessible to
both academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this
project are to predict and control the depth of the heat-affected zone during
ultrahigh-repetition-rate laser processing, to model the unique microstructure
behaviors of laser-material interactions under extreme conditions, and to
develop and apply advanced thermomechanical models to predict the material
responses to laser processing. Specifically, the research team will develop,
validate, and share advanced computational models for predicting thermal
transport behaviors for a broad range of materials under pulsed laser heating at
repetition rates up to the terahertz regime. Moreover, the PIs will develop
thermomechanical models—synergizing the power of the phase field method,
molecular dynamics, and Boltzmann transport equations—for predicting the poorly
understood material behaviors and properties during and after ultrahigh-
repetition-rate laser processing. The process-structure-property relations for
ultrahigh-repetition-rate laser processing will be established through this
project. Such knowledge will enable the development of ultra-precise, fast, and
efficient laser manufacturing technologies via nano-confined heating.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Thermal Transport
Processes program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.