* 1953405
* IRES Track II: Cross-disciplinary Computational Biology Training
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Travis Hughes, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,968.00

The cross-disciplinary science of computational biology has transformed into a
robust subject of its own, emerging out of the shadows of its parent topics -
computer science and biology. Currently, computational biology is an essential
part of biology, biotechnology, health care and public health in both academic
and industrial research and development institutions. However, training
opportunities for the specialized workforce are often limited; the field of
computational biology presents a challenge to many universities because of their
departmental structures and disciplinary silos. In the rapidly evolving
scientific world, the practice of sharing data among science practitioners is
opening up new research avenues such as containing a pandemic using
multidisciplinary approaches or the development of precision medicine for the
future of health care. At the same time, the wealth of biological data is
accumulating faster than the research community’s ability to analyze them. One
bottleneck for analysis is a shortage of computational biologists. In order to
fill some of the training gaps for U.S. graduate students, we will offer two
Advanced Studies Institutes (ASI) with international experts from various
disciplines of computational biology. The two proposed ASIs will train the
students, the majority of whom will be from EPSCoR states with a special effort
to recruit minorities and women, on diverse fundamental/theoretical aspects of
computational biology as well as expose them to recent applications and
developments in the field. In addition, to give the participants an opportunity
to learn about various career possibilities in computational biology, an
experienced team of academic faculties, core service providers, scientists with
experience in relevant industries and individuals working on intellectual
properties and start-up companies will be invited as instructors in these ASIs.
The impact of the ASIs on scientific preparedness of student participants aligns
well with NSF’s mission to promote the progress of science. Training the
participants on different aspects of computational biology during the ASIs will
contribute to the easing of the bottleneck and aligns well to NSF’s mission to
advance the national health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key factors to
success as a computational biologist is versatility and the ability to align
oneself with the diverse demands of the field. Typically, students are trained
in only one or very few aspects of computational biology relevant to their
immediate research. It is rare that graduate students are exposed, in any
meaningful way, to the breadth of fields that compose computational biology. The
two proposed ASIs are different from traditional ASIs, which typically cover one
specific subject matter in depth. Instead, the proposed ASIs will cover multiple
cross-disciplinary topics in computational biology. Learning is a complex
phenomenon, and the most effective training approaches combine a balance between
lectures, promotion of discussions, interactivity and practical applications.
These ASIs will combine all aspects of the aforementioned learning tools by
implementing instruction methods comprising of lectures, hands-on activities and
projects. These workshops will be held in an international setting, which
provides both exposure to culture and as well as leaders in computational
biology outside of the USA. The locations in Asia are important as non-
American/European science and economy continues to grow rapidly in importance,
especially within computational biology. The proposed ASIs will be hosted at the
University of Perdana in Malaysia and the National Supercomputing Center in
Singapore (NSCC) - two dominant biotechnology hubs of Asia. The participants
will have the opportunity to build professional relationships with international
students, faculties and industry leaders from Asia, USA and Europe. During the
workshop, participants will be encouraged to participate in cultural experiences
that will expose them to the history and culture of the host country. A website
will be built for the ASI and will be used for recruitment, coordination and
evaluation. A summary of the activities and their effectiveness in training
participants, as judged by the participants, will be reported in a peer reviewed
journal. Students will be primarily selected from EPSCoR states, with emphasis
on recruiting from minorities (especially Native American) and women, with the
aim of increasing participation of under-represented groups in computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE), and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.