* 1953528
* Microwave Studies of Prereactive Molecular Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kenneth Leopold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 456,250.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kenneth Leopold is
using state-of-the-art instruments to study the forces that molecules exert on
each other. These forces can influence the outcome of chemical reactions,
especially for substances dissolved in water where many important chemical
reactions take place. The work is accomplished by first studying pairs of
gaseous molecules that could react with each other. Then, when additional
molecules are added, their effect on the reactive pair can be observed. The
instruments used measure how molecules absorb microwaves. The specific set of
microwave frequencies that a molecule or cluster absorbs contains accurate
information about its structure and about how atoms are bonded together. Beyond
fundamental science, this work has potential applications to understanding how
aerosol particles form in the Earth’s atmosphere and, thus, on our understanding
of climate. Through this research project the students in Professor Leopold’s
lab obtain valuable experience in advanced experimental methods and in the
rigorous handling of highly accurate experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rotational spectroscopy is used to elucidate the
molecular and electronic structure of bare and microsolvated clusters containing
molecules on the verge of chemical change. This offers an interesting venue for
studying the relationship between aggregation and reactivity. The rotational
spectroscopy is implemented by exploiting both cavity-based and chirped-pulse
microwave techniques. Accurate moments of inertia, hyperfine coupling constants,
and tunneling frequencies provide information about structure and zero-point
vibrational dynamics. The study of microsolvated clusters deepens our
understanding of solvation, a critical factor influencing thermodynamics and
reactivity in solution. It offers experimental benchmarks for the development of
model potentials for theoretical treatments of condensed phase matter and
provides chemical quality information that builds an intuitive understanding of
the interactions of interest. Simple prototypical systems are investigated with
strong focus on complexes subject to proton transfer or hydrolysis. The broader
impact of the work is enhanced when model systems are chosen which are pertinent
to problems in atmospheric chemistry, particularly the nucleation of atmospheric
aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.