* 1953752
* Achieving STEM Persistence through Peer Assisted Learning and Leadership Development
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Julie Fogarty, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,389,407.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to increase undergraduate
student retention and success in STEM. It will do so by engaging a campus peer
assisted learning program to provide academic and interpersonal supports to
students in introductory engineering courses. The project also plans to support
STEM student success via a STEM Leadership Academy that will serve undergraduate
students in the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics and the College of
Engineering and Computer Science. The STEM Leadership Academy is expected to
cultivate students' leadership, interpersonal, and workforce readiness skills.
Expected student outcomes include improved academic performance, greater self-
efficacy, increased persistence, reduced time to graduation, and narrowed
achievement gaps. The project also expects that students will gain a suite of
interpersonal and team-based attributes that will bolster their success in the
workforce. Evaluation of project activities and outcomes will generate new
knowledge about student engagement, degree attainment, and workforce
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to increase retention and
decrease time to degree for students through two critical transitions: 1) lower
to upper division engineering courses; and 2) through STEM degree completion to
workforce entry. Specific aims include: 1) expanding the peer assisted learning
collaborative to introductory engineering courses; 2) iteratively implementing
the STEM Leadership Academy to provide students with three levels of leadership
skill development, experiential learning, and engagement in socially-relevant
activities; and 3) enhancing faculty attitudes regarding student competencies
through professional development workshops. A mixed methods study will
contribute new knowledge about: 1) the peer assisted learning intervention for
lower division engineering courses; 2) how peer assisted learning and the STEM
Leadership Academy affect student self-efficacy, sense of belonging, and
intentions to persist in the degree and enter the STEM workforce; and 3) impacts
on faculty expectations regarding increased student responsibility and the
traditional teacher-student relationships. This project aims to increase the
participation of underrepresented minority, women, and transfer students and
will draw on co-curricular collaborative and socially relevant activities shown
to increase self-efficacy, course performance, retention, and interest in STEM
careers. Project outcomes will be disseminated through publications,
presentations, and a public website. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.