* 1953940
* International Workshop on Operator Theory and Applications 2020
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Raul Curto, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 24,000.00

This award will cover travel for sixteen early-career mathematicians to attend
the International Workshop in Operator Theory and Applications (IWOTA), to be
held at Lancaster University in the United Kingdom, during August 17 - 21, 2020.
The conference is not only the largest operator theory in the world, but it is
also considered the premier event that connects operator theory to other
disciplines that employ operator theoretic techniques and related mathematical
results. IWOTA 2020 will be devoted to all aspects of operator theory and its
applications and will feature top researchers from all around the world. Having
such a major event organized in Lancaster will also provide a unique opportunity
to reinforce research ties between some of the best experts in the field in the
United States and United Kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many problems in physics,
mathematics, and engineering can be best described by representing complex
physical entities as large arrays of numbers and mathematical symbols, called
matrices. Matrices help us visualize how linear transformations act on vector
spaces; determining their structure reveals important properties of the
transformations. Hilbert space operators are infinite-dimensional
generalizations of matrices. The generalization of a vector is often a function
and, as a result, operators are frequently modeled as multiplications on spaces
of functions. At present, IWOTA 2020 will consist of four plenary speakers,
fourteen semi-plenary speakers, and several special sessions. The topics of the
special sessions include operator spaces, quantized function theory and
noncommutative Lebesgue spaces, operator algebras and quantum theory,
noncommutative probability and random matrices, operator semigroups and
functional calculus, spectral theory and differential equations, operators on
analytic function spaces and related applications, complex geometry and operator
theory, free algebraic geometry, quantum groups and algebraic quantum field
theory, linear systems, and a workshop for early-career researchers. The
conference website is
https://www.lancaster.ac.uk/maths/iwota2020/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.