* 1953762
* Improving Career Readiness of STEM Students Through Worksite Visits, Job Shadowing, and Internships during Their Early College Years
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Ramki Kalyanaraman, San Mateo County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,623,724.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project seeks to prepare students for
careers in STEM. To do so, the project will provide community college students
with opportunities to explore STEM careers through a sequence of workplace
visits, job shadowing, and internships. By enabling students to interact with
STEM professionals, the project team predicts that students will gain an
understanding of what it takes to be a STEM professional and the breadth of what
STEM professionals do. &lt;br/&gt; These interactions are expected to help build
students’ confidence and motivation to pursue careers in STEM. As a result of
the project’s emphasis on engaging Hispanic students and students from other
groups that are underrepresented in STEM, the project has the potential to
contribute to the diversity of the STEM workforce. The project includes a robust
plan to build partnerships with local research facilities and high-tech industry
partners. This model of industry partnerships that build networks between
students and STEM professionals may prove to be a model that other institutions
could use to provide students with STEM career exploration
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage first- and second-
year students with STEM professionals in a progressive sequence of experiences
beginning with work site visits, continuing to job shadowing and internships.
These workplace experiences will occur early in the academic journey of
community college students. The intention is that, over two years, students will
participate in a sequence of workplace exposures that require increasingly
greater effort and provide increasingly higher potential impact. A mixed-methods
evaluation will test the hypothesis that these career-focused experiences will
increase students' self-confidence, motivate them to participate in academic
support activities, and contribute to their success in becoming STEM
professionals. This work is important because, by expanding and enriching the
learning environment to include workplaces, the project will examine how
community college STEM programs can increase participation in STEM among all
demographic groups of students. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program
will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.