* 1953023
* The Deep Dive Into Deep Tech Incubation Workshop; Arlington, VA; Spring 2020
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Grace Wang, SUNY System Administration
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2021
* USD 75,000.00

Deep technologies (deep tech) are typically defined as those that are based on
substantial scientific discoveries and engineering advances with high potential
to profoundly impact existing and emerging industries as well as peopleâ€™s lives.
Because challenges facing deep tech startups are different from those for other
startup companies, they frequently take longer time and require more financial
resources to reach market-ready maturity. To strengthen our economic and
technological competitiveness, it is critical to explore methods and develop
best practices to accelerate deep tech commercialization. The Deep Dive Into
Deep Tech Incubation workshop will bring together key players in the deep tech
ecosystem, including incubators, universities, government, investors, and
industrial partners. The Workshop aims to address fundamental issues of deep
tech commercialization, providing an opportunity for participants to share
knowledge and form partnerships with the ultimate goal of accelerating time to
market of deep tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Deep Dive Into Deep Tech
Incubation Workshop will convene thought leaders and key stakeholders from the
deep tech incubation ecosystem around the country to (1) better understand
relationships among incubators, universities, government, investors, and
industrial partners; (2) explore how to most effectively engage with incubators
and other venture development organizations that provide deep tech incubation;
(3) study how to advance the deep tech incubation ecosystem and grow more and
stronger early-stage deep-tech companies in the U.S.; and (4) share best
practices among stakeholders. The Workshop will generate knowledge and insights
in deep tech incubation and foster collaborations among participants,
accelerating time to market for deep tech. Given its broad scope and success in
deep tech research and incubation, the State University of New York (SUNY) is
uniquely qualified to lead the planning, execution and post-program follow-up of
the Workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.