* 1953601
* Sustainable Energy Engineering for Empowering Rural Communities
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* David Thornton, East Central University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2024
* USD 130,333.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site entitled,
"Sustainable Energy Engineering for Empowering Rural Communities" is a
collaborative program from the University of Oklahoma (OU) that builds upon a
previous RET Site and continues outreach to distant-rural teachers, students and
schools, but changes its topical focus to Sustainable Energy Engineering (SEE)
and secondly, partners with the Institute for Math and Science Education (IMSE)
at East Central University (ECU). It builds upon the fact that the wind and
solar industries, and eventually biomass, industries, are revitalizing Oklahoma
rural economies through infusion of property taxes and land use fees. These
additional monetary resources will allow the integration of sustainable energy
engineering into STEM education, strengthening rural education. In addition,
this effort will increase the Oklahoma workforce which needs highly trained
professionals in these areas. By highlighting these areas of interest and need,
rural communities will recognize ways in which their youth can apply their STEM
knowledge and skills in order to give back and sustain the rural community
rather than permanently out migrate to urban areas. Furthermore, emphasizing
sustainable energy engineering will provide needed support to physics and
mathematics teachers who are in low supply, often requiring rural students to
travel considerable distances to participate in physics or higher mathematics
courses. Providing STEM curricula that integrates science and engineering with
clear impacts on contemporary topics, as well as building a network of educators
ranging from rural high school teachers to university research faculty, will
promote a career-preparation pathway for rural youth in Oklahoma, guiding them
as they enter engineering education and move into the engineering talent pool.
In the long-term, the knowledge and results gained from this RET program will
help build sustainable education initiatives to reach rural students and
teachers, and as a result, will support sustainable rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over three years, a total of 36 distant-rural
Oklahoma middle- and high school STEM teachers, will for six weeks each summer,
conduct SEE research with eight OU faculty. IMSE will provide pedagogical and
program workshops, deliver year-round support with classroom implementation of
RET curricula, and enhance school-community relationships. Most importantly,
IMSE will facilitate, nurture and grow the network of teachers, research
mentors, renewable energy industries, regional outreach programs, schools and
their communities that is essential for successfully establishing K-12 STEM
education in distant-rural areas. Distant-rural middle- and high school STEM
teachers will be recruited from the 11-county area surrounding ECU. IMSE is the
regional focal point for facilitating and disseminating STEM pedagogy to the 83
school districts in this rural region. As the RET program expands, rural
communities near wind and solar farms will be targeted, with the eventual
establishment of a second rural RET outreach hub at the High Plains Technology
Center in NW Oklahoma. The summer research experience will engage teachers in
collecting data addressing real-world questions, and from their results, develop
additional research hypotheses they will challenge using their own experimental
design. During this summer period, in partnership with mentors and IMSE,
teachers from the same or adjacent rural districts will be paired to facilitate
collaboration in the development of authentic, guided-inquiry curricula that
utilizes fundamental STEM concepts, apply SEE, and address issues of rural
interest and relevance. Academic year activities will include a RET workshop
each semester at IMSE open to all rural teachers for professional development
credit, and multiple interactions between the OU mentors and the teacher and
students through field trips, classroom visits, and video conferencing.
Likewise, IMSE, OU mentors, and each participating rural school will host a
Family STEM Night to highlight the RET activities occurring in their community.
Dissemination activities will include, but are not limited to, RET teacher-led
workshops at IMSE and rural schools, regional education conferences, and the
NSTA national conference. RET curricula will be posted on a social media site
established specifically by IMSE for RET activities and linked with the national
KidWind website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.