* 1953051
* OAC Core: Small: Devising Data-driven Methodologies by Employing Large-scale Empirical Data to Fingerprint, Attribute, Remediate and Analyze Internet-scale IoT Maliciousness
* CSE,OAC
* 08/14/2019,06/30/2024
* Elias Bou-Harb, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 496,898.00

At least 20 billion devices will be connected to the Internet by 2023. Many of
these devices transmit critical and sensitive system and personal data in real-
time. Collectively known as "the Internet of Things" (IoT), this market
represents a $267 billion per year industry. As valuable as this market is,
security spending on the sector barely breaks 1%. Indeed, while IoT vendors
continue to push more IoT devices to market, the security of these devices has
often fallen in priority, making them easier to exploit. This drastically
threatens the privacy of the consumers and the safety of mission-critical
systems. While a number of research endeavors are currently taking place to
address the IoT security problem, several challenges hinder their success. These
include the lack of IoT monitoring capabilities once such devices are deployed,
the shortage of remediation techniques when they are compromised, and the
inadequacy of methodologies to permit the comprehension of the underlying IoT
malicious infrastructures. To this end, this project will serve NSF's mission to
promote the progress of science by developing data science methodologies to
identify and remediate infected IoT devices in near real-time. The project will
also promote cyber security research and training for minorities and K-12
students. Moreover, the project will contribute to operational cyber security by
developing a large-scale cyberinfrastructure for IoT-relevant data and threat
sharing, enabling hands-on cyber-science at large. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will scrutinize close to 100 GB/hr of real-time unsolicited Internet-
scale traffic to devise and develop efficient deep learning classifiers to
fingerprint IoT devices, identifying their types and vendors, and disclosing
their large-scale vulnerabilities and hosting environments. The project will
design and develop fast greedy approximation algorithms for L1-norm Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) data-dimensionality reduction, enabling the real-time
execution of the Density Based Spatial Clustering of Application with Noise
(DBSCAN) technique for detecting and attributing IoT orchestrated botnets. The
project will also design scalable offensive security algorithms based on
Internet-wide active measurements to offer macroscopic remediation strategies.
The project will curate close to 3.5 million malware samples/day and around 1.3
million passive DNS records/day to build graph-theoretic models to uncover and
characterize inter-related components which form the concept of IoT malicious
cyberinfrastructure. Further, the project will analyze the evolution of such
infrastructures to comprehend their modus operandi by devising efficiency graph
similarity techniques in linear time, by designing and implementing algorithms
rooted in graph kernels and min-hashing methods. The project will also (i)
develop a unique cyberinfrastructure for IoT empirical data and cyber threat
indexing and sharing, (ii) automate the devised algorithms and techniques by
leveraging high speed, in-memory data processing technologies, (iii) generate
IoT-specific detection signatures by exploring fuzzy hashing algorithms, and
(iv) enable at-large access to the generated IoT artifacts through a secure API
and a front-end mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.