* 1953667
* Preparing Underrepresented STEM Students for Success through Academic and Summer Research Opportunities
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Hannah Wingate, Houston Baptist University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2023
* USD 347,870.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to prepare diverse
students for participation in a high impact summer research program.
Underrepresented students are less likely to earn undergraduate STEM degrees
than the general population. As a result, the STEM workforce does not reflect
the diversity of the nation's population. The project seeks to identify and
provide diverse students the skills necessary to complete their STEM academic
curriculum and be competitive in the STEM workforce. Through a partnership
between Houston Baptist University (HBU) and the University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, this project aims to increase the number of diverse
students participating in high impact undergraduate research experiences (UREs).
The project will develop and provide activities that will prepare students to
succeed in the URE as well as enter the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to identify and also provide
students with the skills and experience necessary to be competitive
undergraduate research programs as well as the STEM workforce. Undergraduate
research experiences (UREs) have been shown to increase student engagement in
their undergraduate studies, understanding of their field of study, and interest
in graduate school. The goals of this project are to 1) prepare students for
success in summer research by focusing on the specific skills necessary for work
in STEM careers, 2) engage students in sponsored and mentored summer research
and experiential professional development opportunities, and 3) retain students
in the STEM academic pipeline. Ten students per year, for three years, will be
trained for the URE via a preparative program. Students will also participate in
novel, meaningful research that will be presented at undergraduate research
symposiums. Through formative and summative measures, the project seeks to
increase in the retention of students in STEM majors, submissions of
applications to STEM graduate programs, or the number of students entering the
STEM workforce. Additionally, the preparative program's curriculum will be
publicly available through a website. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI program will also generate knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.