* 1953924
* Electron Delocalization in Linear Heterotrimetallic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* John Berry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2023
* USD 490,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program within the Chemistry Division of the National
Science Foundation is funding a research project under the supervision of
Professor John Berry of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The project
explores new approaches to electronics used in electrical circuits and
computers. Specifically, the project evaluates the electrical conductivity of
molecules containing chains of metal atoms. New metal-containing compounds are
being prepared that have a linear, wire-like structure. These molecular wires
are only one metal atom thick, making them the thinnest circuit connection
possible. In order to test these molecular wires, three design aspects are being
tested. One aim is examining new molecules to attach the metal chains to
electrodes. The linker group, a sort of a chemical solder, must attach strongly
to both the wire and to the electrode. A second aim focuses on modifying the
chemical sheathing that surrounds the wire, which affects the energies (voltage)
of the electrons within the wire. The third aim is exploring diverse metals that
comprise the wire itself. Of interest is the influence of particular metals that
may change the conductivity or resistance of the wire. This research provides
students with hands-on experience. A number of artistic and scientific outreach
efforts are underway to encourage curiosity and public awareness of this area of
science. Professor Berry helps with the Wisconsin Crystal Growing Competition, a
program intended to recruit young students into STEM-related activities.
Similarly, Professor Berry and his students are participating in the Pre-College
Enrichment Opportunity Program for Learning Excellence, which aims to diversify
the chemistry workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Chemical Synthesis Program
within the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation funds the
research project under the supervision of Professor John Berry of the University
of Wisconsin-Madison. This project involve chemical discoveries, but the broader
scientific implications reach fields beyond chemistry, including physics,
electrical engineering, magnetism, and computer science. The project examines
the electrical properties of compounds containing one-dimensional metal atom
chains. The most synthetically versatile class of such compounds are the
extended metal atom chains (EMACs) and heterometallic extended metal atom chains
(HEMACs), particularly those supported by 2,2ʹ-dipyridylamide (dpa) and related
ligands. The researchers probe and tune electron delocalization. The broader
goal is to assess the utility of these wire-like compounds as nanoscale
components in molecular circuitry. The team collaborates with physical chemistry
groups to assess electron delocalization in new HEMACs. A major goal is to
assess the hypothesis that electron transport through HEMACs is gated by
intramolecular, low-energy metal-metal stretching vibrations. To support these
collaborative efforts, specific synthetic experiments are designed to assess
fundamental properties related to single-molecule conductance: anchor group
effects, modulation of frontier orbital energies for electron/hole transport,
and systematic tuning of the metal atoms within the chains for molecular
rectification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.