* 1953168
* Collaborative Research: Flexible Statistical Models to Blend Massive Geostationary-Derived Climate Data Records
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Bruno Sanso, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 229,989.00

Land surface albedo is the fraction of incoming solar radiation reflected by the
land surface. It is an essential climate variable as identified by the Global
Climate Observing System. An international effort involving institutions from
the USA, European Union, Japan, Switzerland and Korea is dedicated to obtaining
geostationary images from five different satellites. Those satellites have
overlapping areas for which two different measures of albedo are retrieved. The
project will develop blended global albedo products that account for the
discrepancies between the different retrievals and quantify the uncertainty in
the resulting albedo values using probabilities. The project will leverage the
expertise of two PIs to develop state of the art methods that can capture the
variability in time and space of climate variables that are observed from a
constellation of geostationary satellites, like cloud characteristics, wind
speed and direction, snow cover, and precipitation, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute geostatistical methods
with a model-based approach to analyze, interpolate and make inferences for a
multivariate spatial field, featuring a non-stationary spatial process, indexed
in a continuous space. The scalability is achieved thanks to a local
neighborhood conditioning structure. Computations will be performed fast and
concurrently, satisfying global coherence through a hierarchical structure. The
model-based nature of the proposed approach allows to account for complex
observational errors, perform non-homogeneous multivariate spatial regression,
and combine observations obtained at different levels of spatial aggregation.
Extensions to spatio-temporal models are seamlessly obtained incorporating
space-time interactions within a parsimonious hierarchical
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.