* 1953796
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Comparative and temporal biodiversity genomics of Ethiopian Highland montane forest passerine birds
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ben Marks, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 252,034.00

Humans have impacted Earth’s landscape, including large scale forest
fragmentation. While researchers have documented ecosystem degradation or
species loss due to human impacts, how populations of particular species have
reacted to forest fragmentation has been less studied, particularly in regions
without long term monitoring. With increasingly fragmented habitats and smaller
population sizes, forest species are more susceptible to chance extreme natural
events, and reduced within-species genetic variation decreases future adaptive
potential. Using forest songbirds from the Ethiopian Highlands as a model system
to study population changes through time, the researchers will measure current
and past genetic variation and population demographics using contemporary
samples as well as archival samples from ~100 years ago housed in natural
history collections. Consequently, this project will provide insight about how
the past century’s forest fragmentation has impacted population trends in
forest-specialized species. The information and results generated by this
project will be used to improve STEM education, including formal undergraduate
and graduate training in genomics research as well as development of a new
research-focused undergraduate genomics course at Texas Tech University. Museum
specimens used in this research will be utilized to increase public scientific
literacy and engagement, including digital and in-person outreach through the
Brain Scoop YouTube video series and hands-on science discovery at the Grainger
Science Hub at the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago, both using bird
specimens from the 1920s-40s to show how museum specimens may be used for
understanding changes in biodiversity through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will determine how forest fragmentation has shaped temporal population
genomic variation in Ethiopian montane forest passerine birds (Aves:
Passeriformes) over the past 100 years. Using whole-genome sequence data from
modern and historical sampling, the researchers will estimate demographic
histories, genetic diversity within populations, genetic differentiation between
populations, and relative rates of gene flow to test hypotheses about (1)
spatiotemporal patterns and processes of diversification, (2) species-specific
characteristics (e.g., dispersal ability) shaping diversification, and (3)
patterns of population genomic diversity generation, maintenance, or erosion
through the past century. The project’s final products will include open genomic
resources for several species of Ethiopian forest birds, science communication
of results via presentations, reports, and manuscripts for audiences in the US,
Ethiopia, and globally, and student training in all aspects of the research
including field studies, genomic sequence generation, bioinformatics, and
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.