* 1953096
* Conference on Unexpected and Asymptotic Properties of Projective Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Alexandra Seceleanu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2023
* USD 14,803.00

This National Science Foundation award supports the Conference on Unexpected and
Asymptotic Properties of Projective Varieties that will take place on May 15-17,
2020 in Lincoln, Nebraska. In the intervening fifteen years since the previous
conference on varieties with unexpected properties took place in Sienna, Italy,
the state of the art in this area of research has undergone tremendous
developments. Despite numerous foundational advances, there are many classically
studied problems that still do not have a satisfactory resolution. The
conference will highlight the transformative developments undergone by this area
of research in recent years and formulate new directions for future research.
Towards this end, we will bring together experts in the field and carefully
select participants to ensure involvement of students and junior investigators
and of individuals from groups under-represented in the mathematical sciences.
Further details can be found at the conference website http://www.math.unl.edu/~
aseceleanu2/BrianFest2020.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic of the
conference is anchored broadly in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry,
with a focus on interpolation problems in algebraic geometry and asymptotic
invariants of homogeneous ideals. The overall objective of this conference is to
bring together experts in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry to confer
on three topics of common interest: symbolic powers of ideals, asymptotic
invariants of linear systems, and unexpected varieties. Despite the diverse
contexts in which these notions arise and the many areas they exhibit
connections to, each of these topics is closely related to the others.
Communication among mathematicians working on these topics is vital and has
already led to significant progress. The relatively small size of the meeting
and its disciplinary focus will be particularly effective at enabling
participants to establish productive collaborative
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.