* 1953975
* Imaging and Quantifying Lipid Membrane Asymmetry in Living Cells with Sum-Frequency Vibrational Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* John Conboy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 473,822.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A), Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) and Chemical Measurement and Imaging
(CMI) Programs of the Chemistry Division, Professors John Conboy and Markus
Babst of the University of Utah are exploring the structure of cell membranes.
Cell membranes are composed of various types of molecules, but their major
constituents are lipid molecules, which themselves are composed of long oily
hydrocarbon chains that avoid contact with water (hydrophobic), and one end that
contains phosphorus and or oxygen atoms that make that end prefer to be in the
presence of water (hydrophilic). Cell membranes are actually two layers of lipid
molecules; the long hydrophobic chains on the two layers face each other inside
the membrane, and the hydrophilic head groups are exposed to watery environments
inside and outside the cell. In living cells, the membrane can be asymmetric; in
other words, the number and specific kinds of lipids in the inner and outer
lipid layers are different. The current theory of cell membrane structure
assumes that this asymmetry is due to the action of another class of molecules
present in cell membranes called flippases and floppases. These are proteins
that are thought to control movement of lipid molecules from one side of the
cell membrane to the other. Professors Conboy and Babst hypothesize that
membrane asymmetry can arise without flippases and floppases in the membrane,
and simply through inner membrane wall interactions with proteins inside the
cell. In order to test their hypothesis, Professors Conboy and Babst are using a
special technique called sum-frequency vibrational microscopy that can reveal
the molecular structure of the lipid molecules in a membrane as well as the
motion of these molecules from one layer to the other. One goal of the project
is to directly measure and generate images of lipid asymmetry in living cells
for the first time. This research project seeks to reveal new fundamental
insights into how large complex molecules interact with each other to form even
larger assembled structures. The findings of this project are likely to
influence how we think about living systems. This project is the vehicle for
advanced training of two graduate students and two undergraduate researchers. In
addition to formal training activities, the Conboy and Babst research groups are
participating in public outreach activities to bring science to a wider
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current view of the cell membrane was
established in the early 1970’s by Singer and Nicolson. The fluid-mosaic model
they proposed portrays the membrane as a “liquid-like” bilayer of lipids,
cholesterol, and proteins, exhibiting rapid and free diffusion in the two
dimensions parallel to the membrane surfaces. In stark contrast, the exchange of
lipids between the leaflets of a bilayer was presumed to be prohibited by the
large energetic barrier associated with translocating the hydrophilic lipid
headgroup, through the hydrophobic membrane core. This static picture of lipid
translocation (or flip-flop) has been a long-held belief in the study of
membrane dynamics and is the basis for the current theories regarding the
bilateral organization of cell membrane components, particularly
phosphatidylserine (PS) asymmetry. We hypothesize that spontaneous PS flip-flop
is a common, facile process in vivo. This prediction raises the question: How
does the cell maintain PS asymmetry in the plasma membrane? Our hypothesis is
that in vivo PS localization to the cytosolic leaflet of the membrane is driven
by electrostatic interactions with cytoplasmic proteins, in particular, the
proteins comprising the cytoskeleton. Our proposed model of PS asymmetry and the
currently accepted view differ in that our model suggests a very dynamic
membrane system, over the more conventional “static” picture of lipid asymmetry.
This dynamic behavior changes the current theories regarding the creation and
maintenance of lipid asymmetry; however, it also simplifies and unifies the
explanation of many known lipid phenomena. Our hypothesis is being tested by
construction of a unique sum-frequency vibrational microscope capable of
directly quantifying and imaging lipid asymmetry in living cells and measuring
native lipid flip-flop in vivo for the first time. The students engaged in this
project are gaining knowledge and experience in rigorous physical and
biophysical concepts as well as advanced imaging techniques based on nonlinear
optical processes. Outreach activities include engagement of K-12 schools in the
Salt Lake Valley, especially Catholic schools that serve higher percentages of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.