* 1953806
* An Atomistic Experimental Investigation of Fracture in Transitional Metal Dichalcogenides
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Horacio Espinosa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2024
* USD 474,999.00

Transition metal dichalcogenides, a family of two-dimensional materials, have
shown unique optical, electrical, and thermal properties that enable emergent
applications in batteries, solar cells, electronics, and sensors. In all these
applications, failure by fracture is a major concern. Under this project, the
aim is to advance the fundamental knowledge of failure in transition metal
dichalcogenides, and to establish robust experimental and computational
protocols that are applicable to similar studies on other nanomaterials. In this
regard, this project would pave the way to establishing methodologies for
reliability and life prediction analyses. This project also presents excellent
training opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, offering
exposure to cutting-edge instrumentation in a rapidly developing new field of
science. The educational components of this project will leverage the
Northwestern University International Institute of Nanotechnology research
experience for undergraduate program to provide opportunities for minority
students to gain exposure to an energizing research environment. Additionally,
the students and postdocs participating in this project will create a YouTube
channel to explain, to a wide audience, fundamental concepts of two-dimensional
materials, in situ experimentation, and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
performing fracture testing using microsystem technology and in situ aberration-
corrected transmission electron microscopy (TEM), the aim is to fill current
gaps of scientific knowledge including quantification of the fracture toughness
and the effect of atomistic defects (vacancies, dislocations, etc.) and phase
transitions on transition metal dichalcogenides fracture behavior. The validity
of current molecular dynamics simulations by comparing predicted atomistic
configurations and mechanisms to measured ones will also be assessed. The
atomistic studies will reveal whether defects such as vacancies, dislocations,
and phase transitions nucleate around crack tips, and their role on toughness.
Moreover, the ultrahigh resolution of transmission electron microscopy will
enable the calculation of strain fields around the crack tip and therefore
fracture toughness quantifications. The following fundamental questions will be
answered: 1) What is the range of applicability of the Griffith fracture
criterion? When are nonlinear effects important enough to call for the use of
the J-integral fracture criterion? 2) Which types of atomic structures/defects
emerge from crack tips? 3) How do defects (vacancies and dislocations) affect
mechanistically and quantitatively the fracture behavior? 4) Do phase
transformations predicted by density functional theory occur and if so, how do
they affect the fracture process? By scientifically answering these questions,
it is anticipated that this study will provide insights and quantitative
information of value to the engineering community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.