* 1953350
* CDS&amp;E: Extracting Models from Data - A Novel Data-Driven Simulation Strategy for Reacting Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* James Sutherland, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2024
* USD 453,220.00

Numerical simulation of reacting flows of real systems is computationally
challenging because of the large number variables involved. This research will
develop a new data-driven modelling approach that directly incorporates
information from canonical or reference test cases to extract simplified models
with user-defined error limits. In particular, novel machine learning concepts
will be used to generate simplified models that are suitable for use in
practical, engineering-scale simulations. Such computationally efficient models
can have a direct impact in addressing a range of relevant energy and
environmental problems, for example oxy-fuel combustion (for easier CO2 capture
and sequestration), pollutant and particulate formation in stationary and mobile
combustion systems, etc. The techniques developed here are also applicable to
other fields where many reaction manifolds or pathways exist such as in plasma
physics or atmospheric chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many systems in nature
evolve along manifolds, which are smooth and reduced complexity subspaces of a
parameter space which satisfy, often unknown, physical constraints. However,
developing models to describe this evolution is challenging. A key challenge to
this modeling approach is dealing with the source terms that arise in the
reduced order model. These are a reflection of the source terms in the full
(high-fidelity) model, but must be well-parameterized by the reduced-order model
parameters without causing unphysical behavior like divergence near manifold
boundaries and spurious source/sink points. This will harness the power of data
science to characterize the geometry of the low-dimensional manifold and use
that information to improve the behavior of the derived models. Extracting the
low-dimensional model is challenging because it requires identifying a moderate
dimensional shape where gridding and meshing techniques which scale
exponentially in dimension will fail. This work will instead be limited by
properties such as boundary curvature and vector field acceleration which are
well-controlled for most physics-defined systems. Moreover, these models will be
learned in a robust manner consistent with a simple physical model, in spite of
noise in training data which may otherwise result in spurious critical saddle
points in the resulting vector field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.