* 1953733
* RET Site: Arkansas Data Analytics Teacher Alliance (AR-DATA)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Shengfan Zhang, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

This award establishes a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site in
Arkansas, entitled Data Analytics Teacher Alliance (AR-DATA). The University of
Arkansas will partner with school districts within the Northwest Arkansas region
to promote research-driven high school analytics curriculum and education,
reaching underserved students, such as those from rural areas in Arkansas. At
least thirty 9th-12th grade mathematics, computer science, and pre-engineering
teachers will work with faculty mentors, graduate students, curriculum coaches,
and industry experts in a 6-week RET Summer Program and academic-year follow up
to develop and disseminate learning modules to enhance current curriculum,
attain new knowledge of data analytics and engineering applications, and benefit
professionally through the RET program activities. The learning modules
developed will reflect current cutting-edge research in analytics as well as the
development needs of next-generation analytics workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AR-DATA RET program will help prepare 9th-12th grade
students for higher education in engineering and for the urgent needs in the
analytics workforce in Arkansas. AR-DATA will emphasize a teaming approach to
provide a culture of communication and facilitate the success of idea exchange
between the teachers and faculty mentors. The instructional materials developed
by the RET participating teachers will be shared and disseminated at the local,
state, and national levels for broader outreach. This RET site aims to provide a
successful example for designing and management of an RET program in rural areas
and generate more interest in developing RET programs in Arkansas. This program
will also effectively integrate research, real world applications, and classroom
teaching through strong partnership and active engagement among university
professors, graduate student researchers, industry mentors, and public school
administrators and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), Division of Engineering Education and
Centers (EEC), and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.