* 1953466
* Combing Andragogy and Pedagogy to Help First Generation, Low Income Students Succeed in Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Antonio Garcia, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 03/31/2025
* USD 2,382,460.00

Using Methods and Principles of Adult Learning to Help First-Generation, Low-
Income Students Succeed in Engineering &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from
the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI
Program), this Innovative Cross-Sector Partnership project aims to foster upward
social mobility by improving the rate at which first-generation students from
low-income families graduate with an engineering degree. Persistently low
graduation rates lessen the impact that universities play in facilitating social
mobility. Hispanic Serving Institutions are well-equipped to improve access to
college opportunities for first generation students, students from
underrepresented groups, and students from low-income families, but often
struggle to make math, science, and engineering curriculums relevant. Current
engineering education practice does not adequately engage with industry to give
students professional motivation, skills, and certifications. This leaves many
low-income, first- generation students uncertain as to how their education
relates to their current and future economic security. Less than half of
engineering majors finish with engineering degrees that would qualify them for
high paying jobs and technical careers. This project will focus on mentoring,
career readiness, industry-accepted certifications to augment the engineering
curriculum through engagement in flexible learning communities. Industry
partnerships, innovative intervention strategies, and research findings will be
used to foster STEM-identity and studentâ€™s understanding, appreciation and
interest in STEM, known indicators for first-generation STEM degree completion.
Anticipated outcomes of the project include an engaged community of career-ready
advanced student learners supported by evidence-based intervention strategies,
industry partners, and university faculty and staff prepared to contribute to
their success. Approximately 800 students will be directly supported in the
industry-mentored, adult learning experiences. The 5-year goal is to increase
the graduation rate in engineering for first-generation college students and
those from low-income households by 50%. The innovative partnership with
industry to prepare students and help them acquire certifications will show
first generation students and their families that real-world skills are valued
by the university, and that they are achieving important milestones each year of
their higher education (not just at the end). Higher (engineering) education in
the US is being pulled in different directions to balance critical, reflective,
and deep thinkers while providing tangible skills. By acknowledging this tension
and building curriculum maps that intentionally blend the two directions, this
project and partnerships will promote a new path to satisfying societal needs
based on the unique attributes of Hispanic Serving Institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test how andragogical (adult) learning
methods, implemented in collaboration with industry, is linked to persistence
within a traditional engineering curriculum at a majority-minority Hispanic
Serving Institution. This study will follow students longitudinally to
investigate how cross-sector collaborations influence educational outcomes and
occupational success. Surveys will be used to investigate how activities that
balance and blend andragogy and pedagogy contribute to student persistence by
promoting the growth of engineering identity and professional confidence. Early
results from the research will be used to integrate adult and industry-mentored
learning into materials such as curriculum maps, catalog descriptions, websites,
and student advising software. Continuous assessment of the outcomes will
contribute to engineering education knowledge and stimulate discussion on how
institutions can utilize learning communities and industry partnerships to
improve the retention and subsequent social mobility for first generation, low
income students. In addition to publications and conferences, project generated
resources and findings will be dissemination through the HSI Resource Hub, a
network of more than 450 HSIs, including those that receive little or no prior
NSF support. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.