* 1953803
* Smart regulation of thermal infrared radiation with meta-structured metal-insulator transition
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Junqiao Wu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 04/30/2023
* USD 358,813.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Infrared (IR) images are produced by IR cameras
capturing thermal IR radiation from hot objects. This process has a wide range
of applications in night vision, thermography, remote sensing, medical imaging,
and building monitoring. Despite extensive efforts, true innovations are sought
to meet the needs of the rapidly advancing modern society. IR imaging is a two-
step process. Power is radiated from a hot surface and then converted to an
electrical signal by an IR camera. Current efforts to improve thermal imaging
sensitivity focus on improving the camera, because the radiated power is
believed to be limited by a physical law that dictates the amount of IR power
radiated from the object at given temperature. Consequently, the temperature
sensitivity for IR imaging is limited to ~ 0.04 degree C. However, this
sensitivity is not fine enough, and prevents some critical applications of IR
imaging. The PI will advance IR imaging by overcoming the physical law that
limits radiated power. The PI will develop a coating material that drastically
boosts the radiated IR power within a selected temperature range. This will
effectively amplify the effective temperature variation of the object into large
variation of IR imaged temperature. As a result, the temperature sensitivity of
IR imaging with a conventional camera is improved by a factor of over 15, to
below 0.003 degree C. Such an improvement enables sensitive detection of weak
defects in integrated circuits, early diagnosis of sub-skin tumors, and
inspection of sub-surface building cracks. The coating material can also be used
to implement switchable radiative cooling to cool a surface when its temperature
is higher than the preset temperature. The new devices to be developed and
deployed will push the boundary of thermal imaging and radiative cooling much
beyond the state-of-the-arts, promising great values for potential
commercialization. Integrated with the research effort, the PI also proposes an
educational program that will stimulate and prepare pre-college students for
careers in engineering pertaining to infrared
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to demonstrate smart, previously non-existing thermal IR regulation devices
for ultra-sensitive sub-surface IR imaging and switchable radiative cooling. The
PI plans to accomplish the goal by re-imagining the Stefan-Boltzmann law of
thermal radiation by lifting its limitation, to achieve orders of magnitude
enhancement in IR imaging sensitivity. Materials with metal-insulator transition
integrated with plasmonic resonance enable a large switching in thermal
radiation, a property not found in any conventional materials. The metal-
insulator transition is engineered with doping and plasmonic resonance to
achieve unprecedented physical properties of temperature-dependent emissivity,
which are the key innovations in this proposal. Tungsten-doping substantially
expands the working temperature range of vanadium dioxide, while micro-patterned
metaphotonic design reverses and amplifies the contrast in IR radiation across
the transition. The resultant switching in surface emissivity at tunable and
preset temperatures lays the materials foundation to smart regulation of thermal
IR radiation: drastic enhancement in IR imaging sensitivity, and switchability
in radiative cooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.