* 1953527
* Conditional Quantile Random Forest with Biomedical and Biological Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Ying Wei, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Modern biology and biomedical science are experiencing a wave of machine
learning applications as biological data sets become increasingly larger and
more complex. Among them, random forest is particularly appealing and has gained
great popularity in biology studies, genomic data analysis, and biomedical
science. They offer great flexibility in modeling the complex data and
associations, while still enjoy certain levels of interpretability and
transparent decision mechanism. The project aims to develop a new framework of
conditional quantile random forest (CQRF), which largely generalize the existing
approaches. The project will investigate its potential in advancing biology and
biomedical science with focused applications analyzing electronic medical
records and genomic data. Once carried out, the research work potentially lead
to new knowledge discoveries and new precision interventions in biomedical
science. The project also provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Handling complex and heterogenous associations is
one of the major challenges to obtain meaningful inferences in big data
applications. Machine learning methods including random forest have been
successful in capturing the heterogeneity in the covariate space. In many
applications, researchers have observed that the associations of interest could
vary by the outcomes. The research builds on the conditional quantile regression
in recursive sampling partitions and predictions, which further extends the
flexibility to adjust for the heterogeneous association across the outcomes. The
build-in conditional regression models also make the inference possible, which
is another critical consideration for the medical applications of machine
learning approaches but have not been well explored and understood. As a result,
the conditional quantile random forest provides a more accurate predictions and
risk assessment, enhances the statistical power for detecting biomarkers, and
provides a new way for treatment selection. In the meantime, the developed
framework is built on a quantile model with high-dimensional interactive
function, which is new in the literature of quantile regression and could
significantly enhance the capacity of quantile regression in large-scale
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.