* 1953035
* Collaborative Research: Machine Learning Theory and Algorithms for Differential Games, with Applications in Economics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Jean-Pierre Fouque, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) has been applied in many scientific fields,
including imaging, computer vision, and materials science. However, the study of
the application of AI to differential games and economics is still in its
infancy. Differential games, as an offspring of game theory and optimal control,
provide the modeling and analysis of conflicts in the context of a dynamical
systems. Domains of applications include management science, economics, social
science, biology, and national security. One of the core objectives is to
compute Nash equilibria that refer to strategies by which no player has an
incentive to deviate. The research aims to break the tractability barrier in
computing these Nash equilibria by using, developing, and studying appropriate
Machine Learning algorithms. The project also provides research training
opportunities for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major bottleneck
comes from the notorious intractability of finite-player games, which makes the
direct computation of Nash equilibria extremely time-consuming and memory
demanding, especially for a large number of players. The problem of efficiently
and accurately computing Nash equilibria for stochastic differential games with
a finite number of heterogeneous players is addressed by developing play-based
Deep Neural Networks algorithms. Infinite-player games will be solved by new
Reinforcement Learning algorithms developed in the context of Mean Field Game
theory for competitive games and Mean Field Control theory for cooperative
games. Applications to economics and finance problems such as Systemic Risk and
Investment/Consumption are considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.