* 1953926
* Palladium-Catalyzed Aerobic Allylic Oxidations: Mechanisms and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Shannon Stahl, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Shannon Stahl to design agents that
speed chemical reactions (catalysts) to perform specific chemical
transformations (oxidize organic molecules with oxygen). Oxidation processes are
important chemical reactions for the production of commodity chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, and agrochemicals. Unfortunately, chemical oxidations usually
use reagents (oxidants) that are toxic, are more powerful than needed and result
in a large number of unwanted by-products, and/or generate waste that is harmful
to the environment. Professor Stahl and his group at the University of
Wisconsin–Madison are developing catalysts that oxidize chemical feedstocks
called alkenes with oxygen; this oxidant generates only water as a by-product.
These studies address the efficiency of the catalysts, trying to make them
longer-lasting and more selective. This research program trains graduate and
undergraduate students to become part of the chemical workforce and to recruit
underrepresented minorities to STEM disciplines. In addition, important safety
protocols are being designed to work with oxygen and organic molecules on large
scale and thus, this research has important industrial
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selective oxidation of C–H bonds is a key
challenge in chemical synthesis and in the chemical industry, as it enables more
efficient synthesis of novel and known chemical structures. Professor Stahl and
his group are developing and characterizing palladium catalysts that mediate
selective oxidation of allylic C–H bonds using molecular oxygen as the terminal
oxidant. The resulting allylic carboxylate products are versatile intermediates
in numerous synthetically-useful, secondary functionalization reactions.
Research efforts explore strategies to enhance the stability of the Pd catalysts
as a means of achieving high turnover numbers. Approaches towards this goal
include the design of new ligands and the identification of reaction conditions
that enable the catalysts to have intrinsic thermodynamic stability. Mechanistic
studies play an important role in this effort, aided by innovative mechanistic
tools such as a high-pressure NMR reactor capable of continuous on-line delivery
of O2 and gas-uptake kinetic analysis. These fundamental studies focused on the
achievement of practical goals, and the concomitant development of important
safety protocols, provides a strong training environment for a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.