* 1953210
* Collaborative Research: New Methods, Theory and Applications for Nonsmooth Manifold-Based Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Shiqian Ma, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 11/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Massive high-dimensional data are ubiquitous in many scientific and engineering
disciplines, such as bioinformatics, computer vision, neuroimaging, and signal
processing. This proposal is motivated by emerging tools for analyzing data from
these disciplines, such as nonsmooth, manifold-based learning with high-
dimensional and multidimensional data. Building on the synergy among statistics,
machine learning, and optimization, this research will focus on the development
of new optimization algorithms and theory for nonsmooth manifold optimization.
The project will also build on existing optimization strengths to develop new
methods and theory in statistics and machine learning. Software packages will be
developed to make the research outcomes readily available to other researchers
and practitioners. In addition, the project will enhance the future technical
workforce through the training of graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
known that statistical modeling of high-dimensional data may include the non-
smooth regularization in the objective function, and some may even involve non-
convex manifold constraints such as orthogonality constraints. The manifold-
based learning offers a powerful framework for dimension reduction and signal
processing. The combination of non-smooth regularization and non-convex manifold
constraints brings new opportunities and challenges for designing optimization
algorithms with convergence guarantees and also for developing new statistical
methods and theory. The research outcomes of this project will provide new
powerful analytic tools in nonsmooth manifold-based learning with theoretical
guarantees. Software packages will be developed to make the research outcomes
readily available to other researchers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.