* 1953763
* Work-focused Experiential Learning to Increase STEM  Student Retention and Graduation at Two-year Hispanic-serving Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Maria Reyes, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 03/31/2025
* USD 2,495,568.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project seeks to provide students with
mentored work experiences in computer information systems. Students will have
access to on-campus work experiences and externships in businesses and
industries. Examples of potential student projects include mobile application
development, cybersecurity, and computer support. It is expected that these
experiences will increase undergraduate student interest, persistence, and
success in computer information systems, as well as in STEM more broadly. To
ensure that they are well-prepared for and gain the most from their work
experiences, students will receive training on employability skills such as
communication, teamwork, and project management. During their work experiences,
students will be mentored by faculty, industry professionals, and peers. To
strengthen the capacity of faculty to serve all students, including Hispanic
students, the project will provide faculty with professional development focused
on equity mindset. The framework to provide mentored work experiences will be
developed and piloted at Phoenix College, then expanded to four other two-year
HSIs in the region. The project also intends to expand this framework to other
STEM fields. Through this work, the project aims to develop a replicable model
for how two-year institutions can develop work experiences that foster increased
student graduation and entry into STEM career
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to examine how a curriculum
that integrates cross-sector partnerships to provide work experiences can
enhance STEM learning and retention. Using mixed methods and grounded theory,
this project will expand knowledge about: (1) the impact of cross-sector
partnerships that support work-focused experiential teaching and learning; (2)
systematic ways to maintain and better use cross-sector partnerships; and (3)
the degree to which a model of work-focused learning experiences can be adopted
at other two-year HSIs and by other STEM fields. Expected results of the project
include: development of sustainable mechanisms to foster cross-sector
partnerships; increased student retention and workforce readiness; and
measurable successes for STEM students, particularly Hispanic students, at two-
year HSIs. Significant findings and research results will be presented at
meetings of the HSI STEM Hub, at conferences at professional societies that
support HSIs, and in academic publications. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge about how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.