* 1953246
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Towards computational discovery of synthetically feasible porous organic frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ian Hill, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 29,984.00

Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) belong to an emerging class of organic
materials with low density, high thermal stability, and stable porosity, with
applications including molecular separations, catalysis, energy storage,
semiconductors, drug delivery, and single-molecule sensors. They are constructed
via dynamic covalent assembly of organic building-block (BB) molecules, a
process wherein the BBs essentially polymerize to form an extended crystalline
material. The COF “universe,” i.e. the set of all possible COF structures, is
vast and potentially comprises billions of potential candidates with varying
pore size and geometry, chemical composition, and functionality. Only a small
fraction of this “universe” has been synthesized so far, although new COFs are
continuously being reported. Nevertheless, there are still very few reported
COFs with more than two types of pores, a critical shortcoming because COFs with
combinations of pore sizes hold promise for enhancing catalysis under
confinement, molecular separation processes, and gas storage applications. A
prominent idea for designed synthesis of COFs, known as reticular chemistry, is
to identify rigid BB molecules that can be uniquely assembled into the desired
COF pattern via covalent bonds. While extremely useful, the related chemical
design is often implemented manually, and is therefore not scalable to more
complex topologies nor is it able to enumerate the vast space of COFs. In this
context, the goal of this research is to develop a computational method to
automatically generate synthetically feasible 2D covalent organic frameworks
with multiple pore sizes and thereby guide experimental efforts to synthesize
complex structures. Synthetic feasibility considers whether the building
block(s) can be easily created using known chemistries and starting materials
and easily assembled into the requisite crystalline COF
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research brings together tools from
cheminformatics, reaction network generation, advanced molecular simulations,
and artificial intelligence to create an automated method to identify COFs that
can be synthesized using easily available starting materials and proven organic
chemistries. This method will be used to create a database of COFs with complex
(in particular heteroporous) topology. Given a target structure, the method will
identify the necessary building block structure and its chemical functionality
via coarse-grained molecule-like patchy particle simulations. The resulting
information will be used to generate potential molecular building blocks using a
reinforcement learning-based biased automated network generation process. The
synthetic complexity of these molecular building blocks will then be evaluated
using cheminformatics tools and algorithms. For the most synthetically feasible
molecules, their synthesis routes will be generated using the concept of
retrosynthesis via automated network generation. The end result of this process
will be a list of theoretically determined synthetically feasible COFs, their
building blocks, and their synthesis routes. Such lists will be compiled for
each tiling and ranked based on the synthesis scores. A few of the most
promising COFs identified through this strategy will be verified experimentally
in a bottom-up assembly involving synthesis of the building blocks and their
assembly using orthogonal reaction chemistries. To integrate research and
education, the PIs will employ the concept of student-led creation of original
scientific research content as part of curricular training, or “class sourcing,”
by designing course projects wherein the cumulative expertise of the entire
cohort of students is leveraged to identify strategies to synthesize new
building blocks and thereby improve rules for network
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.