* 1953791
* Understanding the Consequences of Interactions between Deep Convective Storms and Large Cities
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Jason Naylor, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 337,676.00

Large cities can have significant impacts on local weather due to land-use
characteristics. The Urban Heat Island is the most well-known consequence of
cities, but prior research on precipitation and lightning has provided an
indication that cities can also affect the location and strength of
thunderstorms. This award provides funding for a numerical modeling study of the
potential for urban storm modification with a specific focus on severe weather
potential. The intent of the study is to determine which storm processes are
most affected by an urban area and which urban features are most likely to
modify significant storms. The output from this work will provide operational
forecasters with additional information relevant to public safety. The award
will also help to train the next generation of scientists through support of
students and the development of learning modules for K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to improve the understanding
of interactions between deep convective storms and large urban areas. Most prior
research in the area of storm-urban interactions has focused on weakly-forced
events and/or the resultant precipitation from those storms, and the community
has not coalesced around the dominant mechanism for storm modification (Urban
Heat Island (UHI), flow obstruction, aerosols, moisture). This study will
consist of a large parameter space study to investigate the cause-and-effect
relationship between urban parameters and storm modification. The first step
will be a CM1-based set of ~150 idealized sensitivity experiments, with grid
sizes &lt;250m. The WRF-ARW would then be used to examine instances of storm
modification in real-data cases around Louisville, KY using a 10-member ensemble
approach. The UHI will be adjusted by assimilating data from a network of 30
observation sites around the city. Finally, the observational network will be
used to analyze the spatial variability in convective rainfall amounts. The
overarching questions that the proposal would address are: 1) Which in-storm
processes are most strongly affected by an encounter with a large urban area?,
2) What are the consequences of city-storm interactions as they relate to severe
weather potential?, 3) How do different urban features impact the modification
of deep convective storms?, and 4) What is the effect of environmental wind
shear on urban modification?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Physical and Dynamic Meteorology program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.