* 1953544
* RET Site: Research Experiences for Teachers in Biologically-inspired Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Na Gong, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 608,628.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site at
the University of South Alabama. In-service middle school and high school
teachers from Mobile and Baldwin County Public Schools will spend six weeks each
summer engaged with research activities focused on biologically-inspired
computing. The RET teachers will be guided by an interdisciplinary group of
faculty from the University of South Alabama as well as industry partners on
discovery-based research projects in the area of neuromorphic systems,
biologically-inspired systems to support machine learning applications. The RET
teachers will design standards-compliant curriculum modules which they will
implement in their classrooms during the academic year and conduct workshops for
other teachers. The teachers will also participate in many professional
development activities during the summer research activity and the academic
year. This project should develop a lasting relationship between the university,
the K-12 schools, and the surrounding community that can help to build a strong
educational foundation in the schools supported by the university and the other
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RET site is anchored by a compelling
computing and engineering research area, neuromorphic systems. The research
projects span applications, architecture, circuits, and devices that enable
future computing systems. The projects build on the expertise and on-going
research of the faculty mentors. The technical areas to be investigated include
novel imagery collection techniques and image processing algorithms for cancer
detection, spiking neural network algorithms for imagery data, new power-
efficient memory architecture and circuits to support the algorithms that are
developed, and new memristor device-based neuromorphic system design for better
prediction and accuracy. The research will provide teachers around for
developing creative course modules in mathematics, physics, biology, chemistry,
engineering, and technology that align well with state and national curriculum
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.