* 1953751
* STEM Course Transformation: Cultivating a Culture of Entrepreneurial Mindset and Undergraduate Research
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* David Alexander, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 2,200,001.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to increase the number of
STEM degrees and underrepresented minority (URM) student representation, while
at the same time transforming the STEM undergraduate experience. At California
State University, Chico, low pass rates in lower division courses impede student
progression in STEM, and URMs experience higher repetition rates than their non-
URM peers despite having met similar admission criteria. With the largest
attrition of STEM students occurring in the first two years, the project targets
large enrollment courses with low pass rates to implement high impact practices
designed to increase student success. High impact practices include increasing
student participation in research experiences and entrepreneurial activities,
recognizing that such experiences may yield disproportionate benefits to URMs
while supporting STEM identity formation, retention, and increasing professional
preparation and social integration for all students. CSU, Chico will implement
Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) including the
integration of entrepreneurial skills development as the Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience and Entrepreneurship (CURE-E) model. Faculty
training and development is a central feature of the project. A summer institute
offers an interactive workshop to introduce faculty to inquiry-based learning,
assessment strategies, rubrics, and educational technologies. Faculty members
will participate in ongoing professional learning community sessions, and
returning faculty trained in previous summer institutes will share their
experiences and best practices. By increasing retention and graduation rates,
this project has the potential to help fill critical gaps and broaden
participation in the US STEM workforce by increasing the number of trained STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific aims of this project are the
implementation of the CURE-E model into 15 STEM barrier courses; STEM
entrepreneurship toolkit; faculty and student research and innovation symposium;
faculty training and development in the CURE-E summer institute; and educational
research and project evaluation activities. To understand how the CURE-E model
transforms classroom experiences for STEM undergraduate students, the research
will focus on the faculty leading the re-design and implementation of the STEM
barrier courses using the LifeGrid methodology. This research tool is used to
collect and analyze qualitative data, specifically the instructorsâ€™ external and
internal experiences as they implement the CURE-E model. Expected outcomes
include enhanced quality of undergraduate STEM education showing a decreased
achievement gap between URM students and non-URM students in STEM; increased
undergraduate retention and graduation rates; and contributions to the research
literature on professional development of instructors adopting the CURE-E model.
The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity
at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge
on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.