* 1953298
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Advances in closure modeling for turbulent flows with finite-sized particles informed by massive simulations on heterogeneous architec
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Shankar Subramaniam, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 262,072.00

Suspensions of solid particles immersed in a fluid – either gas or liquid – are
important in many industrial systems and in many natural processes. Multiphase
computational fluid dynamics to predict the behavior of these systems relies on
making approximations to the appropriate equations. As a result, some important
phenomena, such as the aggregation of solid particles in the flow, are not
accurately predicted. The formation of particle clusters in gas-solid flows
results from complex interactions of the particles with the gas and the
particles with each other. This collaborative Computational and Data-Enabled
Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) project will develop a modeling framework
for particle clustering in gas-flow problems enabled by massive simulations
using highly scalable codes. Numerical techniques developed by the researchers
at the three participating institutions will be integrated to formulate a
consistent and scalable framework for solving problems in which particle
clustering is significant. The results will enable researchers to tackle
problems involving particle clusters such as chemical looping combustion,
biomass fast pyrolysis and carbon dioxide capture applications. Computational
data generated in the project will be available to researchers through a web-
based interface. The researchers will use the project to develop educational
tools to engage a broad public audience, especially middle and high school
students, in displays of the fundamental principles underlying flows of particle
suspensions in a gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle-resolved Direct Numerical
Simulation (PR-DNS), which can resolve microscale particle-fluid interactions
and point-particle direct numeric simulation (PP-DNS), which can model inter-
particle collisions, will be integrated with pseudo-spectral techniques, which
have the potential to accelerate computations for gas-solid flows. Highly
scalable PR–DNS and PP-DNS codes will be developed to leverage new algorithmic
advances in (a) turbulence simulation using the pseudo-spectral approach on
heterogeneous architectures and (b) efficient scaling with number of particles
in Eulerian-Lagrangian multiphase flow solvers to perform massive PR–DNS and PP-
DNS of canonical clustering flows on scales needed to demonstrate particle
clustering. Consistent scalable closures will be developed for volume-filtered
Eulerian-Lagrangian formulations and PP-DNS and PR-DNS. A consistent averaging
operation will be applied on the PR–DNS data that explicitly takes the resolved
scales into account, resulting in new unclosed terms that have yet to be
quantified in a two-phase context. Novel closure techniques using machine
learning will be employed to evaluate the functional form of the new terms. To
maximize their impact on model development, the source codes and canonical
multiphase flow data generated in this project will be archived in an open-
access database available to the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.