* 1953839
* Experimental and Computational Maps of Electron Density Distributions in Molecules: New Benchmarks for Quantum Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Peter Weber, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Peter M. Weber and his
students at Brown University are using an X-Ray Free Electron Laser to explore
how electrons are arranged within molecules. Molecules can be roughly described
as positively charged atomic nuclei surrounded by a cloud of electrons. Bonding
between adjacent atoms occurs when the density of negatively charged electrons
between the positive atomic nuclei is high. The Weber research group seeks to
generate maps of electron density within molecules. These electron density
distributions determine all molecular properties and, by implication, the
properties of all materials. In addition, electron density distributions
determine how chemical reactions proceed, and the quantities and types of
reaction products that are generated. Measuring electron density distributions
in molecules for reacting states is therefore important to our understanding of
fundamental chemistry and has myriad implications in industrial chemistry. A
unique aspect of Prof. Weber’s research is that electron density distributions
are being measured not only for molecules in their lowest “relaxed” energy
states, but also in their excited states, where the electron densities have been
altered by laser pulses. By directly comparing the experimentally determined
density maps to those generated by computational models, advances in
computational techniques can be made. The project is providing training for
students in advanced experimental methodologies, offers them experience at a
National facility (SLAC), and also gives them experience in complex computer
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses first on the ground state
density distributions in a range of model systems. They include sulfur
hexafluoride, aromatic and conjugated systems such as phenol and 1,3
cyclohexadiene, and heterocyclic molecules such as pyrazine. Absolute scattering
intensities are obtained by calibrating with atomic systems such as argon and
neon. In a second phase of the project, excited state electron density
distributions are obtained for excitation to valence states or Rydberg states.
Model systems for this part include 1,3 cyclohexadiene as well as di-amines,
such as diazabicyclo[2,2,2]octane. Technical innovations of the scattering
experiment develop an absolute calibration of the scattering intensity,
measurement of the shot-by shot pulse energies of the laser pulse that brings
the molecules to the electronically excited state and the x-ray pulse that casts
the scattering pattern, and an improvement in the time resolution. The latter is
achieved by implementing a special set of up-conversion optics with very short
harmonic generation crystals. Finally, innovations in the analysis of the data
focus on the iteration between experimental data and computational models with
the aim to determine the three-dimensional electron density distributions. Data
codes are developed to calculate excited-state scattering patterns based on
high-level ab-initio wave functions. The broader impact of the research includes
the improvement of computational codes that are widely used in chemistry and
related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.