* 1953774
* Supporting Sustainable Evolution of Electrical Energy Systems via Closed-Loop Consumer Behavior and Market System Modeling
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Lei Wu, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2024
* USD 417,800.00

Energy and power systems generate many societal benefits, such as reliable and
affordable electricity, jobs, and economic growth, but they also produce harmful
emissions and waste. Two approaches to reducing the environmental impacts of the
electricity grid are (1) to promote a greater penetration of renewable energy
sources such as solar and wind power, and (2) to reduce the total amount of
electric energy consumption through behavioral changes. However, such large-
scale changes raise important questions and concerns about secondary impacts on
the workforce, energy costs, and grid reliability. Thus, the success of an
electricity grid transformation will be influenced by the closed-loop decision-
making of various stakeholders, including government regulators, power
companies, and consumers. Viewing this as a multi-agent system, this proposal
seeks to generate new knowledge on stakeholder behavior and explore novel
approaches for electricity system modeling. An improved system model that
incorporates a deep understanding of consumer behavior can support producer and
policy decision-making regarding the portfolio of power sources, messages
directed toward consumers, availability of incentives, renewable energy program
offerings, and other policy alternatives. Through more informed producer and
policy decisions, the U.S. electricity sector will be able to grow in a more
secure, resilient, and sustainable manner. In addition, this proposal will
advance interdisciplinary education through cross-disciplinary teaching, student
research opportunities, and conference workshops to promote collaborative
research, thereby contributing to more well-rounded graduates for the future
U.S. workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research involves three
thrusts: (1) consumer behavior experiments, (2) multi-agent market system
modeling, and (3) integrated consumer and market simulation testing for
usability and value to decision-making and trade-off analysis. In Thrust 1,
consumer behavior experiments will examine electricity choices, investigating
how social norms and incentives impact consumer energy use, the likelihood of
purchasing more efficient products, and the likelihood of opting into renewable
energy credit programs. This will lead to an improved fundamental understanding
of consumer attitudes and behaviors related to electricity choices. These
experimental results from Thrust 1 will inform the creation of an agent-based
model of an electricity system in Thrust 2, which will be used to examine how
different assumptions, model architectures, and policy scenarios affect the
system-level outcomes. This will provide evidence on the suitability of complex
systems modeling approaches and structures for simulating energy market systems,
as well as baseline policy and intervention analysis results. Finally,
experimental vignettes conducted with energy industry and policy decision-makers
in Thrust 3 will examine the simulation's usability, perceived value, and key
findings, serving to both validate the system model and provide directions for
future work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.