* 1953999
* Mesh-free resolvent analysis for operator-based discovery of large-scale coherent structures: implementation and the example of the stratified wake behind a sphere
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Oliver Schmidt, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 319,047.00

Flow instabilities and large-scale coherent structures (e.g. vortices) often
lead to faster heating and unwanted drag on aerospace vehicles and can be
inherent in the formation of weather events such as tropical cyclones.
Predictive physics-based modeling tools for large-scale coherent structures in
turbulent flows are needed in computational aeroscience, natural science, and
environmental engineering. Novel numerical approaches will be developed to
better simulate technical and natural turbulent flows in three-dimensional
complex geometries. The goal of the dissemination strategy is to make the
numerical tools developed in this project freely accessible to researchers from
diverse backgrounds and disciplinary areas. In addition, the new tool will be
used in graduate level courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research identifies an
opportunity to facilitate high-order accurate resolvent analyses of complex
flows as they occur in nature and in engineering. A key-enabler for the proposed
methodology is a recent break-through in the computation of mesh-free radial
basis function discretization. In contrast to methods that approximate the
discrete Jacobian from residual evaluations, the proposed method permits the
adjustment of the accuracy of the discretization to arbitrarily high order, uses
a mesh-free approach that significantly simplifies the discretization of complex
domains and local grid refinement, and works as a stand-alone tool that can be
applied to flow data from different numerical or experimental sources. To
demonstrate the capabilities of the developed technology, the project
investigates the wake flow behind bluff bodies in density-stratified flows.
Motivated by the theoretical correspondence between operator-based resolvent
modes and empirical modes computed using spectral proper orthogonal
decomposition, the research conducts a comparative study of stratified wake
physics using both methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.