* 1953884
* CAS: Can the Ionic Character of 1st Row and the Covalency of 2nd and 3rd Row Transition Metals Converge?
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Peter Wolczanski, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 760,000.00

General Public Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The Chemical Synthesis Program of the
Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation supports the research of
Professor Peter T. Wolczanski of Cornell University. The project seeks to train
candidates in the fields of metal-centered chemistry. Most commodity (bulk) and
fine (pharmacological) chemicals are synthesized utilizing catalysts. These
catalysts are typically transition metal compounds that accelerate the rates of
reaction. Many of these catalysts use metals that are in low abundance, toxic,
and expensive. This program is studying the synthesis of cheaper catalysts, but
they must be modified by organic materials -- termed ligands -- in order to
provide the chemical reactivity necessary to replace the current generation of
catalysts used in industry. One general solution being explored is the
investigation of ligands that promise to render the cheaper metals more
versatile or adaptable. Another general approach is to synthesize metal systems
that will underpin truly transformative processes: the preparation of compounds
that are capable of multistep chemical reactions. A specific application targets
the synthesis of complexes using propellar-shaped molecules that rupture to give
what are called alkylidene ligands. Synthesis of alkylidene-metal compounds
would have broad implications for the advanced manufacturing within the U.S.
chemical industry. The Cornell group is also supports STEM education of 5th
grade and high school students. The STEM efforts include lecture materials and
hands-on training modules. These activities are helping to strengthen the
workforce available to support the US chemical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation
supports the research program of Professor Peter T. Wolczanski of Cornell
University. The project seeks to train PhD candidates in the fields of inorganic
and organometallic chemistry. The research identifies several reactions that are
potentially transformative in regards to commodity (bulk) and fine
(pharmacological) chemicals production. Typical transition metals used in
catalysis are in low abundance and costly, and the work proposes to supplant
these species with inexpensive 1st and 2nd row species. Various ligand platforms
that display redox non-innocence, including a reversible C-C bond formation, are
employed to expand the redox capacity of several first-row metals. Other 3-
coordinate chelates are also involved in H-transfer chemistry to further expand
the scope of reactivity. Exploration of ionic vs. covalent bonding is
fundamental to the work. Transfer HX and H2 additions, akin to transfer
hydrogenations, and processes like hydroformylation, are targeted with early
metal systems. Specific systems show potential for tandem CH activation in
conjunction with olefin metathesis, leading to a net exchange of H2 for CH2, and
one tridentate ligand has the potential for an alternate polymerization
mechanism to Ziegler-Natta. Unique strained reagents are employed as alkylidene
generators for numerous transition metals, as replacing expensive Ru-based
olefin metathesis catalysts is an important target. The production of
independent, versatile PhDs capable of adapting to a challenging and fluctuating
academic or industrial market is a major objective, and the further development
of Charge Distribution Via Reporters (CDVR) as a pedagogical alternative to
formal oxidation states will continue to be tested. The Cornell group is also
preparing a general 5th grade outreach program for publication based on
experience, and is developing a related outreach program for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.