* 1953009
* Collaborative Research: Solar Energy Harvesting, Photothermal-Photovoltaic Dual Modality Building Skins towards Energy Neutral Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Donglu Shi, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 304,883.00

Residential and commercial buildings account for 40 percent of the total energy
consumption in the United States. New concepts at the intersection of materials
science and architectural and civil engineering present opportunities to achieve
highly energy-efficient buildings. A building skin has been conventionally
considered as a weather-resistive barrier. This research offers to transform the
building skin to an active system capable of harvesting sunlight with varying
energy outputs according to seasonal changes. This is achieved by applying
nanoscale thin films to building skins that are multifunctional and active for
energy harvesting, conversion, and utilization. Glass-based high-rise building
skins provide the ideal material for applying the energy harvesting nanoscale
thin films. The thin films will be engineered to offer two major functions,
where photovoltaic or photothermal effects are switched alternatively depending
on seasonal needs. In summer, the photovoltaic effect is used to transform the
solar energy to electricity for building use. In winter, the solar energy is
converted to heat to reduce heat loss in the buildings. This research will lead
to transformative impacts towards achieving energy-neutral civil infrastructure.
Educational programs will be established for K-12 and underrepresented minority
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a
multifunctional building skin capable of efficient solar harvesting for dual
modality energy outputs (thermal or electric) controlled based on seasons.
Principally, both photothermal and photovoltaic films share the same optical
characteristics: strong UV/NIR absorptions with high visible transmittance, the
only difference is the form of energy output. Compared with multi-pane glazing,
single-panes are practically not viable due to rapid heat transfer through
building skin. If a spectral-selective thin film is applied on a window surface,
the skin surface temperature can be increased from 25 °C to &gt; 50 °C via the
photothermal effect. This effectively reduces thermal energy loss from the
interior. In this way, thermal insulation can be achieved optically without
intervention medium. On the other hand, the undesirable solar infrared in summer
can be compensated by the same thin film but in a different modality:
photovoltaic. Absorption of large infrared irradiation not only reduces cooling
energy but generates electricity for other appliances. Fundamental mechanisms
will be investigated on the relationship between spectral selectivity and
nanostructures that enable the most efficient energy harvesting and
conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.