* 1953177
* Fractional Viscoacoustic Wave Equations: Mathematical Analysis, Efficient Simulations, and Applications to Full-Waveform Inversion of Seismic Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yanzhi Zhang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Seismic waveform inversion is a widely used technique in the oil and gas
industry as well as in geophysical research. This technique is among the most
powerful subsurface imaging techniques; its success relies on both an accurate
model of seismic wave propagation and efficient numerical computation for the
practical implementation. This project addresses fundamental mathematical and
computational issues in these two aspects and thus is of central importance for
various applications, including imaging of the Earth's interior, subsurface
exploration in the oil and gas industry, monitoring in carbon sequestration and
geothermal facilities, and earthquake engineering. Students will be trained
through involvement in the interdisciplinary research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this research are to
build mathematical and computational treatments for fractional viscoacoustic
wave equations, to provide efficient and accurate modeling algorithms, and to
further construct the viscoacoustic full-waveform inversion algorithm of seismic
data. The fractional viscoacoustic wave equation, accounting for both seismic
attenuation and dispersion in wave propagation, opens a promising direction to
study seismic waves with attenuation. However, its nonlocality introduces
considerable challenges. This project will involve systematic research in
mathematical analysis, numerical simulations, and geophysical applications of
data inversion, validation, and applications. On the theoretical side, the
nonlocal properties of the fractional viscoacoustic wave equation will be
investigated. On the numerical side, numerical analysis and efficient algorithms
will be developed for its effective simulation. Building on these results,
implementation issues for the viscoacoustic full-waveform inversion associated
with fractional viscoacoustic wave equations will be addressed. The validation
of the full-waveform inversion will be carried out with both synthetic data and
field data from the Frio Formation carbon dioxide sequestration site in
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.