* 1953679
* Building Capacity: An Undergraduate STEM-Enrichment Program in Texas
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Marcus Ynalvez, Texas A&M International University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,649,197.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to research the
educational support and instructional activities that increase the quality and
number of STEM graduates from underserved groups of students such as Hispanic,
female, low-income, and first generation. The project will introduce important
STEM knowledge and skills plus other academic support (tutoring and mentoring),
in addition to video project assignments, to improve students’ sense of
belonging, confidence, and identity with STEM disciplines. Consequently, this
programming will lead to enhanced minority STEM students’ academic performance
and progress toward timely graduation. Through professional formation
experiences, this project will prepare students to graduate and work in critical
U.S. sectors such as agriculture and food, energy, health care and medicine,
cyber and information technologies, and national security. The research will
disseminate new knowledge to other universities and colleges to help
institutions implement new instructional strategies. Overall, the project’s
expected outcomes will produce novel strategies to improve and enhance
undergraduate STEM education for minority students across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the project are to implement
several enrichment strategies on selected Texas A&amp;M International University
STEM students with the aim of improving GPA and time to degree. These strategies
will include a pre-college summer camp to provide participants with a head start
on the STEM-introductory classes critical to progressing in their majors, a two-
semester STEM research methods seminar series, and an undergraduate STEM
research experience. Tutoring and supplemental instruction sessions will also be
included. Half of the participants will be randomly assigned to work on STEM-
related creative video assignments. The methodology embeds an experimental
design, treatment, and control groups. The project will test whether the
enrichment strategies lead to have higher GPAs and an improved path toward
timely graduation. The project will also create professional developmental
opportunities in the form of academic learning opportunities; STEM-internships
and/or STEM-incubatorships; and mentorship of program participants The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.