* 1953849
* Rheology of Multi-Phase Mantle Rocks to 800 km Depth
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Donald Weidner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 607,388.00

A quantitative description of the plastic properties of mantle rocks at mantle
conditions has long been the pursuit of geoscientists, as these properties
control the motion of plates, define the nature of earthquakes, and constrain
the evolution of the Earth. Over the last decade, a series of experimental
technique breakthroughs have enabled the team to deform rock samples with
controlled flow rates and at the pressure and temperature relevant to the
Earthâ€™s interior. However, even with increased knowledge on the rheological
properties of minerals such as olivine, pyroxene, garnet, periclase, perovskite,
etc., the flow law for a real rock sample is still unknown. An establishment of
flow laws for composite rock requires not only the properties of its
constituents, but also the understanding of interactions among them. Synchrotron
X-ray radiation coupled with multi-anvil high pressure deformation apparatus,
the current state of the art technique for rheological experiments, is the
team's tool to probe these interactions inside the rock under mantle conditions.
In this project, the goal is to (1) define the flow law of the rocks at
conditions spanning the region from the upper mantle through the top of the
lower mantle using peridotite as the sample. (2) Pursue specific mixing
scenarios that will give added insights into the rheological properties of
regions actively undergoing phase transitions and to better understand regions,
such as the lower mantle, where there is a mixture of a very strong phase and a
very weak phase. This project will support the training of a graduate student,
and develop and extend novel experimental tools on national X-ray synchrotron
beamline facilities that are open to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this project is to provide an
experimentally based reference for the viscosity of the mantle as a function of
depth to 800 km. The data will naturally include the effect of mineralogical and
compositional changes with depth due to pressure-induced phase transitions. By
measuring rheological flow laws of a model mantle rock, the investigators expect
to see the total effect of depth on the rheological properties. By comparing the
rock data with olivine data, one can identify the contribution of the multi-
phase aggregate properties to the effective flow law. The effect of mixing will
be addressed not only with the mechanical deformation data but also on a
microstructure level with post-experiment study of the final sample. This study
will use multi-anvil high pressure deformation equipment at synchrotron
facilities that have already provided deformation conditions to pressures
equivalent to 600 km depth. This project will further develop the capabilities
to achieve 800 km conditions for the highest-pressure measurements. The
synchrotron X-ray provides stress and strain data in situ allowing documentation
of sample evolution during deformation. In addition, stress is determined from
the analysis of each diffraction peak yielding information about the stress
partitioning between the minerals, and for each mineral, between sub-populations
of grains that share a common crystallographic orientation relative to the
stress field. All of this information constrains the deformation process in each
mineral and the relative strengths of each mineral. This project will develop
techniques suitable for synchrotron high-pressure research. The proposed
research has potential to open new frontiers by combining different techniques
and applying them to high pressure in situ studies. In particular, the
experimental protocol that enables these experiments to 400 km depth is
currently developed. This research program will refine the experimental tools to
enable the experiments to pressures equivalent to 800 km depth. This will expand
the national research base for high pressure deformation studies. The techniques
that evolve from this project will be open to all users of the beamline through
a proposal system to all scientists interested in carrying out these high-
pressure experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.