* 1953907
* Stochastic Prepreg Platelet Molded Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2024
* R. Byron Pipes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 495,005.00

The prepreg platelet molded composite (PPMC) is a discontinuous fiber composite
material form produced by molding of unidirectional fiber prepreg tape
platelets. The PPMC material meso-structure allows molding of complex geometries
to achieve enhanced specific strength and stiffness and thereby compete with
performance of conventional structural metals at significant weight reduction.
Large-scale heterogeneity of the stochastic meso-structure in a PPMC produces
substantial uncertainty in macroscopic mechanical properties and a range of size
effects and “atypical” macro-structural responses, wherein macro-structural
geometry does not exclusively define the failure location. These characteristics
are poorly understood in the absence of physics-based predictive capabilities
and this creates significant obstacles to widespread adoption of PPMCs for
structural applications. Insights from this project will lead to improved
understanding of how the probabilistic and deterministic parameters of PPMC
meso-structure translate into uncertainties in macroscopic performance of the
composite and which parameters have the most impact. The research will promote
the discovery of new, efficient PPMC material compositions and designs tailored
to specific structural applications needed by the aerospace and automotive
industries, thus advancing national prosperity. This research effort will train
a diverse group of students in various aspects of composites engineering and
contribute to the formation of the next generation of scientists that the U.S.
composites industry critically needs to compete globally. In addition, this
award will support inclusion of undergraduate students from underrepresented
minority groups to serve a mission of broadening educational
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program aims to study the
fundamental failure mechanics of PPMC by developing high-fidelity computational
models. The objective of this activity is to derive the material structure-
property relationships associated with the interactions between the macro-
structural geometry, stochastic meso-scale morphology, and platelet geometry.
Probability distributions of effective mechanical properties and relevant
failure modes are required inputs to deduce the structure-property
relationships. The property distributions will be obtained via the statistically
validated numerical simulations (“digital twins”) of standard mechanical tests
for composites following the design of experiments principles. The methods that
will be employed for virtual material testing are probabilistic modeling (Monte-
Carlo approach) and physics-based progressive failure analysis; thereby,
leveraging computational damage mechanics and finite-element methods.
Statistical significance methods will be utilized to investigate the effect of
the control parameters on the composite property distributions. The results of
probabilistic modeling will be statistically validated by the experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.