* 1953574
* Novel Approaches to Modifications of Nucleosides and Related Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mahesh Lakshman, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Mahesh K. Lakshman in the Department of
Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry at The City College of New York. Professor Lakshman
is working with graduate and undergraduate students to develop ways to modify
nucleosides, which are molecules that are the building blocks of DNA and RNA.
Modified nucleosides are important because they are used in medicinal
applications, as plant cell growth stimulants, and as probes for understanding
biological processes. Nucleosides consist of two linked parts: a sugar and a
base pair. This program is focused on determining how to use a mild oxidant to
change the structure of the base pair and to attach the base pair to the sugar
portion of the nucleoside. Since nucleosides have many reactive parts, these
studies are determining how to control the modification procedures to give a
single product. This work is also establishing a fundamental understanding of
the reactivity of mild oxidants with nucleosides. Professor Lakshman’s research
group is ethnically and gender diverse, contributing to the diversity of the
future workforce. These students obtain professional hands on experience in
planning, developing, and performing chemical reactions, as well as soft skills
such as teamwork, oral and written dissemination of scientific information, and
communication abilities. Professor Lakshman has been associated with significant
research infrastructure development and outreach activities, where the latter
has providedyoung students with hands-on experience in science. It also allows
for parents to interact with faculty and to understand the role of science,
which serves to better a general understanding and perception of science,
education, and research, and their impact on
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nucleosides are an important class of biomolecule
due to their presence in all living systems. Modified nucleosides have been
developed for medicinal purposes in the control of cancer and viral diseases, as
detection tools, and as probes of biochemical and biological processes. The
development of new ways to synthesize unknown nucleoside structures will provide
access to new applications. Professor Lakshman is developing oxidative coupling
processes to modify purine and pyrimidine nucleosides and to connect base pairs
to sugars. This project is using iodonium reagents to achieve these
transformations and is applying fundamental reactivity studies to determine
trends that will facilitate the prediction of selectivity. These studies are
overcoming challenges with nucleoside modification due to the inherent
reactivity of these compounds. Professor Lakshman’s diverse research group
includes students at all educational levels (Ph.D., MS, 5-year BS-MS, and
BS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.