* 1953070
* STTR Phase I:  Multifunctional Trilayer Membrane for a Stable, Scalable and Economical High Energy Capacity Li-S Battery with Long Cycle Life
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Vilas Pol, VALGOTECH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will address concerns about the shortage of materials
for Lithium-ion batteries as the number of electric vehicles increases. Lithium
Sulfur (Li-S) batteries offer an opportunity because sulfur is more readily
available, lower cost, and environmentally friendly. Unlike lead-acid batteries,
Li-S batteries do not require use of sulfuric acid or other environmentally
harmful chemicals. The global Li-S battery market will grow at an estimated
annual rate of 70+% in the next 10 years, with a growth of nearly $700 M in
2018-2022. The proposed project will accelerate the development of advanced Li-S
batteries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to address
important technical challenges like inferior reversibility and poor safety
(stability) of the Li metal anode. Equivalent circuit network (ECN) models will
be developed for simulating the performance of the new Li-S cells. Accurate and
appropriate models are necessary for applications of Li-S batteries. Through
experiments, systems modeling, and simulation, these objectives will be
accomplished: 1) Gain better understanding of Li-S electrochemistry with a new
cell using an advanced membrane, 2) Study effects of different operating
parameters, such as the charge and discharge rate on the cell performance, 3)
Conduct preliminary studies on the effect of temperature on the Li-S cell
performance, 4) Demonstrate and report high energy and long cycle performance in
Li-S pouch cell, 5) Li-S cells (coin and pouch cells) will be fabricated and
their performance studied at different charge/discharge rates and temperature
levels using precise testing equipment. The data will be used for ECN model
development and simulation studies. The potential outcome(s) of the project
include development of a new Li-S pouch cell incorporating an advanced composite
membrane to enable the cell to have a capacity of over 400 Wh/kg and
demonstrated cycle life of over 500 cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.