* 1953525
* Investigating Community College to PhD: Developing Graduate Aspirations Among Upward Transfer Students in Computing and Technology
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2020
* David Feldon, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 09/30/2020
* USD 688,454.00

The study will investigate whether participation in early intervention
positively predicts graduate school aspirations and enrollment among upward
transfer community college computing students and whether this differs by
gender, race/ethnicity, first generation college status, or socioeconomic
status. The college study also will consider factors that shape their decision
making. The intervention will be implemented across five campuses within the
University of California system, tracking students from the time they transfer
to one of the campuses through matriculation unto graduate programs in
computing. By empirically examining the impact of different aspects of the
intervention, the study will provide guidance for how to most efficiently
promote graduate school aspirations and intentions among upward transfer
students in computing and other STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by
Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT), the study will investigate four research
questions: (1) Does participation in the early intervention program positively
predict graduate school aspirations and enrollment among upward transfer
computing students? Does this differ by gender, race/ethnicity, first-generation
college status, or socioeconomic status? (2) What other post-transfer
experiences predict graduate aspirations and enrollment among upward transfers
in computing? (3) How do upward transfer students experience and make meaning of
the early intervention program? And (4) How do upward transfer students aspire
to graduate school in computing? What factors shape their decision making?
Investigators will employ multiple methods to examine the longitudinal impact of
the proposed intervention and a Staged Innovation Design to analyze the data.
The project could inform the design of pathways from community college to
doctoral programs in computing, thereby, diversifying the computing faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, STEM professional workforce development theme. ECR supports fundamental
research that addresses STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.