* 1953382
* RET Site: Collaborative Research: Research Experiences for Teachers across the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Stephen Ducharme, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program is
hosted by the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) with the
lead at Georgia Institute of Technology and partners at the University of
Minnesota; University of Nebraska, Lincoln; and Northwestern University. This
program, entitled "RET Site: Collaborative Research: Research Experiences for
Teachers across the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure", will
provide a total of 60 (20 per year for 3 years), in-service, high school and
community college faculty (CCF) within commuting distance of the NNCI university
site an opportunity to engage in high-quality, nanoscale science and engineering
(NSE) hands-on research in state-of-the-art nanotechnology facilities at four
NNCI sites for 6 weeks during the summer with 1 week of follow-up activities
throughout the year. The objectives of this program are to grow a multi-site
cohort of educators with research experiences that reflect broad educational,
industrial, and societal NSE activities and link them with the Teaching Nano and
Emerging Technologies Network (https://www.nano.gov/TeacherNetwork); build and
disseminate a library of NSE educational materials; highlight the work of NNCI
cohort by attending the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) conference;
and encourage RETs to present at professional society
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educators will complete a hands-on research
project in NSE during the summer with continuing support during the academic
year. The RET projects will cover a wide range of topics spanning the breadth of
NSE. With support from faculty, mentors, and RET coordinators, the RETs will
develop curriculum materials to bring their NSE research back to their
classrooms. During the academic year, faculty and mentors will visit the RET
classrooms to assist with the implementation and further development of the
curriculum modules. Participating in the NNCI RET program will help teachers and
CCF motivate their students to explore STEM and NSE fields that will provide
them with satisfying and life long careers in the 21st century economy. This RET
program spans four NNCI sites allowing participants access to a wider variety of
NSE research than would be available at a single-site, and exposing participants
to the NSE needs of industry and related career opportunities across the nation.
Webinars will be held across all participating NNCI sites to enable teachers to
learn about NSE industries and careers as well as to discuss their modules. The
RET program will also allow networking opportunities from the widest range of
teacher backgrounds through participation in on-line presentations and webinars,
a LinkedIn group, at the yearly NSTA conference, and at professional society
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.