* 1953892
* Expanding Research and Professional Opportunities for Early-Career Female Mathematicians
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Radmila Sazdanovic, Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/28/2023
* USD 36,550.00

The Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM) will organize workshops and
related events at two major US mathematics meetings: Joint Math Meetings (AWM
Workshop at JMM, Jan 6-9, 2021 in Washington, DC) and the Society of Industrial
and Applied Mathematics (AWM Workshop at SIAM, July 6-10, 2020 in Toronto, CA).
The AWM Workshops at the JMM and SIAM annual meetings increase the visibility of
women in mathematics by providing an opportunity for early-career women to
present their work at a national conference. In particular, this award focuses
on supporting participation of graduate students in these events. Increasing the
participation of women and other under-represented groups in the mathematical
sciences is of critical importance to the health of our society and changing the
institutional norms of what a research mathematician looks like. By promoting
the research of early-career women mathematicians, and by creating a tightly-
knit intellectual community centered on shared research interests, these events
will generate new mentoring relationships, new research collaborations, and
increased scientific output in featured research areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each meeting's Workshop has a research focus reflecting a
previously held AWM Research Collaboration Workshop, a week-long event where
participants work together on open research problems. At a particular meeting's
Workshop, leaders in each research field present their research with the
intention of introducing early-career mathematicians (primarily graduate
students) to the current state-of-the-art in their field. Graduate students, in
turn, share their research during poster sessions and small group interactions.
The research topics of the next two workshops include Mathematics of Materials
(SIAM 2020) and Analysis (JMM 2021). These topics span a broad spectrum of
current mathematical problems, and will correspondingly enhance the future
careers of a broad swath of early-career women mathematicians. The Intellectual
Merit of the proposed workshops are inherited from each AWM Workshop: a tailored
research event that brings together mathematicians working in a current, active,
and relevant areas of research. Junior researchers in these areas will
particularly benefit from collaborative events where they are exposed to the
most recent advances in the area, helping accelerate the pace of breakthrough in
that field. More details about the workshops are available at https://awm-
math.org/meetings/awm-jmm/ and https://awm-math.org/meetings/awm-
siam/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.