* 1953905
* Formation and Evolution of Atmospheric Brown Carbon from Nitrate Radical Initiated Oxidation of Heterocyclic Volatile Organic Compounds
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Haofei Zhang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 724,288.00

Brown carbon (BrC) particles in biomass burning plumes affect climate through
their interaction with radiation and Earth’s energy budget, yet, little is known
about their formation and radiative characteristics. In this multi-PI project,
atmospheric formation and transformation processes of BrC particles are studied
in systematic laboratory experiments using sophisticated analytical tools.
Resulting new mechanistic information will aid in the interpretation of field
observations and inform predictive climate models.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project aims at increasing understanding of mechanisms of atmospheric oxidation
of heterocyclic volatile organic carbons (VOCs) as sources of brown carbon (BrC)
secondary organic aerosols (SOA). Systematic laboratory chamber and flow reactor
experiments will be carried out that mimic nighttime conditions in which
relevant VOCs are oxidized initially with nitrate radical (NO3) and subsequently
aged diurnally with NO3 and hydroxyl (OH) radicals. A suite of on- and off-line
state-of-the-art instruments will be employed to characterize particles’
physical and chemical properties, including size, optical parameters, molecular
composition, and functional groups. In addition, a multiphase kinetic model will
be developed with the data obtained from compositional measurements. The outcome
of this work will aid in the interpretation of observations made in complex real
biomass burning systems and provide fundamental mechanistic information that can
be incorporated into larger scale climate models. Three graduate students will
carry out the bulk of the laboratory work, and a number of undergraduate
students from underrepresented populations will be recruited from existing
programs on the PIs campus. Outreach activities include engagement with local
high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.