* 1953640
* Supporting the Academic Journey of STEM Students through Research and Work Experiences in Puerto Rico
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Karlo Malave-Llamas, Sistema Universitario Ana G. Mendez, Incorporado
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,370,713.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project focuses on enhancing
undergraduate STEM education, with the goal of increasing the success of low-
income students in STEM degree programs. The project proposes to do so by
providing students with discovery-based research experiences and career
development opportunities. The project team expects that these experiences will
increase students’ self-efficacy and, thus, improve their overall academic
performance. In addition, the project team expects that students will become
more interested in pursuing graduate studies or STEM careers. The project will
establish collaborative partnerships and alliances with industries and
institutions in Puerto Rico to develop the internships. Participation in these
internships is expected to help students develop the skills needed to succeed in
STEM careers, thus broadening participation in the STEM workforce. By the end of
the project, the University expects to increase the first-year retention rate to
80% in Biology and Biotechnology Bachelor of Science bachelor's degree programs.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project's objectives include providing research
experiences and career internships to STEM students with the expected outcomes
of clarifying, refining, and reinforcing students' persistence in STEM fields.
The specific goals of the project include implementing discovery-based research
experiences in first- and second-year biology courses to spark students’
curiosity and develop their scientific identities. After their third year, STEM
majors will engage in professional development activities and have access to
internships. The effectiveness of project activities will be evaluated through a
mixed-methods research design, integrating quantitative and qualitative data to
assess and understand the underlying factors affecting students' performance in
STEM academic programs. The project ultimately aims to enhance the academic
experience of low-income students, particularly Hispanic students, leading to an
increase in retention rates in STEM programs. Dissemination of this project's
objectives, activities, outcomes, and findings will occur through publications
and symposia aimed the academic and scientific communities, industry
stakeholders, and the community at large. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.