* 1953509
* Mechanisms linking nutrient acquisition and water-soaking during bacterial infection of plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Scott Peck, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,099,314.00

Plant pathogens negatively affect production of food, fiber, biofuel and
aesthetic crops. Water-soaking, which is the accumulation of fluid in
extracellular spaces of infected plant tissues, is a hallmark symptom of
diseases caused by pathogenic fungi, oomycetes and bacteria. Plant pathogens
must also obtain nutrients from infected host tissues. Despite their central
roles in pathogenesis, mechanistic explanations for how infecting microbes
induce water-soaking and acquire nutrients are lacking. Bacterial pathogens that
causes bacterial speck disease in tomato, the model plant Arabidopsis, and maize
rely on a single, key virulence factor to induce water-soaking. In maize, the
accumulating fluids are also rich in nutrients that support pathogen
proliferation, indicating an inter-relationship in the key processes of water
and nutrient acquisition. These findings along with identification of
intracellular host targets of the virulence factor enable the proposed studies
to elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying the liberation of water and
nutrients from infected plant tissues. The acquired fundamental knowledge of
this key step in pathogenesis will in turn enable breeding and biotechnological
approaches for development of disease resistant plants. Because the key
virulence factor is broadly conserved among diverse plant-pathogenic bacteria,
these strategies will extend beyond tomato and maize to a multitude of
agriculturally important plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prevailing speculation
posits that pathogen-induced release of water and nutrients into extracellular
spaces results from damage to plant cells. However, preliminary data indicate
that Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (Pst) and Pantoea stewartii subsp.
Stewartii (Pnss) deploy AvrE-family type III effector proteins that induce
water-soaking and increase the extracellular abundance of nutritive metabolites
prior to disrupting the integrity of infected plant cells. Additionally,
pathogenicity of Pnss depends on AvrE-family effector induced perturbation of
host phenylpropanoid metabolism, including accumulation of hydroxycinammic acid
amides (HCAAs). Existing and newly generated mutant plants lacking AvrE-family
effector targets, including plasma membrane-localized phosphatases, plasma
membrane-spanning receptor-like kinases, and HCAA biosynthetic enzymes, will
reveal the contribution of these host targets to effector-induced water and
nutrient accumulation outside of intact plant cells. Comparisons of the plasma
membrane (phospho)proteomes of wild-type plants with mutants that do not fully
support the virulence activity of the AvrE-family effectors will enable
identification of changes in protein phosphorylation or abundance that are
genetically linked to these effector-induced perturbations of host physiology.
These physiological, metabolomic, proteomic and genetic analyses will reveal
mechanisms through which AvrE-family effectors regulate the movement of water
and nutrients across the plasma membrane of host cells and place these
mechanisms in the context of the disease state produced by Pst and Pnss in their
dicot and monocot hosts, respectively. More generally, the findings will advance
understanding of how plant pathogens induce water-soaked and nutritive
extracellular spaces in their hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.