* 1953311
* CDS&amp;E: Controlling Protein - Protein Interactions: Computations and Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Stephen Bergmeier, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 466,000.00

There are tens of thousands of proteins that bind with other or identical
proteins. These protein interactions play a critical role in a range of cellular
and physiological functions including gene regulation and immune system
response. As such, aberrant protein association has been implicated in
pathological conditions including metabolic disorders, chronic inflammation, and
cancer. Thus, developing molecules that can control protein interactions would
have a broad impact on numerous scientific disciplines including immunology,
pathology, and cellular/molecular biology. Furthermore, the identification of
chemical agents that reduce unwanted protein interactions would lead to novel
therapeutics and diagnostic tools having important clinical implications. Apart
from the scientific and clinical impact, such studies would also advance
biotechnology, including the manufacturing of specialty proteins and the ability
to probe commercially important biological reaction mechanisms. Thus, there is a
clear need to develop chemical agents that can control protein association. The
overall objective of this project is to employ machine learning tools and
molecular-scale simulation, coupled with experimental validation of the
predicted molecular performance, to rationally design molecules that can control
protein interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program focuses on the
interferon regulator factors (IRF) family of proteins, where protein association
is critical to the function of these proteins. IRFs play an important role in
numerous physiological and pathological processes, such as in the signaling
pathways operative during the immune response to pathogens. The IRF family has
nine known members, providing a wide range of protein associations to study.
Preliminary research has revealed that small organic molecules, like phenyl
methimazole (termed C10), are effective at blocking the association of members
of the IRF family. In this research program, high-throughput searches around the
chemical space of C10, using a combination of genetic algorithms, machine
learning, and molecular dynamics simulation, will be used to find molecules
optimized for binding with IRF members. Studies will be conducted to determine
the specificity of the binders, i.e., are the binders specific to one particular
IRF member or do they behave as pan-IRF binders. Once optimized candidate
binders are computationally identified, they will be procured or synthesized,
and molecular/cellular assays will be used to quantify their ability to inhibit
IRF association. The computational strategies will allow exploration of a large
chemical space to narrow the search to a small number of potential binder
molecules and the experiments will serve as validation for this approach.
Because molecular-level details of how small molecules bind with IRF proteins
will be revealed, the fundamental knowledge generated in this research program
will be applicable in the search for inhibitors of association of other protein
families. The investigators will be involved in a number of outreach activities,
including organizing district-level science fairs and participation in
university-level programs such as the Program to Aid Career Exploration to
advance the Appalachian region of Ohio through
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by Chemistry of Life
Processes in the Division of Chemistry (Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate) and by the Process Systems, Reaction Engineering, and Molecular
Thermodynamics Program of the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (Directorate for
Engineering).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.