* 1953089
* An Electrospinning-Electroplating Process to Embed Electronics into Fabrics for E-textiles and Wearables
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Arash Takshi, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2024
* USD 467,477.00

The market need for wearable electronics and smart textiles is growing rapidly,
however, the integration of advanced electronic circuits to fabrics still faces
technological challenges. This grant aims to explore a two-step sequential
printing method for direct printing of copper conductors on fabrics. An
electrospinning process applies a nanofiber circuit layout on the fabric and an
electroplating process coats and solders the circuit as a standard surface-mount
electronic component. The proposed technique is promising for the integration of
microprocessor-based circuits and smart sensors to garments for developing
wearable medical devices for continuous health monitoring of patients, smart
soldier vests for carrying more gadgets, and smart textiles for monitoring
recreational activities. These advances in e-textiles and wearables greatly
impacts the U.S. economy, health and security. This research is a cross-
disciplinary effort, which leverages recent advancements within the fields of
nanotechnology and electrochemistry. Also, the project plan includes educational
and research activities for underrepresented and female undergraduate and
graduate students and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High printing
resolution of a highly conductive material is needed for the integration of
advanced electronic components on fabrics. The two-step manufacturing process
includes high resolution direct-writing of electrospun conductive polymer
nanofibers on most fabrics followed by hydrogen evolution-assisted
electroplating of copper to metalize the nanofibers and weld them to the fabric
surface. This research aims to study the impact of the structure of the
electrospun polymer layer on the quality of the grown electroplated copper.
Also, an important objective of the project is controlling the electroplating
process to obtain copper nanostructures for conduction and enhanced attachment
of the printed layer to the fabric substrate. Both simulation of the hydrogen
evolution-assisted electroplating and experimental studies of copper printing on
nanofibers is conducted to address the knowledge gap on integrating the two
processes. The research plan includes studying the controlled electrospinning
process and localized electroplating for the design of a printing nozzle system
that can be used for both patterning a circuit layout on fabrics and soldering
standard electronic components at low temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.