* 1953631
* Partnered Internships: Including Families, Faculty, and Industry in STEM Education to Improve Success in STEM Career Pathways
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Nina Goodey, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to provide a greater
understanding of the impact of family support on outcomes for STEM majors,
particularly from underrepresented groups (URGs). We hypothesize that the
proposed project will contribute to the development of a diverse workforce by
exposing URGs to real-world STEM problems through successful cross-sector
partnerships with corporations and organizations. With this project, which
deeply involves faculty and students’ families, we will investigate how cultural
and social networks created from cross-sector partners support student success.
We will examine how to form meaningful partnerships between faculty research
mentors, external internship supervisors, and families to support student
retention in STEM academic programs and sense of belonging in STEM careers. The
findings will be disseminated and guide other institutions in best practices in
involving families in STEM students’ academic and professional activities.
Improving the outcomes of URG students in STEM is essential as the need for STEM
professionals will continue to increase and diverse workforces are more creative
and more productive. To improve sense of inclusion, we place students on diverse
teams. Most research and innovation in STEM is conducted by teams, which have
been proven to have better problem-solving skills when diverse. Institutions of
higher education, including HSIs, will benefit from tools that result in optimal
outcomes for URG STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a new framework
for promoting success among URGs in STEM fields may well change the trajectory
for successful outcomes for students. Understanding what changes to make to the
framework is essential. Our work will contribute to this understanding. This
project will use surveys, focus groups, and interviews to study how cultural and
social norms among Hispanic populations promote or inhibit student interest in
specific career pathways, and if, or how, family norms support (or detract from)
student persistence and graduation. A new STEM family survey instrument will be
developed, validated and disseminated. The findings will reveal best practices
in balancing any STEM-negative influences, educating families on STEM and STEM
careers, and involving family members in students’ academic and professional
trajectories. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (2015) data tells us that URGs are
underrepresented in STEM fields. Further, demand for individuals in STEM career
pathways continues to grow. This project will help guide and inform institutions
of higher education in the design of programs that build on the enrollment gains
from URGs and support students to persist, graduate, and enter STEM fields.
Research into strategies that support improved persistence and graduation rates
are essential to satisfying the unmet demand for STEM-focused, trained
professionals. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.