* 1953535
* Fusion-Inducing Liposomes for Efficient Intracellular Delivery: Continuum Models and Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Annalisa Quaini, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 481,454.00

Bringing mathematical and computational scientists together with biomedical
engineers, this project addresses an unmet and growing need for a simple, safe,
and efficient system to deliver macromolecules to the cellular interior.
Therapeutic macromolecules, for example, peptides and proteins, have tremendous
potential in medical fields but their clinical applications have remained
limited as their delivery is much more challenging compared to small molecule
therapeutics. A promising family of carriers, called fusogenic liposomes, suffer
from a key shotcoming: the high concentrations of fusogenic lipids needed to
cross cellular membrane barriers lead to toxicity in vivo. This limitation may
be overcome by creating liposomes that contain relatively low concentrations of
fusogenic lipids but can present them in dense patches on their surfaces. This
may be achieved through membrane phase-separation, a mechanism that biological
membranes often use to locally concentrate specific lipid species. This project
will apply complementary mathematical, computational, and experimental tools to
(i) design and develop a new class of liposomal carriers, called patchy
fusogenic liposomes (PFLs), and (ii) investigate how the fusogenic patches
affect the ability of PFLs to fuse with cellular membranes. Broader impacts
include training opportunities for participating students. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be trained to work at the interface of experimental
bioengineering, applied mathematics, and scientific computing. Cross-
disciplinary conversations will be fostered by close interactions and joint
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of massive numerical experimentation to
support and complement experimental practice in the design of liposomes requires
highly efficient and computationally cheap numerical methods. Despite recent
advances, molecular dynamics and coarse grain models still feature high
computational costs. This project will focus on sophisticated novel continuum
models and combine them with numerical algorithms and data analysis tools to
produce a highly efficient computational platform. The multiphysics model under
consideration accounts for lateral phase-separation, membrane fluidity, and
electrostatic interaction and its predictive capability will be assessed against
experimental data through a multi-stage validation process. High computational
efficiency in implementing the model will be achieved through physics-based and
directional splitting algorithms for a robust geometrically unfitted finite
element method. Once validated, the software will be systematically deployed to
investigate the role of critical PFL characteristics for membrane fusion.
Ultimately, this project will deliver the design of PFLs that feature minimal
amounts of fusogenic components while maximizing the chances of fusion with
other membranes. The efficient computational methods for surface PDEs and
coupled surface-bulk systems developed for this project could be used for a
large variety of applications, from simulations of tumor growth to modeling of
eukaryotic cell motility. In addition, the newly developed software will be open
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.