* 1953910
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant (DDRIG): Institutional Legitimacy and the Halibut Fishery in Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Christopher Sneddon, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,988.00

Small-scale fisheries are widespread socio-ecological systems that are
especially threatened in the Arctic. In Greenland, small-scale fishers outnumber
large-scale fishers by over 8:1. While small-scale fisheries are culturally,
economically, and socially indispensable, they may be difficult to govern and
access. The perceived legitimacy of institutions that regulate access to
fisheries are poorly understood, even though they have significant impacts on
fisheries globally. This research investigates an Arctic halibut (Reinhardtius
hippoglossoides) fishery and how stakeholders’ attitudes are informed by 1) key
historical, social, and spatial factors that affect fisheries access, and 2)
perceived institutional legitimacy. The results of such research have critical
implications for comparable fisheries in Alaska and elsewhere in the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research employs the “Q” method, developed to
systematically and reproducibly evaluate participant perspectives on issues with
competing viewpoints. Using Q, the investigator will identify and evaluate key
variables in how fishers and other stakeholders perceive the legitimacy of
institutional arrangements governing fisheries. The work will also evaluate the
extent to which perceived institutional legitimacy converges across and within
stakeholder groups, including policymakers, scientists, regulatory agencies,
resource managers, and fishers from different communities. The investigator
hypothesizes that perceived institutional legitimacy is affected by study
participants’ experience and awareness of socio-historical variables, such as
previous regulatory arrangements, and by their location relative to unregulated
fisheries. Use of Q will be complemented with ethnographic interviews and
workshops; statistical analyses will follow data
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.