* 1953135
* LEAP-HI: Understanding and Engineering the Ecosystem of Firearms: Prevalence, Safety, and Firearm-Related Harms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Firearm-related harms are a pressing societal problem that imperils Americaâ€™s
health and prosperity. The US leads high-income countries in both firearm
homicide and suicide rates, with almost forty thousand firearm-related deaths in
2017, surpassing motor vehicle-related deaths for the first time. Fundamental
understanding of the causal relationships among potentially contributing
factors, such as firearm prevalence, state legislation, media exposure, and
perceptions of firearm safety is needed. In an engineering sense, these factors
are linked in complex and dynamic ways. This Leading Engineering for America's
Prosperity, Health, &amp; Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) award supports fundamental
research to extend engineering methods for the understanding of the firearm
ecosystem, as informed by state-of-art research in public health and social
science. Through advancements in complex systems theory, data science, and
hypothesis-driven experiments, the project will provide insights for improving
public safety in the US. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of undergraduate and graduate students at four urban campuses,
which thrive on racial and economic diversity, and expose underserved
communities to engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
first investigate the firearm ecosystem on three different scales. On the
macroscale, research will illuminate cause-and-effect relationships between
firearm prevalence and firearm-related harms. On the mesoscale, the project will
explore the ideological, economic, and political landscape underlying state
approaches to firearm safety. On the microscale, research will delve into
individual opinions about firearm safety. Next, the three scales will be
integrated into a data-driven probabilistic model of the firearm ecosystem to
afford predictions of the system evolution, comparative studies with other
countries, and what-if analyses to improve health and prosperity in the US. This
research will advance the state of knowledge in information-theoretic causality
analysis, multilayer complex networks, dimensionality reduction techniques, and
human-computer interactions toward an unprecedented engineering understanding of
the firearm ecosystem. The techniques developed in this project will constitute
a powerful toolbox that can be utilized in other engineering domains pertaining
to complex systems, where there is a need for statistically-based methods to
elucidate causal mechanisms underlying system dynamics and create predictive
data-driven models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.