* 1953412
* IRES: Track II: The Coastal Processes &amp; Machine Learning Advanced Studies Institute
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Somya Mohanty, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2023
* USD 163,623.00

Coastlines host population centers, infrastructure, diverse ecosystems, and
provide valuable tourism and recreational opportunities. Coastal regions are
also prone to hazards such as storms, sea level rise, and chronic erosion. There
is a growing volume of data available to scientists who study coastal processes
and the future dynamics of coastlines. A range of new tools and methods that can
be used to extract knowledge and insight from these data, especially machine
learning techniques. However these new methods are not typically part of the
graduate curriculum for coastal scientists. This project is focused on
developing an advanced studies institute (ASI) in Auckland, New Zealand to teach
machine learning methods to 20 US graduate students studying coastal processes
and coastal geomorphology. The ASI participants are the next generation of US
coastal scientists, who will get jobs in industry, agency, and academic
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASI is taught by several scientists who focus
on applying machine learning methods to coastal problems. The institute directly
impacts 20 US graduate student participants, and provides a focused experience
for them to develop machine learning skills in a coastal context. The ASI is
designed to leverage resources that are unique to New Zealand, including
multiple high-fidelity datasets. All course materials for the ASI will be built
with open source software and stored in open repositories to facilitate use in
other coastal teaching and learning settings beyond this ASI. A project
evaluation will investigate the ASI learning goals (post-event and
longitudinally). ASI outcomes and learning materials will be disseminated in
print, online, and at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.