* 1953920
* Developing a vision for the future of systematics at the Society of Systematic Biologists conference
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Emily Sessa, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 10/31/2020
* USD 99,603.00

Systematics lies at the heart of biodiversity science, and so identifying and
catalyzing opportunities for connections among systematists, and between
systematists and scientists in other fields, will be crucial if we are to
unravel the complexity of life on Earth, from molecules to ecosystems and
beyond. The field of systematics is advancing at a rapid pace, particularly as
we are now living squarely in the age of "big data". This award will support a
set of facilitated activities at the Society of Systematic Biologists meeting
January 3-6, 2020 at the University of Florida that will generate a multi-year
vision for priorities within the systematics community, focusing particularly on
identifying current grand challenges and opportunities and developing plans for
how the community can respond. Part of the discussion will focus on interactions
between systematics and other fields in biology, as well as geology and computer
science. Invitations to participate in the discussions will be posted on the
conference website and published in the program; additional targeted outreach
efforts will be made to ensure broad participation. Funds will support
attendance at the meeting by a diverse range of participants, particularly early
career researchers, students, and scientists at all stages who belong to groups
underrepresented in systematics and computational biology. Products resulting
from the workshops will be broadly and freely disseminated via scientific
publications and websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting is an opportunity
for the broader systematics and biodiversity science community to discuss
relevant issues in the field of systematics and to provide hands-on training in
new methods and their theoretical background to enable researchers to capitalize
on recent advances in data collection and analysis. The activities focused on
developing a vision for the future of systematics are particularly timely and
important given the crucial role systematics plays in enabling comparative
studies and interdisciplinary science. These conversations will be designed and
implemented in collaboration with Knowinnovation, maximizing the opportunity for
participants to engage in creative and productive conversations about the future
of systematics and to develop plans for moving a new vision
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.