* 1953171
* CDS&amp;E: Computational Simulation and Cyber Software Development for Nanoscale Friction
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yongsheng Leng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 406,658.00

Friction exists at the contact between two sliding surfaces. It occurs
throughout nature -- from objects the width of a single hair (1000 nanometers)
to continental scale (earthquakes) and even to particles in outer space. This
award will develop a new computational modeling and simulation tool to enable
deeper understanding of nanoscale friction dynamics to enable more efficient
advanced manufacturing processes and high-performance nanoscale machines and
systems -- from drug delivery devices to nanorobots. The project will train
graduate and undergraduate students in algorithm and code development and will
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups by developing their
research skills for careers in computational and data-enabled science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Current algorithms are unable to replicate
conditions experienced during atomic force microscope (AFM) experiments --
failing to accurately capture slip transition. This project develops novel
methods that enable researchers to probe the slow-driven dynamics of nanoscale
friction at realistic experimental timescales. One method is to integrate the
tip friction dynamics in the experimental timescale and the molecular dynamics
simulation at the contact interface. This approach is derived from the total
Hamiltonian, which captures the driven dynamics of the nanoscale system and
calculates the ensemble-average force applied to the tip using an iterative
procedure. Preliminary results show this to be a promising approach with a high
potential to solve this long-standing problem and to provide the research
community with a novel cyberinfrastructure (CI) tool that will be made available
through LAMMPS community package. Development of this enabling CI tool is a
potentially transformative, high-risk project that can have a significant impact
on molecular dynamics modeling of AFM friction, which is applicable to a wide
range of problems in science and engineering research. The project will also
study several fundamental questions relevant to temperature and sliding velocity
effects on nanoscale friction to advance fundamental knowledge in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.