* 1953411
* RET Site: Training STEM teachers in alternative (biomass, solar, wind, and hydrogen) energy research through hands on laboratory and computational experiences
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Sandeep Kumar, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Education plays a vital role in the development of energy professionals for a
sustainable society. The Hampton Roads area is the biggest metropolitan region
in Virginia, with a population of more than 1.7 million and compromising eight
cities. The main goal of the RET Site: Training STEM teachers in alternative
(biomass, solar, wind, and hydrogen) energy research through hands on laboratory
and computational experiences, at Old Dominion University (ODU), is to establish
long-term collaborative partnerships among the Old Dominion University (ODU),
public school districts, and local industries in the Hampton Roads area to bring
STEM knowledge in the alternative energy areas to K-12 classrooms. The goal of
the RET Site will be achieved through research training of STEM teachers in a
7-week summer program and post-program translation of teachers' research
experiences into classrooms. STEM teachers will be engaged in hands on research
experience in alternative energy through the cutting-edge research projects. The
RET participants will then translate the acquired research experiences and
knowledge into their classrooms to encourage students, especially those from the
underrepresented groups, to pursue STEM degrees and careers. The RET site serves
as a long-term network among mentors, teachers, and industrial partners, which
will eventually benefit K-12 students' perception of STEM careers. In addition,
graduate students will support K-12 classroom activities and community
outreaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, this RET Site will
host a total of 30 grade 9-12 science teachers to conduct research in the fields
of alternative (biomass, solar, wind, and hydrogen) energy at ODU laboratories
during the summer program. Through this RET program, STEM teachers, especially
those from underrepresented groups, will be trained to develop both experimental
and computational research skills, while gaining knowledge of advanced science
and technology concepts in alternative energy. An Argument-Driven Inquiry (ADI)
workshop will be organized to train teachers to translate RET outcomes into K-12
STEM education through enhancement of the current curricula. It is expected that
these activities will significantly assist teachers to encourage more students
to pursue STEM degrees and careers by using practical examples. RET teachers
will be exposed and contribute to the advances of cutting-edge research on
alternative energy projects mentored by both faculty and industry mentors. The
expected tangible outcomes of the project are to bring alternative energy
curriculum in the local Hampton region high school classrooms through the
trained RET teachers and involve those teachers in scientific and educational
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.