* 1953465
* Testing the Impact of Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and Streamline Transfer Support on STEM Success for Underrepresented Students
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Dalvin Hill, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 03/31/2025
* USD 545,637.00

TITLE: Testing the Impact of Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and Streamline
Transfer Support on STEM Success for Underrepresented
Students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support from the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2
project will examine whether the combined impact of Culturally Responsive
Pedagogy (CRP) in STEM, coupled with the removal of structural barriers for
transfer, will result in the repair of the STEM pipeline for underrepresented
talent. Our nation must discover innovative answers for numerous crises of well-
being: food, water, energy, and health, to name a few. These solutions will
require future-focused, creative thinking, achievable only if we are educating a
diverse STEM workforce. The percentage of high school graduates who plan to
major in STEM at a 2-year institution is rising, demonstrating growth for the
high school-to-community college pipeline. Yet, even as community college STEM
enrollment is increasing, degree completion remains persistently low for
underrepresented students. This project posits that CRP, alongside strategic
transfer supports, is the answer. The project will build on emerging literature,
which argues that CRP is critical at the K-12 level to engage underserved
students in STEM academic experiences. The project will also build upon recent
studies which indicate that diversity in the STEM pipeline cannot be achieved
without repairing the “leak” between 2-year and 4-year colleges. This project
will jointly leverage these evidence-based insights to explore whether CRP’s
advantages can be scaffolded across from K-12 to repair the STEM pipeline’s most
critical transition, from 2- to 4-year schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research intervention for this project will fill a critical gap in our national
understanding of community college-to-baccalaureate STEM persistence by testing
the combined impact of CRP and streamlined transfer support structures for
underserved students. This research will generate a new evidence basis for
strategies to drastically improve STEM education for underrepresented students.
Furthermore, the project will test and implement an inclusive, equity-driven
model of community college STEM success to serve as an exemplar in higher
education. Lessons will be disseminated nationwide through conference
presentations and publication in peer-reviewed journals, with a promise to
inform effective tactics and practices that will lead to increased success for
underrepresented students while meeting the urgent national challenge of STEM
workforce inclusivity. Recognizing that underrepresented, low-income, and first-
generation college students will be the leaders and innovators of the next-
generation STEM workforce, this project is designed to generate the
groundbreaking knowledge that enables both their future and the nation’s long-
term prosperity. This HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education
and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.