* 1953594
* Cross-Sector Partnerships, Experiential Learning, and Professional Development to Build Pathways to STEM Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Marianne Smith, Citrus Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 02/28/2023
* USD 2,231,991.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1: Building Capacity project aims to
improve STEM education and broaden participation in STEM. It intends to do so
through a collaborative, cross-sector partnership model that will provide
students and faculty with year-round, extra-curricular, STEM-related
experiences. It is expected that these experiences will help increase the number
of students who are retained in and successfully complete STEM degrees at HSI
institutions. One of the unique features of this program is that faculty will be
embedded with students during the extracurricular experiences. As a result,
faculty will connect with professionals working at the forefront of their
disciplines and be able to use their experiences to improve their teaching. The
program is also expected to help increase the number and quality of cross-sector
collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team has already created
partnerships with corporate, non-profit, and government organizations. The
primary partners are Packet, MillerCoors Brewing, CSU Fullerton, Gravitational
Waves Physics &amp; Astronomy, City of Hope, The Explainables, The Right
Question Institute, and the Blue Marble Space Institute of Science. These
organizations will provide students with experiences that range from workshops
and demonstrations to coding boot camps and summer research internships. The
project intends to serve 300 students, who will participate in one of three
themed cohorts: 1. Geosciences; 2. Engineering, Physics, Mathematics &amp;
Computer Sciences; and 3. Biology and Chemistry. It is expected that
participation in the cohort will broaden studentsâ€™ understanding of career
opportunities, introduce them to subfields within their disciplines, and provide
internships or research opportunities, while building durable networks with
peers and professionals. The research and evaluation components of the project
will contribute to the literature regarding science identity. It is expected
that this work may serve as a model for increasing the diversity of the STEM
workforce. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.