* 1953591
* Exploring a Dynamic Soil Information System: A Workshop
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Roberta Schoen, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2022
* USD 35,000.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine will hold a 2-day
workshop to bring members of the scientific community together to examine how
soil resources might be dynamically and accurately monitored toward the mutually
supporting goals of achieving a better understanding of causal influences on
observed changes in soil and of providing accessible, useful, and actionable
information to land managers, scientists, farmers, and others. Soil is an
important structural, living, and dynamic substrate supporting human activities
and natural processes worldwide. Current systems in place for monitoring and
documenting soil conditions do not provide an accurate picture of how soil is
changing over time with respect to degradation, erosion, fertility, capacity for
retaining water, and other properties. Nor do our current monitoring systems
capture the interactions of soil with natural (weather, climate, and fire) and
anthropogenic forces, such as land management. To achieve a better understanding
of those interactions and outcomes, a robust, longitudinal, multi-location
dataset is needed that records chemical, physical, and biological soil
attributes, and that is coupled to data on environmental and climatic conditions
as well as land use activities. Conceiving of such a broad and diverse dataset
requires thoughtful consideration of methods for collecting uniform data and
appropriate indicators for different soil attributes and the forces that
interact with soils. Also necessary is a practical consideration of the specific
requirements of potential users of such a database who are likely to include
scientists from many disciplines, from microbiologists to ecosystem modelers, as
well as practical users, like farmers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A steering
committee will be appointed by the National Academies to identify appropriate
experts and stakeholders to participate in the workshop. To explore the
requirements of a dynamic information system, workshop discussions will be
organized around several topics, including: defining appropriate, measurable
indicators of chemical, physical, and especially biological soil properties;
identifying the availability of complementary datasets [including those provided
by the NSF National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON)] that reflect
environmental conditions and land management activities to overlay soil data;
available technologies and methods to facilitate the timely and cost-effective
collection of soil and environmental data; conceptual and practical
considerations for database design, data storage, and data stewardship; and,
tools to deliver information at different scales of resolution to meet the needs
of a diversity of users, including land managers, farmers, academic, state and
federal scientists, and policymakers. The workshop reflects several of the
science and technology priorities identified in the 2016 Framework for a Federal
Strategic Plan for Soil Science and addresses information gaps noted by the 2015
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization's Status of the World Soils
report with respect to information about changes in soil characteristics over
time in North America (and particularly in the United
States).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.