* 1953293
* High-Dimensional Interaction Detection and Nonparametric Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Emre Demirkaya, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Understanding how variables interact with each other is fundamentally important
in many scientific discoveries and contemporary applications, especially in
areas such as social networks, marketing, medicine, genetics, and cancer
studies. Identifying important interactions can also help improve model
interpretability and prediction. Yet interaction detection with high-dimensional
data poses great challenges since the number of pairwise interactions increases
quadratically with the number of covariates and that of higher-order
interactions grows even faster. Although there is a growing literature on
interaction detection, there is a limited amount of work on the error rate
control and inference aspects. Building robust statistical foundations of
interaction detection and nonparametric inference, and offering reproducible and
scalable algorithms for selecting important interactions can greatly facilitate
the use of these much-needed tools in real applications. The common theme
underlying this entire project is that of developing statistical methodologies
and theories on high-dimensional interaction detection and nonparametric
inference with statistical guarantees and improved reproducibility and
interpretability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three
interrelated aims of timely theoretical and methodological studies on high-
dimensional interaction detection and nonparametric inference. The first aim
establishes the theoretical foundation of prediction and false sign rate control
for interaction detection in ultra-high dimensional regression models. The
second aim builds on the recent development of model-X knockoffs and proposes
new methods for high-dimensional interaction detection with false discovery rate
control and appealing power. The third aim further investigates the nonlinear
interactions between a pair of high-dimensional random vectors and develops a
new testing procedure for high-dimensional nonparametric inference through the
lens of distance correlation. The systematic research program developed in three
aims above will help build rigorous statistical foundations of theory and
methodologies for high-dimensional data analysis that can guide practitioners
and researchers. The investigators also plan to systematically develop tractable
and efficient computation algorithms to implement the proposed methods through
free software packages, like R and Python, and then make them readily available
and publicize them in all relevant fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.