* 1953279
* RESEARCH-PGR: Determinants of Polycomb Recruitment in Monocot and Eudicot Crop Species
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Doris Wagner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

The genomic era has provided a wealth of information about the composition of
the genetic material in different organisms. How multicellular eukaryotes such
as plants utilize the information content of their genomes to adjust their form
and cellular function to a given environment is less well understood. Due to
chromatin compaction, only certain portions of the genome are accessible for
transcriptional activation; precisely which portions are accessible depends on
the developmental stage, tissue type, or condition (biotic or abiotic stress,
for example). Polycomb repression is a major epigenetic silencing and chromatin
compaction mechanism for shutting off unnecessary or detrimental gene expression
programs, and thus it is important for organismal form and function. A key
question is how Polycomb Repressive Complexes, which lack inherent capability to
bind specific DNA sequences, find their target loci in the genome. In Drosophila
and mammals, different modes of Polycomb recruitment are employed â€“ recruitment
by sequence specific binding proteins to cis motifs in the former and genome
scanning for dinucleotide repeats by Polycomb accessory proteins in the latter.
Polycomb recruitment in Arabidopsis is very similar to that in Drosophila, yet,
it is not known how Polycomb complexes are directed to the correct genomic
locations in other plant species. The researchers hypothesize that the scanning
mode of Polycomb recruitment may be better suited for organisms with a larger
genome size and therefore aim to elucidate the mechanism for Polycomb Repressive
Complex 2 recruitment in a plant crop species with a large genome size. This
will test the hypothesis whether different modes of Polycomb recruitment also
exist in the plant kingdom. New high school laboratory teaching modules focusing
on plant epigenetics will be used to extend the impact of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will develop and implement tools to
test Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) recruitment by ChIPseq in several
crops. Subsequent in-depth analysis will be conducted in a single crop species,
which based on preliminary analysis, holds most promise for ability to test
whether different modes of Polycomb recruitment also exist in the plant kingdom.
These analyses will include PRC2, H3K27me3 and H3 ChIPseq as well as RNAseq to
identify candidate Polycomb-recruiting DNA fragments linked to Polycomb
regulated genes. Second, key features specifically enriched in the candidate
Polycomb-recruiting DNA fragments, such as cis motifs or nucleotides, will be
identified by computational approaches. The combined investigations will reveal
commonalities or differences in the mode PRC2 recruitment in plants with
different genome sizes. It will uncover critical regulatory DNA elements for
genome annotation in crop species and set the groundwork for future epigenetic
manipulation of crop genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.