* 1953189
* Collaborative Research: New Methods, Theory and Applications for Nonsmooth Manifold-Based Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Lingzhou Xue, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Nowadays, the availability of massive data is continuously increasing, primarily
due to the continued advancement of technology. As a consequence, massive high-
dimensional data are ubiquitous in many scientific and engineering disciplines,
such as bioinformatics, computer vision, neuroimaging, and signal processing.
The nonsmooth manifold-based learning with high-dimensional and multidimensional
data is in general complicated due to its intrinsic non-convexity and non-
smoothness. This project will address both statistical and computational issues
of nonsmooth manifold-based learning and explore its new applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is known that statistical modeling of high-dimensional
data may include the non-smooth regularization in the objective function, and
some may even involve non-convex manifold constraints such as orthogonality
constraints. The manifold-based learning offers a powerful framework for
dimension reduction and signal processing. The combination of non-smooth
regularization and non-convex manifold constraints brings new opportunities and
challenges for designing optimization algorithms with convergence guarantees and
also for developing new statistical methods and theory. The research outcomes of
this project will provide new powerful analytic tools in nonsmooth manifold-
based learning with theoretical guarantees. Software packages will be developed
to make the research outcomes readily available to other researchers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.