* 1953753
* Mathematics Persistence through Inquiry and Equity: Redeveloping Gateway Mathematics in a Two-year HSI to Promote Success in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Alexandra Hofler, Southwestern College
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 05/31/2025
* USD 927,073.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project will study the major reform
efforts designed to improve student success in gateway mathematics at a two-year
HSI and develop inquiry-based and equity-driven interventions to support STEM
achievement. Gateway mathematics courses are the first transfer-level
mathematics course taken by most students intending to pursue a STEM major.
These courses traditionally have a high failure rate, and are a common barrier
for STEM-intending students from historically underserved communities. In
addition, these courses are undergoing a shift as state law is impacting
policies related to student placement. With this project, a collaborative team
from a two-year institution and a four-year institution will analyze trends in
student success, develop classroom-based interventions and professional
development for instructors of gateway mathematics courses, study the impacts of
the interventions, and examine the sustainability of change efforts. This work
will have an impact locally by transforming gateway mathematics courses
enrolling up to 10,000 students across the life of the project. By improving
gateway mathematics courses, this project will contribute to the societal
benefit of broadening participation in STEM majors and careers. This effort will
also result in generalizable knowledge about institutional change in STEM
departments at two-year HSIs, and the results will be disseminated through
research publications, workshops, network improvement communities, and
professional development conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
proceed in three phases. In Phase 1 the researchers will collect and analyze
institutional and classroom-level data to inform a change effort. Analyses will
use descriptive and inferential statistics, case study analysis, and be informed
by inquiry learning and institutional change frameworks. In Phase 2, the
researchers will engage in cycles of design research and professional
development to build the capacity of mathematics instructors to leverage
inquiry- and equity-oriented teaching practices in order to expand student
success in gateway mathematics courses. In Phase 3, the research team will
gradually reduce the active intervention, and study the sustainability of the
changes enacted in Phase 2. The results of this work will be a model for the
reform and redesign of gateway STEM courses in two-year HSIs. These results will
be disseminated through research publications, workshops, network improvement
communities, and professional development conferences. This project will make a
beneficial contribution to society by improving the STEM education of Latinx
students at a two-year institution, and more broadly through our dissemination
efforts. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.