* 1953148
* Recent Advances and New Directions in  the Interplay of Noncommutative Algebra and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Timothy Hodges, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This NSF award supports participation in the international conference
&lt;br/&gt;``Recent Advances and New Directions in the Interplay of
Noncommutative &lt;br/&gt;Algebra and Geometry,'' which is planned for July
13–17, 2020, at the &lt;br/&gt;University of Washington in Seattle, Washington.
It is expected that &lt;br/&gt;80–100 participants from all over the world will
attend. Mathematics &lt;br/&gt;is the study of patterns. Frequently, such
patterns are described via &lt;br/&gt;systems of equations. Systems of
polynomial-style equations and their &lt;br/&gt;solutions play a critical role
in almost every scientific field, such &lt;br/&gt;as statistical mechanics,
elementary particle physics, quantum mechanics, &lt;br/&gt;robotics,
crystallography, and networking. Often, the solutions cannot &lt;br/&gt;be found
by experimentation, and often they are not numbers but are &lt;br/&gt;functions
(e.g., differential operators or matrices), and so, in general, &lt;br/&gt;they
do not commute. The field of noncommutative algebra is the science
&lt;br/&gt;behind seeking methods that find all solutions to any system of
&lt;br/&gt;polynomial-style equations in noncommuting variables, and the planned
&lt;br/&gt;conference will focus on recent research activities that use
different &lt;br/&gt;types of geometric techniques in noncommutative algebra.
The conference &lt;br/&gt;will consist of survey talks, research talks, a poster
session, a career &lt;br/&gt;panel, a public lecture, and research discussions.
The research talks &lt;br/&gt;will feature 50-minute, 25-minute, and 10-minute
lectures in order to &lt;br/&gt;accommodate researchers at various career
stages. The 10-minute talks &lt;br/&gt;and poster session will take place early
in the conference in order to &lt;br/&gt;facilitate maximal discussion time
during the conference between &lt;br/&gt;early-career researchers and senior
researchers. Funding will be &lt;br/&gt;prioritized for junior participants and
for researchers from groups that &lt;br/&gt;are traditionally under-represented
in the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the planned
conference is to generate new research in &lt;br/&gt;noncommutative algebra and
related areas, while contributing to the &lt;br/&gt;development of the research
workforce in noncommutative algebra. This &lt;br/&gt;major international
conference will cover several topics of active &lt;br/&gt;current interest in
noncommutative algebra, with broad connections to &lt;br/&gt;combinatorics,
geometry, mathematical physics, number theory, and topology. &lt;br/&gt;It will
emphasize recent exciting developments and emerging future
&lt;br/&gt;directions, particularly in such areas as noncommutative algebraic
geometry, &lt;br/&gt;Artin-Schelter regular algebras, Calibi-Yau algebras, Hopf
algebras and &lt;br/&gt;quantum groups, category theory, and homological
techniques. The conference &lt;br/&gt;will bring together the leading experts
from different specialties within &lt;br/&gt;noncommutative algebra, encouraging
interactions between participants &lt;br/&gt;from a broad range of perspectives
and approaches. Further information &lt;br/&gt;can be found at the conference
website: https://sites.google.com/view/ndna2020/home&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.