* 1953228
* APS Indigenous Language Manuscript Interface
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Brian Carpenter, American Philosophical Society
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,131.00

The rich record of stories, vocabularies, and analyses of Indigenous languages
found in archival manuscript collections are critical language infrastructure to
advance linguists’ understanding of these languages and Indigenous communities’
goals of cultivating new generations of speakers of Native languages. Yet even
when archives digitize these manuscripts, they face new challenges as they look
to make the information within these under-utilized documents easier to examine
and use in a digital setting for multiple audiences. The Indigenous Language
Manuscript Interface (ILMI) project will contribute new solutions to this
widespread issue in linguistics and archiving through a collaboration between
the oldest language archive in the United States, the American Philosophical
Society (APS), and the Language and Cultural Revitalization Program of the
Tunica-Biloxi Tribe of Louisiana (TBT). The ILMI project will create a new open-
source platform that can be hosted by archives themselves, allowing researchers
to navigate and view digitized original pages of manuscripts in endangered
languages alongside data of the original text and data added by linguists and
community language experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a pilot example of
this platform, this project focuses on the 1930s Tunica language notebooks of
the influential linguist Mary Haas and the last fluent Tunica speaker, Sesostrie
Youchigant. These notebooks constitute the largest set of Tunica language
documentation ever created. The TBT’s language experts and apprentices will
produce transcriptions, transliterations, and additional information,
integrating community expertise into the project and providing opportunities for
language apprentices to expand their training. A TEI-encoded initial version of
the interface will be produced by the end of Year 1. In Year 2, the lead
linguist will create thorough analyses, annotations, and multimedia resource
enhancements in collaboration with the TBT, leading to a finished Tunica
language portal hosted by the APS. APS archivists will demonstrate the broader
application of this new framework to digitized presentations of thousands of
pages manuscripts in dozens of other Native languages, creating linked content
guides to help all audiences explore these resources. The APS will provide the
Tunica data produced by the project as open data sets available to researchers.
It will also promote the ILMI framework for broader adoption by other language
archives, and by linguists seeking to enhance the usability of archival
manuscripts with their own contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.