* 1953000
* CAREER: Physics-Oriented Statistical Wave Analysis Integrating Order and Chaos
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/21/2019,01/31/2024
* Zhen Peng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 391,989.00

Wireless communications, electronics, and sensor systems are expected to take
place in increasingly congested, contested, and competitive environments. The
evolving complexity of wireless communications demands fundamental changes to
existing electromagnetic wave analysis and modeling methodologies. Often at
times, there is no precise knowledge of the wave system, the radiating noise
source, and the propagation environment. Furthermore, in the short-wavelength
regime, the electromagnetic wave scattering process can be very sensitive to
details. It results in a very high variability of wave distributions, and makes
the deterministic solution relevant only to the specific configuration. This
project proposes new physics-oriented statistical electromagnetic wave models to
resolve environmental uncertainties. The proposed research opens up new pathways
to exploit the complexity of propagation environments when designing wireless
devices and antennas. The outcomes will establish a configurable virtual testbed
for communications in complex environments not confined by the laboratory
measurements. The research advancements will be integrated with the education to
develop unconventional educational tools. The project will create a virtual
reality electromagnetic laboratory at University of New Mexico (UNM), which
offers a multifaceted teaching and learning environment through innovative data
visualization and interactive simulation. Other educational components include
developing online courses and advanced cross-disciplinary courses, mentoring
high school students through UNMTemps Youth Summer program, and broadening
participation of underrepresented groups by working with UNM's state-funded
Multicultural Engineering Program and the New Mexico Alliance for Minority
Participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
investigate fundamental mathematical models and computational algorithms for the
statistical wave analysis in complex electromagnetic environments. The project
will study an innovative theoretical solution to Maxwell's Equations in the
wave-chaotic media (domains exhibiting ray-chaotic dynamics). The fundamental
solution (stochastic Green's function) rigorously integrates the coherent and
incoherent propagations within a compact form. A new stochastic integral
equation method is proposed for the statistical wave propagation through the
chaotic environment. It quantitatively interprets the universal statistical
properties of wave chaos through the random matrix theory. Since real-world
electromagnetic systems often exhibit mixed chaotic and regular wave dynamics,
the second part of the work investigates the first-principles theoretical
framework of combing the integrable (regular) and non-integrable (chaotic) wave
dynamics. By incorporating the component-, site-, and system-specific
information with the universal chaotic dynamics, the work accomplishes a
comprehensive framework for the statistical analysis and uncertainty
quantification of complex wave systems. The advancements will establish an
imperative simulation-driven, design-under-chaos capability, which is expected
to have a big impact in the engineering discipline. Knowledge from this project
will bring forth a new generation of computer-aided design (CAD) tools that will
revolutionize electromagnetic simulation, prediction, design and optimization in
complex environments. While the proposed research primarily focuses on
electrodynamics, the methodology can be applied to other fields including
acoustics and vibrations, quantum mesoscopic transport, and nuclear physics.