* 1953932
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Deep and Efficient Dynamic Analysis of Operating System Kernels
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Ardalan Amiri Sani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The objective of this project is to improve the security of operating system
(OS) kernels through deep analysis and testing. OS kernels are the foundation of
computer systems such as personal computers, smartphones, servers, as well as
the Internet infrastructure in general. Modern OS kernels are enormously complex
and contain a large number of security vulnerabilities that slip through the
testing phase onto end devices. Unfortunately, the state-of-the-art testing
solution is insufficient as deeper parts of the OS remain hard-to-reach and
therefore largely untested. The project aims to solve this precise issue by
developing a set of innovative dynamic analysis and testing techniques that will
greatly improve the security and quality of OS kernels. The results will benefit
the security of virtually all computing devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
state-of-the-art testing technique for OS kernels is called fuzz testing, which
generates random inputs in the hope that they will exercise various parts of the
kernel code. It has two unique bottlenecks: (1) space bottlenecks that prevent
the fuzzer from reaching desired code blocks and triggering potential
vulnerabilities, i.e., dependencies among syscalls, and (2) time bottlenecks
that force the fuzzer to stop its execution for some period of time, resulting
in wasted fuzz time, i.e., repetitive reboots where the same bugs are triggered
repetitively. The project will develop a set of program analysis techniques to
improve fuzz testing of OS kernels by making the fuzzer more intelligent in
resolving dependencies and by helping it avoid repetitive
reboots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.