* 1953745
* RET Site: Sensor, Signal and Information Processing Algorithms and Software
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Andreas Spanias, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 559,967.00

The Internet of Things (IoT), the ecosystem of physical objects connected via
the internet, has seen rapid growth over recent years and has been enhanced by
mobile applications. Machine Learning (ML) algorithms and sensors are critical
to this technology, leading to a demand in developing sensors that are more
efficient and less expensive. This award creates a new Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) site focused on applications of ML methods for sensor and mobile
IoT. Each summer, ten high school teachers and two community college instructors
will participate in research activities at Arizona State University. High school
teachers will be recruited from the Queen Creek Unified School District (QCUSD)
and Salt River Schools (SRS), and community college instructors will be
recruited from Cochise College (CC), all of whom serve a large population of
underrepresented students. After a hands-on bootcamp centered on key concepts in
ML, sensors, and IoT, teachers will be immersed in a 6-week research program and
mentored by a team of ASU faculty, graduate student advisors, and industry
leaders. ASU will continue their engagement with teachers throughout the school
years and offer assistance and feedback on transferring their research
experiences into the classroom. The goal of this RET Site is to give teachers a
deeper understanding of ML and IoT such that they can develop engaging materials
around these topics for their classrooms. Moreover, teachersâ€™ experiences will
motivate and energize their students to engage in STEM activities and career
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industry labs strive to produce inexpensive
sensors for mobile IoT whose performance hinges on signal conditioning and
classification software. Training faculty and teachers in this area requires an
integrative approach as software designers need to understand application/sensor
limitations. RET Site participants will be immersed in application-driven
algorithm and software development for sensor and IoT testbeds. In addition, the
RET will require a short hands-on bootcamp in machine learning designed to build
their knowledge in ML, sensors, IoT with the focus on developing materials for
their classes. Industrial mentors and curriculum specialists will be engaged to
provide reviews of research and instructional plans. The RET site objectives are
to: a) introduce teachers and instructors to research practices by immersing
them in government/industry research activities, b) engage them in the
development of machine learning and signal processing methods for sensor and IoT
health monitoring research, c) motivate and guide teachers to adapt RET
experiences into compelling teaching materials. This RET features
multidisciplinary synergies with access to unique technology, exceptional
talents, and increased opportunities to broaden participation. RET Site
partners, QCUSD, SRS and CC, serve a large number of minority students. In fact,
the SRS serve 100% Native American students. The RET will disseminate
publications and outcomes to conferences and teaching standard organizations.
Teachers will create hand-outs and presentations to support their instructional
plans. The RET site will include industry participation from the sensor signal
and information processing (SenSIP) industry-university center which is also an
I/UCRC site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.