* 1953561
* Building Capacity for Student Success in Science and Math: Culturally Responsive Teaching and Professional Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Toni Sauncy, Texas Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,389,765.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to incorporate culturally
relevant teaching methods into baccalaureate degree programs in Biology,
Mathematics, and Physics. These disciplines have well-documented opportunities
to improve recruitment and education of undergraduate STEM students from diverse
populations. Texas Lutheran University, a small liberal arts HSI, aims to
increase STEM students’ retention, persistence and success in these disciplines.
To achieve this aim, the project will use an integrated approach that combines
faculty development in culturally relevant teaching, early engagement of STEM
students in faculty-mentored research, outreach experiences, and family
engagement. The project will examine the hypothesis that engaging students in
early research experiences will increase retention, graduation, and post-
graduation career success. The project seeks to improve the academic performance
and increase the number of undergraduate students who earn STEM degrees,
particularly students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on the critical transition from high school into rigorous
college or university STEM degree programs. The project plans to improve success
of students through this transition by integrating STEM curricula with the
tenets of culturally relevant pedagogy, including identity formation, social
justice and equity, and understanding of cultural biases and barriers. The
project will study the effect of this integration on STEM undergraduate student
retention and success. Quantitative and qualitative data will be analyzed to
understand the influence of curricular, co- curricular, and extracurricular
interventions on retention and graduation. It is anticipated that these results
will identify highly effective combinations of practices for improving
participation, persistence, and success of students in STEM disciplines, with
attention to students from underrepresented groups. Data collection methods will
include surveys, focus groups, interviews, and review of institutional metrics.
Comparative data from participants involved in the project’s interventions and
non-participating students will be used for analysis, with the goal of
identifying correlations and possible causative relationships that impact
students’ epistemological and identity development, and their overall success in
STEM. The project expects that its model of student supports can be used or
adapted by other institutions that intend to increase STEM student success. The
findings and insights from this work have the potential to generate knowledge
about how to include diverse students in science careers and also about how to
increase the cultural awareness of all students. This HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.