* 1953566
* FASEB's The Dynamic DNA Structures in Biology Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Lorraine Symington, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/28/2023
* USD 12,000.00

This award will support graduate student, postdoctoral and new investigator
attendance at the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
(FASEB) meeting at the Oak Island Resort and Conference Center in Nova Scotia,
Canada from June 7-12, 2020. The meeting focuses on unique DNA structures and
how they affect biological and mutational processes. The meeting is co-organized
by Drs. Lorraine Symington (Columbia University), Kirill Lobachev (Georgia
Institute of Technology) and Karen Usdin (NIH). The format of the meeting is a
combination of 36 invited talks, 14 talks selected from submitted abstracts, and
several poster sessions. In addition, two keynote lectures by Virginia Zakian
(Princeton University) and Tom Petes (Duke University) will begin the meeting.
There are also two dedicated 1-hour sessions for trainees to interact with
leading experts and three separate poster sessions held in the evenings. A
career-workshop will also be held for trainees. 42% of the invited talks are by
women and the organizers and session chairs seek to prioritize graduate
students, postdocs and new investigators in the selection of talks chosen from
the abstracts. This meeting also affords many opportunities (both formal and
informal) for sharing recent research findings and exploring collaborations and
seeks to include those underrepresented in science in every aspect of the
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a premier and unique meeting on alternate
DNA structures that draws many national and international participants, and
includes many NSF-funded investigators. The meeting began in 2008 and is held
every other year. Recent advances in DNA repair, DNA replication, transcription,
and non-canonical DNA and DNA-RNA structures will be highlighted in this
conference, which will bring together diverse scientists from around the world.
This new venue was chosen as a more easily accessible site for both US and
international participation than at the last meeting. The session topics
include: Expandable Repeats and Human Disease, RNA-mediated Genome Instability,
Structure-Induced Genome Instability, Dynamics at Stalled Replication Forks, G
quadruplexes and Telomeres, Gene Editing, Single Molecule Analysis of
Replication and Repair Structures, and Chromosome Rearrangements/Fragility. The
conference primarily highlights unpublished research findings and provides many
experiences for young researchers to learn about the field and devise future
avenues for research. The meeting will encourage career development of a new
generation of researchers, including those who are underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.