* 1953299
* IRES Track II: Dynamics, consequences, and management of plant-fungal co-invasions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* J. Stephen Brewer, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2024
* USD 289,054.00

Invasive species significantly damage agriculture, forestry, and natural
ecosystem services globally and in the United States. Increasingly, it is
recognized that many biological invasions are actually "co-invasions," in which
two or more invasive species always invade together because they depend on each
other for their success. One widespread example is that of trees (such as pines
and eucalypts) and their symbiotic root fungi, which often escape from areas
where they were purposely planted and invade into native habitats and other
sensitive areas, where they cause economic and ecological damage. Effectively
addressing this and related problems in invasion biology requires a geographic,
international perspective, which will be fundamental in the two proposed
Advanced Studies Institutes (ASIs, i.e., graduate courses taught abroad). We
will conduct a complementary pair of ASIs, one each in Australia and South
Africa, each training 10 American PhD students for 21 days. Recruitment for
these courses will insure that the trained students represent a diverse cross-
section of American society, enhancing representation of traditionally under-
represented groups in the field of invasion biology. The courses will teach
fundamental concepts of invasion and co-invasion biology, and will involve the
students in international collaborative research addressing fundamental
questions on biological invasions. Students will learn cutting-edge field,
laboratory, and analytical skills needed for addressing these problems, and will
also gain international networking and professional development opportunities
that will prepare them to be leaders in this field. Post-travel activities will
guide each PhD student to learn about important invasive species issues in their
local communities in the United States, and to pass along these lessons to
approximately 400 American high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invasive
species are an important threat to biodiversity and ecosystem services
worldwide, including in the United States. They have the potential to reduce
biodiversity, disrupt important co-evolved mutualisms and species coexistence,
alter ecosystem processes, and produce new ecosystem states that are resistant
to ecological restoration. It is thus critical to understand the eco-
evolutionary dynamics of invasions, their consequences for biodiversity and
ecosystem functions, and how their dynamics and restoration are influenced by
global change and extreme climatic events. An important emerging sub-field
within invasion biology is the study of co-invasions, in which the success and
impact of an invader depends on co-invasion with other species, such as the
widespread introduction of pines and their symbiotic ectomycorrhizal fungi
throughout the Southern Hemisphere, and the parallel introductions of Eucalyptus
and their ectomycorrhizal fungi in the Northern Hemisphere. Effectively
addressing questions on biological invasions and co-invasions requires a
geographic, international perspective, which will be fundamental in the two
Advanced Studies Institutes (ASIs) proposed here. We propose two complementary
ASIs, each training 10 American PhD students over the course of 21 days: ASI #1,
Invasions and Ecosystems, will be hosted at the Hawkesbury Institute for the
Environment, NWS, Australia, and will focus on the ecosystem functional
consequences of plant &amp; fungal invasions, and how dynamics and management of
invasions are affected by extreme climatic events. ASI #2, Invasions and
Evolution, will be hosted at the Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology
Institute, Pretoria, South Africa, and will focus on the evolutionary,
phylogenetic, and genomic mechanisms and consequences of plant &amp; fungal
invasions. Each ASI will a) teach graduate students fundamental concepts of
invasion biology; b) involve the students in international collaborative
research addressing fundamental questions on biological invasions; c) teach the
students cutting-edge field, laboratory, and analytical skills needed for
addressing those questions; and d) provide students with international
professional development opportunities that will prepare them to be leaders in
this field. The proposed program will increase participation and leadership in
invasion biology by groups traditionally under-represented this field, through
recruitment partnerships with established programs at the University of
Mississippi, as well as with graduate programs at two Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in Mississippi. Post-travel outreach by the
graduate student trainees in local high schools will bring home the lessons of
invasion biology, applying them to examples in the United States and impacting
approximately 400 high school students. This outreach experience will also give
our ASI graduates valuable experience synthesizing their knowledge and teaching
it to a broader audience. The project will also enhance American research
infrastructure by building new international partnerships with scientists in two
countries (and with Lecturers from six others); these connections will benefit
the participating students throughout their careers through potential
international research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.