* 1953469
* Integrating Four-Dimensional Cell Migration Modeling with Quantitative Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Wouter-Jan Rappel, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2024
* USD 437,845.00

Many eukaryotic cells are able to move, an ability that plays an important role
in a number of biological processes, including embryogenesis, development, wound
healing, and pathological diseases, including inflammation and cancer metastasis
cancer. This motion occurs in a variety of extracellular environments, including
fibrous extracellular matrix (ECM). The biophysical properties of the ECM,
including dimension, stiffness, and degree of confinement, can critically affect
the migration of cells but the mechanisms are poorly understood. The research
team will develop mathematical models that describe cells as 3-dimensional (3D)
objects with changing shapes and create techniques that can address cell
interactions with fibrous ECM networks. They will create a modeling platform
that will be applicable and extendable to a wide range of cell migration
problems. They will then integrate their modeling with novel and quantitative
experimental data that they will generate. Specifically, their experiments will
quantify cell migration in ECM with carefully controlled properties, focusing on
the ECM-induced transition between single and collective migration and between
unidirectional and rotational collective migration. The project activities will
include the training of high school, undergraduates, and graduate students who
will be directly involved in the proposed research. The team members will also
extend their existing collaboration with two local high school, the Preuss
Charter School, a top local high school that accepts students only from
disadvantaged families, and Clairemont High School.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop mathematical models that are able to describe
cells as 3D objects with changing morphologies and create techniques that can
address interactions between cells and fibrous ECMs. The research team will
focus on the dynamics of cells, resulting in 4D (3D space+1D time) cell
migration modeling. The model will be based on the phase-field description which
avoids the need to explicitly track and parameterize the deforming cell
membrane, which can naturally incorporate intra-cellular signaling pathways, and
which can be easily extended to describe collective migration. The experiments
will quantify cell migration in ECM with carefully controlled properties,
focusing on the ECM-induced transition between single and collective migration
and between unidirectional and rotational migration. The experimental results
will be incorporated into their models while the modeling will be used to
generate experimentally testable predictions. The specific aims for the project
are 1) to develop a mathematical model for deformable 3D cells and determine how
single vs. collective migration is regulated by ECM properties and 2) to develop
a mathematical model for confined migration and determine how unidirectional vs.
rotational collective migration is regulated by cell-ECM
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.