* 1953838
* Collaborative Research: Linking Pharmacokinetics to Epidemiological Models of Vector-Borne Diseases and Drug Resistance Prevention
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Olivia Prosper, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 65,749.00

The goal of this research is to develop mathematical tools to improve
understanding of how the behavior of drugs within the body, and their effects on
pathogens, influence the spread of drug-resistant disease. Drugs that target
microbes (antimicrobials) have saved millions of lives. But, because microbes
evolve, over time antimicrobials reduce the population of pathogens that succumb
to drugs and leave behind those that do not - a process called selection.
Consequently, unbridled use of antimicrobials threatens their long-term efficacy
- a concern since the discovery of penicillin in 1928. Today, drug resistance is
recognized as a serious problem requiring urgent attention. Differential
equations can describe mechanisms that drive changes in living systems; control
theory can generate the best strategies to use these mechanisms to achieve a
desired goal. These tools will help guide drug development and dosing protocols
that balance the immediate benefits of administering antimicrobials with the
long-term selection pressure imposed by these drugs. A mathematical framework
that is adaptable to different disease systems could inform strategies to reduce
the threat of resistant pathogens to global health and the attendant cost to
society. Furthermore, this project will provide graduate students at Howard,
Texas Tech, Lehigh, and the University of Kentucky, with the opportunity to
intern at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, fostering connections outside of
academia. University of Kentucky students will also assist the lead investigator
in mentoring high school students through a pilot Saturday Morning Math program
that will provide hands-on experience with coding, modeling, and visualization
of scientific results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators aim to construct a
general mathematical framework, with vector-borne disease serving as a benchmark
example, and build the tools needed to bridge the gap between within-host PK/PD
(pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics) and population-level epidemiology, so that
others may readily adapt the framework to their own studies of competing
pathogens. The investigators will approach the problem of linking the fast
dynamics of PK/PD to the comparatively slow population-level dynamics by
introducing serial compartments in a system of nonlinear ordinary differential
equations representing the progression of individuals through stages of
treatment characterized by different drug concentrations and different
durations. A stochastic sub-model is proposed to parameterize one of the
functions that links within-host PK/PD to the population-level dynamics. The
proposed research is important because, to date, no general methods exist to
analyze a staged-progression model where the stages have different durations.
Such a model could provide results and insights that significantly improve the
protocols for drug interventions in a way that mitigates the selection pressure
leading to drug resistance. For example, it is unknown how the likely existence
of backward bifurcation and the staged-progression approach with heterogeneous
stages will interact and influence optimal treatment policy. Furthermore, the
proposed parameter estimation, uncertainty, and identifiability analyses will
likely lead to challenging mathematical and statistical problems requiring
advances of existing methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by the Division of Mathematical Sciences Mathematical Biology Program and
Division of Human Resource Development HBCU-UP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.