* 1953586
* Developing Engineering Instructional Faculty as Leaders of Educational Change at Hispanic-Serving Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Alexandra Strong, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 05/31/2025
* USD 984,259.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project focuses on enabling non-tenure-
eligible, instructional faculty to further foster culturally responsive,
evidence-based approaches in engineering education at Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs). Non-tenure-eligible Engineering Instructional Faculty (EIF)
are an under-explored and under-supported population who play a critical role in
students’ educational experiences within engineering. With the historical
emphasis placed on faculty development and resources for tenure-track faculty,
there is an untapped opportunity to amplify the existing efforts of EIF at HSIs
to support an increasingly diverse student population. This project seeks to
develop EIF as leaders of educational change who embrace and promote the use of
culturally responsive, evidence-based instructional practices at HSIs. Towards
this end, this project will partner with EIF to design Engineering Leadership
Academies (ELA) - a self-sustaining, within- and cross-institutional faculty
development model that equips EIF and amplifies their leadership of educational
change at HSIs. Through professional development and coaching of approximately
80 EIF, the project will enrich a growing network of educational leaders at
HSIs. These EIF will design educational initiatives for their campuses that seek
to improve student learning and retention, with the potential to directly impact
the education of over 1,800 engineering students throughout the project. In
addition, the ELAs and the culminating National ELA conference will expand the
reach of the faculty development by including participants from a diverse set of
HSIs, including two- and four-year institutions as well as those who receive low
levels of NSF funding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to (1) develop a
rich understanding of the perspectives and experiences of EIF at HSIs, (2)
define a framework for how to support educational change leadership development
of EIF, and (3) identify learning experiences that support EIF leadership
development, (4) design and implement ELAs to thereby (5) increase the use of
innovative, culturally responsive, evidence-based teaching approaches in
engineering education programs at HSIs. This multi-year project will use a
variety of qualitative, quantitative, and participatory research methods
embedded in a series of action research cycles. Each cycle will enable both the
iterative development of the ELA and the inclusion of additional EIF from HSIs
nationwide. This research will provide the engineering education and faculty
development communities with a deep understanding of an under-explored and
under-served population of faculty, specifically EIF at HSIs. The project
findings will further expand models for developing teachers-as-leaders and
engineering leadership to create a framework for sustainable engineering faculty
leadership development. The design and implementation of the ELAs will make
visible the features and necessary content of faculty development programs that
promote educational leadership and innovation at HSIs. Broader dissemination of
the findings at a National ELA Conference will enable EIF participants to share
their educational innovations and associated research findings with a growing
network of EIFs. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education
and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.