* 1953111
* Inducing and Exploiting Grid Structures for Fast, Adaptive, and Accurate Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Matthew Plumlee, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Computer simulation now encompasses most areas of scientific research. Computer
experiments conducted on these simulations are an effective way to leverage
limited computation capacity. This research project will develop tools to
overcome existing computational limits to solve increasingly complex problems
arising in various applications where computer models play a critical role.
There is a vast potential to enable high-dimensional, large-scale
experimentation using high-performance computing with smart data collection
schemes that yield tractable computational analysis and accuracy that is orders
of magnitude better than existing approaches on a large swath of estimation
problems. The most appealing features of this approach are that it enables
parallel but flexible experimentation and computationally reasonable inference
with theoretical guarantees. This research will facilitate the transfer of
computer models from exclusive users of high-performance computing environments
to a broad array of scientists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general
philosophy of the project will be to use experiments with underlying grid
structures that are significantly more flexible and adaptive compared to basic
grids. The key to enabling fast computation are rigorous representation results
for Gaussian processes that exploit the generalized grid structures. The
algorithms that exploit these representations are both fast, meaning the
algorithms have small computational cost, and exact, meaning the only source of
sub-optimality comes from machine error. Because the results will be exact,
these algorithms will be considerably more accurate than existing fast methods
which rely on approximations. The research focuses on designing dimensional and
spatial adaptivity for high-dimensional estimation to service downstream
calculations like uncertainty quantification, optimization and calibration.
While the interest in this problem comes primarily from computer experiments,
the approach is general enough to provide additional impacts in general machine
learning, specifically in the use of Gaussian process
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.