* 1953694
* Modeling and Control of Ceovolutionary Network Formation with Applications to Finishing Processes for 3D Printed Components
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Satish Bukkapatnam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2024
* USD 430,000.00

Network representations allow a deep understanding of the dynamics of natural
and technological systems by providing explicit characterization of pairwise
relations between entities within the system in consideration. For instance,
using networks to represent physical contacts among individuals in a community
can provide a more precise representation of an infectious disease outbreak
dynamics than standard models where homogeneous mixing of the population is
assumed. However, networks do not appear out of thin air and their statistical
properties tend to evolve over time given the dynamic nature of the systems.
This project addresses the fundamental issues that are at the nexus of fields of
network science and control theory, on how real-world networks arise, how they
co-evolve with the environment, and how they can be perturbed. Theoretical
aspects of this project will be assessed, and in part are motivated, by an
experimental thread in controlling localized finishing processes of material
surfaces in 3D printing. A material surface at the sub-micrometer level can be
thought of as a wrinkled paper with asperities and pores that admits network
representations. A finishing process aims to efficiently transition a rough
surface (disconnected network) into a smooth surface (highly connected network)
through abrasive action. Currently, finishing and post-processing techniques,
commonly used to impart desired surface characteristics on 3D printed
components, consume 20-70% of the total cycle time. Efficiency gains in and
automation of finishing processes can overcome this major impediment to the
industrial adoption of this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Networks form and
change in the real world not just due to the interactions among their internal
entities (i.e., nodes) but from their dynamic coupling and coevolution with the
environment. The research aims to achieve the following scientific
contributions: a) novel network formation models with endogenous dynamical
processes and strategic node-level decision-making, and characterization of the
effects of latencies and critical feedbacks on emerging network structure; b)
theoretical framework for control of network formation that will provide optimal
interventions to the decision-making, the dynamic process or the network
structure by an external agent in order to shape the arising network features;
c) consistent network representations of surface morphology evolution during
finishing processes, and automated local finishing processes that are efficient
and guarantee desired surface properties. The key technical novelty in modeling
of network formation processes is the introduction of latency effects of
environmental dynamics and node behavior, which yields a rich set of dynamics,
questioning the robustness of fundamental network formation models. We propose
to leverage recent works on influence maximization and optimal control with
Kullback-Leibler control costs to provide a control theoretic framework for
efficiently obtaining desired network structures given the nonlinear dynamics of
coevolving networks. Our validation effort promises to show how the proposed
theoretical framework can be transformative in novel application areas, e.g.,
smart finishing of 3D printed components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.