* 1953708
* Understanding the Reactions of Carbon Dioxide with Late Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Nilay Hazari, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

The conversion of carbon dioxide (CO2) into more valuable compounds is an
important goal due to the potential of this waste product as a readily
available, sustainable, non-toxic, and inexpensive chemical feedstock. Catalysts
based on transition metals, such as nickel or palladium, show promise speeding
up the reactions of carbon dioxide so that they are practical, but improvements
in efficiency are required for further implementation. In this project, Dr.
Hazari of Yale University is developing an understanding of how carbon dioxide
interacts with a variety of transition metal complexes using both experimental
and computational techniques. This knowledge is crucial for the design of
improved systems for carbon dioxide utilization as it will provide information
on how to modify the catalyst as well as how to improve the conditions under
which reactions are performed (temperature, pressure, etc.). This research has
potential to increased selectivity so that only desired products are formed. The
research is complemented by Dr. Hazari’s involvement in a series of outreach
activities related to carbon dioxide utilization. These activities focus on
students from underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The activities include a one week summer
program on energy for high school students in the New Haven area and
opportunities for undergraduates to perform research in Dr. Hazari’s laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms B (CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Hazari from Yale
University is developing a fundamental understanding of the insertion of carbon
dioxide into late-transition metal bonds. This research provides guidance about
the design of catalysts and optimization of reaction conditions for processes
involving carbon dioxide utilization. Specifically, the rates of carbon dioxide
insertion into Group 10 pincer-supported transition metal hydrides, hydroxides,
alkyls, and aryls are being measured. Factors that are being probed include the
effects of the metal center, ancillary ligand, solvent, and additives, such as
Lewis acids, on the kinetics of carbon dioxide insertion. A major focus is the
development of scaling relationships that correlate the rate of carbon dioxide
insertion into a metal hydride (a kinetic property), with the hydricity of
transition metal hydrides, a thermodynamic property. This enables the evaluation
of hypotheses relating to whether secondary coordination sphere effects such as
hydrogen bonding or electrostatic effects that stabilize the transition state
for carbon dioxide insertion. Density Functional Theory calculations are carried
out in parallel with the experimental work and probe the structure of the
transition states, determine the geometries of unstable intermediates, and
measure hydricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.