* 1953941
* Long Range Molecular Vibration Correlation in Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* David Shelton, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 40,072.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor David Shelton of the
University of Nevada Las Vegas is using inelastic laser light scattering
techniques to probe molecular vibrations in liquids. The blue color of the sky
at mid-day and red color at dawn or dusk are the result of elastic scattering of
light; the photons of light maintain the same color (i.e., energy) as they
scatter off molecules or dust particles in the atmosphere. Sometimes, the
photons of light lose some of their energy to the molecule or object from which
they scatter. This is called inelastic scattering, and analysis of the scattered
photon energy can reveal interesting information about the scattering system.
Prof. Shelton is exploring the vibrations of molecules in liquids. The generally
accepted view is that molecular vibrations in liquids are localized, with the
influence of one vibrating molecule on the motion of another molecule extending
at most a few molecular diameters. This project is exploring the possibility
(based on some preliminary observations) that vibrational interactions between
molecules can occur at inter-molecular distances of hundreds of molecular
diameters. If these preliminary observations are confirmed, our understanding of
liquids would be changed significantly: despite being composed of apparently
randomly moving individual molecules, some liquids would appear to possess some
properties normally associated with highly ordered solid crystals. The principal
tool used in this project (hyper-Raman scattering spectroscopy) is an advanced
type of inelastic scattering instrument that detects events when two scattering
photons combine to form one high-energy photon (this is an example of what is
called a “nonlinear” optical process). The students engaged in this project are
undergraduate researchers who are gaining an unusually valuable experience in
advanced nonlinear laser light scattering techniques and spectroscopic analysis,
both of which are important in other areas of science and increasingly important
in sensing and communications technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on long range molecular vibration correlation measured by hyper-Raman
scattering (HRS) in several representative non-polar, polar and hydrogen-bonding
molecular liquids. HRS is observed with a linear polarized laser beam incident
on the sample and linear polarized scattered light collected at 90 degree
scattering angle. HRS for each vibration mode appears at a scattered light
frequency that is shifted from the second harmonic frequency of the laser by the
vibration frequency of the mode. Spectral intensity is measured with incident
(I) and scattered (S) light polarized either parallel (H) or perpendicular (V)
to the horizontal scattering plane, for the configurations with IS = VV, HV, VH
and HH. The HV and VH HRS intensities are equal by symmetry for uncorrelated
molecular vibrations in an isotropic fluid, but when the molecular vibrations
are spatially correlated, then coherent addition of the scattered fields from
individual molecules produces a dependence on the scattering wavevector that
breaks the symmetry between the HV and VH polarization configurations. The HRS
signal is decomposed into contributions from transverse and longitudinal polar
collective modes based on their distinctive polarization (and angle) dependence.
This experiment suggests that molecular vibrations in liquids are correlated
over macroscopic distances, which is a fundamental change in the usual
description of liquids. This work contributes to a better understanding of the
liquid state of matter, which is important for technology, physics, chemistry
and biology. The hyper-Raman scattering experiments have been designed to be
accessible to undergraduates researchers without extensive prior experience; the
new experience is preparing them well for graduate school and other advanced
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.