* 1953206
* LEAP-HI: Smart Sensing and Forecasting of Water Quality in the Water Distribution Network For Protection of Public Health
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Kerry Kinney, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that there are at least
20 million individuals sickened each year from pathogens in drinking water, most
commonly with gastrointestinal or respiratory infections. Respiratory infections
from two common pathogens alone in drinking water are responsible for 29,000
hospitalizations annually at a cost exceeding $800 million. A primary reason for
pathogens in drinking water is deterioration of water quality in the
distribution network, as water flows from treatment plants to homes and
businesses. This happens, for example, when chlorine added to drinking water to
inactivate pathogens is consumed because of long travel times in pipe networks,
metal pipe corrosion, and reactions with organic matter. The goal of this
Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-
HI) project is to develop new science and engineering tools for mitigating
public health risks associated with drinking water by deploying sensors in the
water distribution network, and using data from these sensors and periodic
sampling to develop computer models that forecast lapses in water quality and
quantify public health risks. The research team will collaborate with public
utilities and stakeholders to advance decision making for the issuance of
drinking water advisory notices, implementing changes in water treatment, and
prioritizing future infrastructure investments. This research will require input
from the disciplines of hydrology, chemistry, microbiology, systems engineering,
big data, risk assessment, and public health, and will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups and enhance engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary challenge for improving water quality in the
distribution system is the timely and accurate collection of data for the
development of accurate and computationally efficient forecasting tools to
support decision making. The research objectives of this project are to: 1)
advance scientific methods for integrating smart sensors into the water
distribution network; 2) discover new fundamental relationships for coupled
processes and their integration into a process-based model; 3) research new
algorithms for data-driven modeling that link sensor data and process-based
model results for forecasting public health risks; 4) explore investment
strategy impacts on water quality; and 5) communicate the new knowledge to
stakeholders. The research approach includes three test beds of different scales
to deploy and test the smart sensors, incorporates complex reactions into an
existing process-based model, and uses these tools to train and validate the
data driven-model. The outcome of the modeling framework will be a multi-
parameter, multi-process decision space to provide guidance for implementation
actions and infrastructure investment for the management of water quality in
water distribution systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.