* 1953471
* IRES Track II: Advanced Studies Institutes in Analysis on Fractal Spaces, Dynamical Systems and Mathematical Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Zair Ibragimov, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/29/2024
* USD 319,919.00

Contemporary mathematics has become a truly international endeavor and hence it
is important that U.S. students grasp this early on and start cementing their
international network of researchers. Under this project, a series of three
Advanced Studies Institutes (ASI) will be held in Uzbekistan during 2020-2022.
Each ASI will last two weeks and will consist of lectures and tutorials given by
distinguished researchers from the United States and Uzbekistan, and short
presentations given by graduate student participants. The research focus of the
ASIs will be on contemporary topics in Analysis on Fractal Spaces, Dynamical
Systems, and Mathematical Physics. The ASIs, through lectures and research
related activities, will serve as platforms to incorporate the latest
developments in these areas into education and research for U.S. students. The
project will expand the U.S. students' horizons, connect them with distinguished
mathematicians and graduate students from other parts of the world, and enhance
their graduate school experiences and career opportunities. Finally, Uzbekistan
has a rich cultural and scientific heritage and presents a unique research
environment for the U.S. students. Great scientists of the 8th - 11th centuries,
such as Al-Khorezmi and Al-Biruni, made significant contributions to the
scientific knowledge that we have today. For example, the word “algebra” comes
from the title of Al-Khorezmi's book, while the word “algorithm” comes from his
name. The project will have societal benefits by promoting mutual understandings
between the United States and Uzbekistan.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ASIs will
engage U.S. graduate students in active learning and research at the frontiers
of knowledge in broader areas of Mathematical Physics, Analysis on Fractal
Spaces, and Dynamical Systems. In recent years, a number of significant results
have been established in these areas, including by researchers in the U.S. and
Uzbekistan, and the ASIs will serve as venues to disseminate these results and
to stimulate new international collaborations. In mathematical physics, the
theory of relativistic fluids has witnessed tremendous progress in recent years,
with many fundamental problems being addressed, such as constructive proofs of
stable multidimensional shock formation without symmetry assumptions and global
regularity of the Einstein-Euler system in the presence of a positive
cosmological constant. In analysis on fractal spaces, there has been a great
progress recently in extending the classical results in analysis and geometry
from Euclidean space settings to non-smooth or fractal spaces. Many results in
this area often rely on the extensions of classical results in geometry and
analysis to fractal settings. In dynamical systems, one-dimensional dynamics has
been a flourishing theme over the past several decades. It provides the simplest
model for non-linear chaos in its intricate intertwining with regular dynamics.
Renormalization is a powerful machinery that was developed in this context to
describe the interaction between various scales of dynamical and parameter
portraits. The project funds a total of 60 U.S. advanced graduate students and 6
to 9 U.S. researchers. At least half of the participants are recruited from
groups underrepresented in sciences including female students and students from
academic institutions with limited research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.