* 1953005
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Gaussian-Process Methods for Spatial Statistics and Machine Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Matthias Katzfuss, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 02/28/2025
* USD 365,697.00

The Gaussian process is a mathematical tool that can use incomplete data to fill
in gaps, for example to interpolate the temperature at a person’s house given a
network of nearby weather stations. Gaussian processes are used in many
application areas, such as geospatial analysis, machine learning, and the
analysis of computer experiments. Gaussian processes are flexible,
interpretable, and provide natural quantification of uncertainty. However,
direct application of Gaussian processes is too computationally expensive for
large datasets. This project addresses the computational challenges with novel
algorithms and bridges the gap between statistical and machine learning
approaches. As big data now appear in almost every field of science and society,
providing powerful, scalable, and free software to analyze such datasets can
have a transformative effect. This work will replace current practices and
approximations for massive spatial data that are often simplistic due to
computational limitations. This project can lead to improved accuracy and
uncertainty quantification in countless applications with direct impact on
society, including carbon monitoring, renewable energy, rainfall prediction,
calibration of robotic arms, and modeling and prediction of insurgent
activities. The developed methods and software will thus be an important tool
for computational and data-enabled science and engineering. The investigators
will mentor and train student researchers, and share the project findings via
journal publications and conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to develop a nearly universal toolbox for scalable Gaussian
process (GP) modeling. The toolbox is based on the ordered conditional
approximation (OCA), a simple but very powerful idea that exploits the screening
effect (i.e., conditional independence) exhibited by many popular covariance
functions. The OCA framework unifies many state-of-the-art GP approximations
from statistics, machine learning, and numerical linear algebra. This project
will result in new, highly accurate OCA methods with guaranteed scalability and
broad applicability for modeling and analysis of nonstationary, multivariate,
multi-scale, and other processes. Also, extensions will be developed that allow
these new spatial-statistics methods to be used in a variety of machine-learning
applications, where OCA-type approaches have not received much attention so far.
For the new methods, the computational cost is guaranteed to be linear in the
data size, with further speed-ups possible through parallelization. All
approaches will be implemented in easy-to-use open-source software. This will
allow users to bring the power of GPs to bear on modern datasets, enabling
spatial prediction, calibration, parameter learning, and nonparametric
regression with big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.