* 1953049
* EAGER: Real-Time: Collaborative Research: Unified Theory of Model-based and Data-driven Real-time Optimization and Control for Uncertain Networked Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Junfei Xie, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 08/31/2021
* USD 60,883.00

The project seeks to find a common decision-making framework that seamlessly
integrates offline data and computing, real-time data and computing, learning,
and probabilistic predictive decision. It provides a unified theory of model-
based and data-driven real-time optimization and control for uncertain networked
systems. Integral Reinforcement Learning holds the key to integrating real-time
data-driven methods, model-based methods, and physical constraints. The
structure of Integral Reinforcement Learning will be explored to investigate
exactly how and where to use Deep Learning neural networks in architectures that
have multiple nested learning loops. A probabilistic spatiotemporal scenario
data-driven framework will then be developed for multi-scale sequential control
of networked engineering systems under uncertainty. The algorithms and tools
developed will be used to sculpt optimal power profiles for power electronics
converters in a DC distribution network and help mitigate the adverse effects of
intermittent sources, uncertain load demand, or faults.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents a radical departure from the
exiting big data and decision-making research, toward developing autonomous
decision-making under uncertainty constructs for systems of growing scales and
time critical mission requirements. Algorithms and tools developed can be
extended to other smart and connected domains, e.g., air traffic management,
networked traffic platoons, and sensor networks. US microgrid capacity is
expected to reach 4.3 GW by 2020. DC distribution networks are emerging
alternatives to AC distribution ones, and are critical to the scalable
integration of renewable energy resources and electrified transportation fleets.
Research results will be ported into topics in reinforcement learning, optimal
control, networked control systems, data-driven analysis and decision-making,
and power electronics systems. This project synergizes research activities
between University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) and Texas A&amp;M-Corpus Christi
(TAMUCC), both HBCU/MI Hispanic Serving Institutions, and involves students from
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.