* 1953325
* Analysis of an Extensive Towed Streamer Dataset Collected on the New England Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Alan Chave, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2021
* USD 182,081.00

Groundwater on continental shelves is a new frontier in water sciences. A
modeling study suggests that over a thousand cubic kilometers of fresh water
could be trapped offshore New England, and hundreds of thousands of cubic
kilometers exist within passive continental margins globally. For reference, the
City of New York consumes roughly a cubic kilometer per year. Under recent NSF
support, a towed electromagnetic (CSEM) system was designed, constructed, and
tested that is aimed at surveying offshore groundwater. This technique builds on
experience in the petroleum industry using a similar technology. CSEM is
preferentially sensitive to resistive bodies, which include fresh water. During
the course of an 8-day test cruise in August 2019, more than 700 km of data were
collected over a region extending from the east end of Martha’s Vineyard to
offshore Long Island and from coastal waters to the edge of the continental
shelf. This proposal seeks to analyze, model, and interpret this exciting data
set. Specifically, the inference that the entire New England shelf is underlain
by freshwater is a hypothesis that can be partially tested. The result will
contribute to national health and welfare, and has societal relevance given the
increasing scarcity of fresh water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The towed streamer
CSEM system is composed of a 1-km long receive streamer towed at half of the
water depth, and a 250-m long transmit dipole towed near the surface. The
transmit streamer is powered by a 250-A source producing a bespoke waveform
between 0.1-10 Hz. Data are available in real time via optical fibers in the
streamer cable. Data are collected in “shots”, each 60 s, of transmitted
waveforms and 10 s with the transmitter off to measure noise levels. The work to
be carried out under this proposal includes: 1) merging the navigation and
streamer attitude data to produce a model for receiver location as a function of
time, 2) computing the frequency response of each shot, removing the source
response in the process, 3) devising a robust method for culling out the shots
that are noisy to produce a final data set, 4) merging the navigation and shot
data to produce a final data set containing location, depth, amplitude and
phase, and 5) inverting the data to produce 2D resistivity maps along the
various lines where data were collected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.