* 1953799
* NSF-BSF: Extremal and Probablisitic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Asaf Ferber, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 210,000.00

In this project the investigator and collaborators study a variety of questions
in extremal and probabilistic combinatorics. While extremal combinatorics deals
with the interplay between various properties of large discrete structures (e.g.
graphs, hypergraphs, permutations, or sets of integers), probabilistic
combinatorics deals with the typical relations between such properties. Both
areas have grown tremendously in the past few decades both in depth and in
breadth. They supplied many spectacular results that affected various other
areas of mathematics, such as number theory, group theory, probability theory,
information theory, and theoretical computer science. Furthermore, many key
insights that were developed in order to solve some of the core questions in
extremal combinatorics were later exported to other areas. A major goal of this
project, besides answering the questions under study, is to develop new tools
and techniques that will be applicable to other areas of discrete mathematics.
The project provides research training opportunities for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions the investigator and his collaborators
intend to study belong to some of the most actively studied topics in current
extremal and probabilistic combinatorics, with many explicit and implicit
analogies and connections between them. The first set of questions deals with
classical extremal problems such as the Turan-number of bipartite graphs and the
number of subsets of the first n integers not containing a solution to some
fixed linear equations. The second set of problems deals with random matrices
and addresses questions such as "what is the probability that a random symmetric
matrix is singular?" and "how resilient is the rank of a typical matrix?" The
third set of problems deals with anti-concentration inequalities and addresses
questions such as "what is the probability of seeing a given number of edges
when sampling a fixed number of vertices from a hypergraph?" The last set of
problems deals with permutations and address the order of Stanley-Wilf limits
and large deviation inequalities for random
permutations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.