* 1953191
* Parallel Ensemble Learning and Feature Interaction Discovery: High Volume Dynamic Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 452,016.00

In the digital age, the advancement of technology has enabled data collection at
an unprecedented pace including the collection of a variety of dynamic data over
time. Such dynamic data potentially holds the key to unlock many mysteries in
science, such as how genes interact with each other in the developments of
Drosophila and Human alike. However, dynamic data is notoriously challenging to
analyze due to its changing nature as well as its massive data size. The PI
plans to enhance the modeling toolbox for dynamic data by designing scalable
parallel algorithms that aim at both high prediction accuracy and high
interpretability through decision-tree based methods. Their applications range
across many fields including computational biology and precision medicine.
During the course of the proposed research, graduate students will receive
training in domain-driven data science and open-source software development.
Further dissemination of the proposed research will be through an upcoming book,
undergraduate- and graduate-level courses, and presentations at workshops and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high-volume dynamic data poses challenges
to the model training process because the underlying data distribution is
varying with time. Algorithms or models have to adapt to the changing dynamic as
well as their interpretations. Among statistics and machine learning methods,
decision-tree based ensembles are especially favorable for dealing with a large
volume of dynamic data because tree ensembles can capture flexible non-linear
relationships in the data and are easily interpretable for people to extract
useful narratives and information. PIâ€™s prior work, such as iterative Random
Forests (iRF) and signed iterative Random Forests (siRF), identifies stable and
high-order biomolecule interactions that explain its high predictive accuracy
but it only focuses on cross-sectional data at a fixed time point. The proposed
research will build on the iRF and siRF algorithms to develop enhanced Random
Forest and iRF algorithms for modeling high-volume and dynamic data with
interpretable high-order feature interactions. The PI will 1) develop a
communication-efficient parallel RF training algorithm (pRF) that can
efficiently take advantage of a large number of machines. 2) propose a novel
method that discovers feature interactions in the dynamic data with the presence
of concept drift: dynamic iterative Random Forests (diRF). 3) carry out a
theoretical analysis of pRF and diRF algorithm under time-varying change-
detection models where local stationarity conditions are
satisfied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.