* 1953701
* Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Controlled Electron and Energy Transfer Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Abraham Nitzan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 512,059.00

Professor Abraham Nitzan of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to investigate charge and energy transfer and conversion
at the molecular scale. Nanotechnology offers the potential for new, miniature,
and powerful devices. However, devices operating on such small scales don’t
behave the same way as traditional, more familiar electronics. Nanoelectronics
are governed by quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics is the part of science that
considers with the behavior of matter and light on the atomic and subatomic
scale as opposed to classical mechanics, which deals with the macroscopic scale.
Professor Nitzan’s research group is exploring the theory needed to predict the
function and operation of tiny electronic devices and nano-electromechanical
engines. To complement the developed models and predictions, experimental
collaborators will test, confirm, and suggest needed refinements. This project
has a strong educational component also, as a group of students and postdoctoral
scholars is supported to gain hands-on experience in this groundbreaking
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Nitzan’s research focuses on the
theoretical and computational studies. The efforts examine the interplay between
electron and heat transfer in molecular systems and interfaces as reflected by
electron and heat currents. Electronic current noise and electron hopping
induced heat transfer is being studied. Team also characterizes the relationship
between system structure and its vibrational heat transport behavior;
specifically, to assess the role played by anharmonicity, chemical
substitutions, disorder, mode localization and pathway interference in
vibrational energy transport in molecular systems. They examine ways to control
heat transport processes by external driving. Finally, Professor Nitzan and his
group are investigating the thermodynamic implications of driving imposed on an
open molecular nano-system, which is undergoing energy and particle exchange
between internal electronic and vibrational states as well as relaxation due to
coupling to external baths, in order to develop a general thermodynamic
framework for describing energy conversion processes in molecular nanosystems
that can operate as molecular machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.