* 1953270
* RAPID:Investigating Media Dependencies, Mitigation Behavior, and Information Processing in the Time Leading up to Hurricane Dorian
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Kenneth Lachlan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2022
* USD 15,995.00

Considering media dependency and the likely need to reduce uncertainty before
making rational decisions, most individuals will seek to acquire information
from trusted media sources in the time leading up to, during, and immediately
following a large scale disaster. Yet at the same time, little is known about
media reliance under conditions of impending crises, and the effect that
patterns of information use will have on emotional responses, risk perception,
the attention devoted to risk messaging, and motivation to mitigate. While
speculated in past research, it is also unclear whether media reliance and
negative emotional responses are somehow linked to trait ruminative coping
styles, and it is equally unclear if need for cognition motivates information
seeking and response. To address these deficiencies in the literature, this
study examines the interplay between reliance on media, coping strategies,
processing tendencies, risk perceptions, and motivation to mitigate in the
context of Hurricane Dorian, which struck the southeastern United States in
September 2019. The findings will be useful to researchers hoping to better
understand media dependencies during hurricanes, and to emergency management
agencies in their consideration of message design and placement. The research
fills a significant gap in the social science literature on crisis response by
evaluating the links between trait processing characteristics, media use,
emotional responses, and mitigation behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
is an online survey distributed to 1,000 residents of Atlantic coastal areas
impacted by Hurricane Dorian. Participants are identified by zip code and drawn
from communities in Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina. They
respond to items addressing their trait need for cognition and their tendencies
toward ruminative processing. Participants respond to questions on their media
dependencies and responses, including the relative importance of varying media
in obtaining information about the hurricane, the specific informational
outcomes they sought, how they received first alerts, the degree of attention
they allocated to these messages, and perceptions of the adequacy of information
provided to them by government and media organizations. In terms of behaviors in
response to these warnings, participants are asked about any mitigation or
evacuation plans they had in place, any damage to their home that occurred,
specific coping strategies they relied upon to manage stress associated with the
event, their perceptions of the degree of risk associated with the hurricane,
and items addressing their emotional well-being before and after the
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.