* 1953259
* LEAP-HI/GOALI: DfAM of Smart Materials Using a Machine Learning Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Mary Frecker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure
(LEAP-HI) / Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project
addresses the complex technical challenge of automated design and additive
manufacturing (AM) of customized smart materials and devices. Additive
manufacturing, or 3D printing, is a layer-wise approach to manufacturing that is
rapidly becoming a viable method for large scale production. The medical device
industry, in particular, stands to benefit from AM through manufacture of
customizable devices for particular patients, diseases, and/or stages of
healing. The project advances AM by developing the ability to print “smart”
materials that can change shape in response to external stimuli. The technical
challenges are motivated by a medical device industry need identified by the
industrial partner, Actuated Medical Incorporated (AMI), for patient-specific
adaptive devices that are capable of actively changing their shape at periodic
intervals as the patient’s needs change. The active polymer materials developed
as part of the project are printed in a single AM process and will provide
customized multifunctional devices with fully integrated actuation to advance
the state of the art in patient-specific medical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the researched work
resides in the convergence of distinct, yet related and mutually beneficial,
areas: smart materials, design, additive manufacturing, and industrial scale-up
and integration. Despite the evolution of AM technologies and the ever-expanding
growth of smart materials, including printable ones, few researchers have
demonstrated the 3D printing of multifunctional multi-material structures and
devices. The project addresses this gap in knowledge through the integration of
processing, modeling, design and characterization, and by investigating the
complex interactions between multiple foci. The technical contributions are: (1)
development of functionally graded thermoset polymers with customized shape
memory and magneto-mechanical response capabilities, and (2) development of a
novel AM fabrication process that is capable of conformal printing and
functional grading of multiple materials. In collaboration with the industrial
partner, the investigators will develop appropriate performance and fabrication
requirements and scale up the research results through direct involvement of
students and faculty at the industry partner’s facility, while accounting for
regulatory requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.