* 1953416
* RAPID: Reformulating Networks of Security, Sustainability, and Survival: the emergence of an Atlantic storm society
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Kenneth Broad, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 28,867.00

Hurricane Dorian hit the northern Bahamas in September 2019 as a Category 5
hurricane with sustained winds up to 185 mph, gusts over 200 mph, prolonged
rains, and 20-foot surge. The aftermath of this storm event continues to unfold
across geographic scales involving local, national, regional, and international
social networks. By examining the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Dorian, while
networks of response are still being created and reformulated, it is possible to
begin identifying and characterizing the emergence of a coastal storm society
that is able to respond to the increasingly pervasive threat of recurrent major
storms. This reformulated society that is taking shape as a result of Dorian has
the potential to reformulate vital networks within persistent and chronic
conditions of uncertainty, thereby increasing community resilience. Findings
will be disseminated to aid organizations involved in disaster recovery efforts.
Reports will offer practitioners and researchers of humanitarian aid/ disaster
response a model for a more robust assessment tools that leverages local
resilience. The research also builds scientific research capacity through
international collaboration, broadens the participation of underrepresented
groups in the sciences, and trains undergraduate and graduate students in
methods of rigorous, scientific data collection and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award supports the collection of
critical but ephemeral data on the new forms of social dissolution and cohesion
formulated across local and regional scales in the aftermath of Hurricane
Dorian. In exploring issues of security, governance,and belonging, the project
asks what new forms of social cohesion and infrastructure are emerging, how and
to what they are adapting, and what events, processes and technologies enable or
frustrate these networks. Methods include on-site participant observation and
targeted semi-structured interviews (n=300) with displaced residents and rescue
organizations. Data will be compared with over 20 years of previously collected
research on social relations in the region, which will provide a baseline in
understanding shifting and emergent social forms and socio-
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.