* 1953349
* Expanding Undergraduate Research Participation in General Education Courses to Improve STEM Persistence and Graduation Rates
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* James Holloway, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,829,423.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to build capacity for and
broaden early participation in undergraduate research. It will do so by
implementing and testing a sequence of course-based undergraduate research
experiences designed to enable more undergraduates to participate in STEM
research. Undergraduate research has been linked to increased student
persistence, improved graduation rates, increased STEM content mastery, and
enhanced science identity. These positive effects of undergraduate research
experiences are even more pronounced for students from populations typically
underrepresented in STEM. In many institutions, demand for undergraduate
research experiences exceeds available opportunities. As a result, the
experiences may be biased toward students who enter college with the knowledge
and skills needed to do research. Participation can be limited for students who
are not yet “research-ready,” including students from under-resourced high
schools. This project will involve multiple STEM disciplines and engage in
institution-wide changes: nearly 100 instructors will embed research experiences
into more than 85 sections of general education courses that will serve more
than 5,000 students over the course of the project. Information from
implementing and studying this research infusion will increase understanding
about how to: a) improve instruction and learning outcomes in STEM general
education courses; b) improve student pathways to research engagement; c)
leverage undergraduate research to more strategically improve persistence and
academic attainment for students underrepresented in STEM professions; and d)
provide a lower-cost, yet still effective, method for introducing more students
to the value and key concepts of scientific research. It is expected that
increasing access to undergraduate research will strengthen instruction in
introductory courses, increase the diversity of student researchers, and result
in improved college graduation rates in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address deficiencies in the state of knowledge about undergraduate
student education by comparing outcomes of complete undergraduate research
experiences to incremental undergraduate research experiences embedded in
general education and portal STEM courses. The project team will use demographic
and student educational records to measure the impact of multiple levels of
research engagement on different student populations. In addition, the research
team will develop and refine a new metric to measure student transitions from
lower to upper division courses. Key research questions that will be addressed
include: How do additional levels of undergraduate research engagement impact
learning, self-perceptions, and behavior, in comparison to full research
engagement? To what extent can these introductory levels be leveraged to expand
the number of undergraduate research experiences, and to create more inclusive
pathways to full research? Which student populations are most likely to benefit
from the different levels of research engagement, and from each of the
instructional mechanisms and activities? How can Hispanic-Serving Institutions
more accurately measure lower division to upper division transition in order to
identify students in most need of intervention? The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.