* 1953176
* CDS&amp;E: GOALI: Paints/Coatings In-Silico Product Design and Real-Time Product-Quality Monitoring and Control
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Masoud Soroush, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 326,410.00

Modern paint/coating (P/C) products are complex mixtures of chemicals that
include polymer resins, pigment dispersants, and other additives. To describe
P/C qualities such as color strength, durability, and shelf life, a vast set of
consumer specifications are required. The dependence of these consumer
attributes on the properties and amounts of the P/C ingredients and the
preparation conditions is complex, poorly understood, and currently impossible
to predict using physically based mathematical models. This is in contrast to
the P/C ingredients themselves, however, whose properties generally are well-
understood and can be predicted in advance by rigorous chemical reaction and
mixing models. This project is expected to develop a model capable of predicting
final properties of these complex mixtures. This is expected to aid in product
design, and real-time quality prediction, defect detection and diagnosis, and
product quality monitoring and control. The expected economic impact of this
work is faster design and customization of paint/coating (P/C) products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims to overcome the challenges of
predicting P/C final product qualities using a hybrid simulation approach that
combines machine learning methods with physically-based modeling elements. At
its core, decades of manufacturing data from the industrial partner of this
collaboration will be used to uncover relationships between manufacturing
processing conditions and the poorly understood P/C product qualities using a
statistical machine learning technique. This will create a black-box model in
the form of an artificial neural network which will take as input the
predictions of the physically based ingredient modeling elements and will
predict final P/C qualities. This research will produce robust computational
methods for in-silico P/C product design, real-time P/C product quality
prediction, product defect detection and diagnosis, and will enable methods to
monitor and control P/C product quality. The computational methods can be
applied directly or extended to other manufacturing processes. The team plans to
integrate this research systematically into undergraduate education through the
Drexel Co-op Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.