* 1953453
* Understanding the Role of Stochasticity in Chemical and Biological Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Anatoly Kolomeisky, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 470,000.00

Anatoly Kolomeisky of William Marsh University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to theoretically investigate the role of various chemical and
biological processes. It is known that chemical reactions are random or
stochastic processes, i.e., the times before the products appear are varied and
broadly distributed. All living systems rely on a large number chemical
reactions to support and maintain their activities. The high efficiency of
biological systems, however, raises a question of how random chemical reactions
can lead to very precisely controlled biological processes. Professor Kolomeisky
proposes that biological systems are able to properly tune the random chemical
processes by utilizing several different mechanisms. By combining theoretical
modeling, advanced computer simulations and extensive bioinformatics analysis,
his research group investigates the mechanisms of various complex chemical and
biological systems in order to clarify the role of randomness at the molecular
level. Specific projects include: determination of the molecular origin of cell-
size control in bacteria; understanding the mechanisms of transcription
bursting; uncovering the role of motion in cancer initiation; and investigating
the dynamics of heterogeneous catalytic chemical reactions. Close collaborations
with experimental and theoretical groups enable testing of the new ideas on the
role of randomness, and it promotes a deeper understanding of these complex
natural processes. Professor Kolomeisky is providing opportunities for high
school and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to participate in
this research and gain valuable training and experience for their future
careers. A special summer research program for visiting female and minority
undergraduate students is established. Outreach activities also include the
presentation of chemical shows in local schools, co-organization of an
undergraduate chemistry research symposium, public lectures delivered at local
cafes, and continued collaboration with science writers in order to disseminate
the this knowledge to a general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Kolomeisky focuses on developing a comprehensive theoretical description of
stochastic effects in living cells by generating quantitative models for several
specific biological and chemical phenomena. Theoretical analysis in his group is
driven by a central hypothesis that cells are capable of tuning the randomness
of biochemical reactions by using two main strategies, which involve a
collective effect when many different stochastic processes are coupled together
to cancel out the unfavorable random factors. They also observe a coupling of
stochastic processes with external fields (mechanical, electrical, etc.) to
control the random features. Professor Kolomeisky will specifically investigate
several biological and chemical processes in order to quantify the effect of
stochasticity in each of them. These processes are analyzed using a variety of
theoretical tools including discrete-state stochastic models, first-passage
analysis, bioinformatics methods, and extensive Monte Carlo computer
simulations. An outreach program developed by Professor Kolomeisky provides the
opportunity for local high-school students and undergraduate students from
underrepresented minority groups to participate in scientific research in an
academic setting via special summer research programs. Professor Kolomeisky
organizes a team of chemistry graduate students to give chemical experiments
shows in local schools, which are supplemented by popular lectures in order
increase the interests in STEM topics. The project also highlights the benefits
of science for society by directly presenting scientific findings to the local
community in an informal setting of café discussions, as well as communicating
with science writers in local newspapers and participating in scientific
internet blog discussions. The broader impacts of this project include a
multidisciplinary training program for young researchers of different levels
that will prepare them better for future technological and industrial
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.