* 1953204
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Deep learning enhanced parallel computations of fluid flow around moving boundaries on binarized octrees
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Inanc Senocak, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Computer simulations of heat and fluid flow find applications in many aspects of
science and engineering. Notable examples are aerodynamic design of aircrafts
and automobiles, and weather forecasting. These simulations are often
computationally expensive, and they are performed on supercomputers. Special
methods are used to implement the equations of heat and fluid flow as a
simulation software. The end goal is to create an accurate computer code that
can make optimal use of available computing power. However, this end goal is
becoming challenging on modern extreme-scale supercomputers that deploy a large
of number of computing processors to work in parallel. Existing algorithms face
performance bottlenecks and do not realize the full potential of a modern
supercomputer. The project team will develop new algorithms to overcome this
performance bottleneck. The successful completion of this award is expected to
result in an open-source heat and fluid flow simulation software. The project
team will develop educational tutorials to pique the interest of high-school
students in new capabilities of computer simulation and machine learning
techniques in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objective is to enhance parallel performance of simulations of incompressible
fluid flow around moving boundaries. A recently developed binarized octree
generation technique will be further developed as an open-source parallel
adaptive mesh refinement software infrastructure to solve the fluid flow
equations on Cartesian domains with deep levels of mesh adaptations. Machine
learning techniques and deep neural nets will be adopted in ways to ease
potential bottlenecks that are expected to degrade scalability of parallel
computations when large number of processors are deployed in simulations. The
project team will develop multiple deep learning algorithms such as
convolutional neural networks and generative adversarial networks to learn the
fluid flow around complex geometries and apply the learning for rapid and
accurate field estimation at arbitrary points. To successfully incorporate the
effect of boundary conditions at the interface, conditional generative
adversarial networks will be trained on different coarse and fine grids to learn
the communication pattern among the blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
within the NSF Directorate of Engineering is jointly supported by the NSF Office
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.