* 1953775
* 2020 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Yoav Rieck, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2022
* USD 24,999.00

This award provides funding for the 2020 Spring and Fall Redbud
Geometry/Topology Conferences, the first of which is to be held March 6-8, 2020
at the University of Arkansas. These conferences are part of an ongoing series
of conferences held at universities in Arkansas and Oklahoma, intended to
increase interaction and collaboration among early career and established
mathematicians in the area. The Spring meeting will feature talks by prominent
speakers from across North America, as well as a graduate student workshop. The
Fall meeting will take place at the University of Oklahoma, and it will
predominantly consist of talks by early-career mathematicians from Arkansas,
Oklahoma, and surrounding states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many problems in three-
manifold topology are algorithmic in nature. There have been many developments
recently, both in producing efficient algorithms and lower bounds on complexity.
The 2020 Spring Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference will focus on algorithmic
and effective questions in three-manifold topology. It will bring together
leading researchers to discuss these developments. The invited speakers are: Ian
Agol (University of California, Berkeley), Nathan Dunfield (University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign), David Futer (Temple University), Susan Hermiller
(University of Nebraska), Greg Kuperberg (University of California, Davis), Marc
Lackenby (Oxford University), Eric Samperton (University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign), Eric Sedgwick (DePaul University), Jennifer Schultens (University of
California, Davis), Anastasiia Tsvietkova (Temple University), William Worden
(Rice University). The conference begins with a workshop designed to enhance the
experience of graduate students and junior researchers. The workshop will
feature expository talks by Dunfield, Futer, Tsvietkova. More information is
available at the conference website:
https://mattclay.hosted.uark.edu/Redbud/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.