* 1953549
* Collaborative Research: Paleomagnetism and Geochronology of Mafic Dikes in Morocco, Reconstructing West Africa in Proterozoic Supercontinents
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* David Evans, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 390,432.00

Over billions of years of Earth history, continents have drifted across the
globe, periodically assembling into supercontinents. Pangea was the most recent
of these: a single landmass that joined the Americas to Europe and Africa, prior
to spreading of the Atlantic Ocean. Pangea was likely preceded by more ancient
supercontinents named Rodinia (about 900 million years ago) and Nuna (about 1.5
billion years ago), both existing within the “Proterozoic” time interval of
primordial life. Although these supercontinents have names, their exact
arrangements of continental fragments remain uncertain. Regardless, geologists
are beginning to speculate on whether the supercontinental transitions generally
have an accordion-like pattern of motion (imagine a future for the Americas
reversing their course and drifting eastward to close the Atlantic Ocean and re-
collide with Europe and Africa), or whether continents circumnavigate the globe
(imagine the Americas continuing to drift westward to close the Pacific Ocean
and collide with eastern Asia and Australia, thus turning the old supercontinent
“inside-out”). These ideas help shape our view of Earth’s evolving deep interior
over billions of years, and also give geographical context to the formation of
mineral deposits, ancient climate records, and biological evolution at the
longest timescales. This project uses two complementary methods of laboratory
measurement to determine how the continents have moved across the Earth’s
surface: paleomagnetism—the ancient record of the geomagnetic field that is
recorded by rocks; and the isotopic dating of the age of rocks using the
radioactive decay of uranium to lead. The project focuses on the least well-
understood continental fragment in the Nuna and Rodinia supercontinental
landmasses: the West African craton. Within West Africa, particularly the Anti-
Atlas Mountains of Morocco, recent advances of geological understanding provide
an opportunity to apply the two methods to ancient volcanic rock systems (“mafic
dikes”) of a variety of ages, to produce more accurate reconstructions of the
Nuna and Rodinia landmasses and to discover the patterns of Earth’s
supercontinental transitions. The project will involve collection of rock
samples in the field, laboratory analyses on those specimens, and publication of
results in peer-reviewed journals. In addition to the scientific goals of the
project, important societal outcomes associated with this project include
training the next generation of Earth scientists in an important science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) discipline; incorporation of the
project’s results into public museum displays; and development of educational
modules with K-12 public school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainties in
the configurations of supercontinents Nuna and Rodinia currently permit either
of two end-member views on long-term global geodynamics: whether supercontinents
tend to revert to prior configurations, or turn “inside-out.” It is also
possible that they have alternated between those two patterns in time. West
Africa's paleogeography is the least constrained of all major Precambrian
cratons, and its previously hypothesized placement either within the middle of
pre-Pangean supercontinents or along their periphery is crucial to the
aforementioned debate. This project seeks to conduct an integrated paleomagnetic
and geochronological study of mafic dike swarms in Precambrian inliers of the
Anti-Atlas Mountains, Morocco. High-quality and precisely dated paleomagnetic
poles obtained from this study will fill a notable gap in the tectonic and
kinematic history of West Africa and neighboring blocks in Nuna and Rodinia, and
provide essential ground-truth to the debate on supercontinental transitional
styles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.