* 1953993
* Collaborative Research: Unearthing Antarctica's role in the Late Cretaceous Evolution of Flowering Plants
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Brian Atkinson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2024
* USD 488,934.00

Part I: Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Flowering plants are the dominant
land plant group on Earth today. They play essential roles in climate-life
interactions and are fundamental for human well-being (health, food, materials).
Despite their importance to us, their early evolution has remained enigmatic.
Without the geological context of how these plants evolved, we will not fully
understand their roles in regulating climate and structuring environments. This
is important as terrestrial ecosystems today are undergoing many changes. The
fossil record indicates that critical events relating to the early
diversification of flowering plants occurred during the Cretaceous period
(145–66 million years ago). Recent discoveries of fossil flowers and fruits from
this time period have significantly furthered our understanding of early
flowering plant evolution. However, the majority of these discoveries are from
the Northern Hemisphere while similar discoveries from the Southern Hemisphere
are relatively lacking. This project will address this paucity of data by
collecting and describing Late Cretaceous flowering plant fossils from Western
Antarctica and placing them in evolutionary frameworks to better understand
early flowering plant evolution, biogeographic history, and Antarctica’s role in
the formation of modern ecosystems. Western Antarctica is the only place in the
Southern Hemisphere that is reported to contain Late Cretaceous-aged (100–66
million years ago) three-dimensionally preserved flowers and fruits. Therefore,
the recovery and study of these fossils can meaningfully further our
understanding of the early phases of flowering plant evolution. This work will
result in the description of new species that will be placed in evolutionary
analyses and biogeographic frameworks, which will help clarify the Cretaceous
diversification of flowering plants in the Southern Hemisphere. These fossils
will provide insights that will allow us to anticipate which plants might thrive
in a warming Antarctic and world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The Late Cretaceous diversification of flowering plants
(angiosperms) in the Southern Hemisphere is poorly understood due in part to the
limited amount of well-characterized fossil plant reproductive structures.
Paleobotanical studies indicate that Antarctica was an important area for the
Cretaceous diversification of flowering plants and is the only place in the
Southern Hemisphere that is known to contain permineralized Late Cretaceous-aged
angiosperm reproductive structures. The proposed research will elucidate
Antarctica’s role in the evolution of angiosperms and assembly of modern
ecosystems by recovering and characterizing Late Cretaceous Antarctic
angiosperms, placing them within a phylogenetic context, and testing for
biogeographic links between North America and Gondwana as has been observed for
animals. Fieldwork will be conducted in the James Ross Basin of West Antarctica
where previous reports and preliminary data indicate the presence of Late
Cretaceous-aged floras that include structurally preserved reproductive
structures. The exceptional preservation of these fossils allows us to record
data essential for placing them in a phylogenetic framework from which their
evolutionary and biogeographical context can be determined. The taxonomically
informative and well-preserved angiosperm reproductive structures within the
James Ross Basin are of a crucial age and from an important geographic area for
understanding the phylogenetic diversification of Southern Hemisphere
angiosperms and ecosystems. Collected fossils will be examined using standard
physical techniques and microCT imaging. The study of these fossils will result
in the description of new species and possibly higher taxa and provide a unique
perspective into the floral diversity and composition of West Antarctica during
the Cretaceous. In addition, the fossils will be placed within a phylogenetic
framework, which will help to elucidate which lineages were diversifying in
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.