* 1953082
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Fast Numerical Simulations of Low Void Fraction Disperse Multiphase Systems using Event-Triggered Communication
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gretar Tryggvason, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 239,369.00

Disperse flows involve multiphase fluids where one phase consists of particles,
including bubbles and drops, suspended in another contiguous phase. Disperse
flows arise in many problems of practical interest in engineering and the
natural environment. Direct numerical simulations (DNS) have proven to be
indispensable in understanding such flows. However, for flows with more
concentrated particles (i.e. low void fractions), it becomes computationally
expensive to simulate interactions between particles. Even state-of-the-art
simulations take much too long for them to become commonplace. This project will
develop new computational methods, based on ideas from control theory, to speed
up such simulations and use them to conduct an in-depth study of disperse
multiphase systems with low void fractions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
intellectual merit of the project lies in using computation algorithms that
reduce communication among multiple processing elements for conducting large-
scale simulations of heterogeneous multiphase systems - in particular, low void
fraction disperse systems where the inclusion of many particles requires large
computational domains and long computational times to collect converged
statistical quantities. Such averaged data is critical for the construction of
reduced order models used for industrial predictions. This project will aid in
better understanding of multiphase flows and systems that are critical in energy
conversion, material processing, the chemical industry, atmospheric processes,
and living systems, as well as develop novel computational strategies based on
event-triggered communications between processors to improve the efficiency of
parallel computations. Further, people will be educated in both their
development and use, and educational material aimed at lowering the barrier to
entry for new researchers will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.