* 1953223
* NSFDEB-BSF: Uneasy alliances: emergent properties and feedback mechanisms among manipulative endosymbiotic communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jeremy Van Cleve, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2024
* USD 859,658.00

Unseen microbes influence the health and well-being of larger organisms, from
humans to plants to insects. Some of these microbes cause disease, some are
harmless, some are beneficial, and sometimes their effect depends on other
microbes that are present in the same host organism. These microbial
communities, or “microbiomes”, that share the same host can be very complicated,
making it difficult to understand how different microbes affect each other and
the host. However, arthropods such as insects and spiders often have simpler
microbial communities that can serve as useful models for understanding
microbial interactions and their combined effects on the host. Additionally,
these simple microbial communities are often heritable, passed directly from
arthropod mother to offspring, and can have major effects on their host’s
biology and reproduction. In this project, the researchers will use a spider
model system to investigate the consequences of microbe interactions. The
agricultural spider, Mermessus fradeorum, can host a community of up to 5
strains of inherited bacteria. These bacteria manipulate the spider’s
reproduction in complex ways that depend on which combination of bacterial
strains are present. The expected research results will be particularly
important for current and future efforts to use specific arthropod-hosted
bacteria to manipulate and control arthropods that can transmit diseases.
Undergraduate students, with an emphasis on the inclusion of underrepresented
groups, will be trained through classroom activities, individual research
experiments, and summer research internships. Outreach to the public will
include spider-oriented events at schools and public events, including
development of spider-oriented discovery cart series series at the University of
Kentucky Arboretum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will determine how the
presence or absence of different bacteria affect: 1) the quantity and location
of other members of the bacterial community within the host’s body, 2) the
resulting reproductive biology of the spider, and 3) the spread of different
bacterial community types in the spider population. The researchers will then
use mathematical models to make more general predictions about how co-hosted
bacteria cooperate versus compete within their shared host. The researchers will
use antibiotics to differentially cure spiders of various strains of bacterial
symbiont, then compare localization and quantity of other bacterial community
members using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) microscopy and
quantitative PCR. The reproductive phenotype of differentially infected spiders
will be evaluated via controlled matings to assess reproductive compatibility
among different infection types and offspring sex ratio. Spiders with different
symbiont communities will then be assembled into replicated laboratory
populations that will be allowed to evolve over several generations, to assess
the effects of the within-host microbial community on interactions among hosts
with different microbial symbionts, and also to whether host population
structure feeds back to affect the composition of the within-host symbiont
community. Analytical and simulation models will be used to tie within-host
interactions of co-infecting bacteria to among-host dynamics of population
infection, which will provide a generalized framework for understanding
bacterial interactions in more complex systems. This proposal was co-reviewed
and co-funded by the Divisions of Environmental Biology and Integrative Biology
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.