* 1953653
* Using Interconnected Career Pathways and Success Coaching to Enhance Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Christina Nase, Rowan College of South Jersey -- Cumberland Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2025
* USD 2,145,082.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project seeks to improve the success of
students in STEM fields. It will do so by developing a regional model of
culturally inclusive STEM career pathways that span from high school to STEM
careers. The pathways will focus especially on careers in cybersecurity and
mechatronics/engineering, which have high workforce demands and offer well-
paying career pathways. This STEM career pathways model will be designed to
enhance relationship-oriented student supports and coaching to help students
across critical transitions, such as the transition from high school to college.
It is expected that these supports will result in increased success rates among
STEM students, particularly students from Hispanic or low-income populations.
The project will also support improvements in STEM curricula, implementation of
high-impact practices such as active learning, and access to research and work-
based learning experiences. By enhancing the STEM learning experience, the
project seeks to increase enrollment, retention rates, two- and four-year degree
completion rates, and career placement of students. The project seeks to
generate effective practices for designing a STEM career pathway model and will
share its findings with the broader higher education
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to generate new knowledge about
how to enhance student success in STEM by defining career pathways and
supporting students in those pathways. By embedding transfer program pathways in
cybersecurity and mechatronics/engineering, the project will enhance
opportunities for students to enter the STEM workforce in these fields. Project
goals are to: 1) Increase retention, credit-hour accumulation, graduation, and
STEM career entry outcomes; 2) Increase engagement of students, including
Hispanic and low-income students, in course-based undergraduate research and
experiential learning through cross-sector partnerships; 3) Improve academic and
career outcomes for students through innovative STEM teaching and learning
strategies and curricular models. The project evaluation includes a quasi-
experimental impact study to examine results by comparing outcomes for cohort
and non-cohort students, enabling assessment of differential outcomes between
groups. Mid-project outcome-trend reports, as well as the post-grant impact
study, will be disseminated via presentations at STEM conferences, publications,
and outreach to non-NSF funded HSIs. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.