* 1953959
* Chip-scale massive-parallel ultrafast physical random bit generator
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Hui Cao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 04/30/2024
* USD 386,000.00

The performance and reliability of our digital networked society rely on the
ability to generate large quantities of randomness. Random numbers are widely
used in secure communications, Monte Carlo simulations and stochastic modeling.
A completely new mechanism for massive-parallel ultrafast random number
generation is proposed. The random number generation rate that can be achieved
with this scheme will be several orders of magnitude higher than the fastest
physical random bit generators reported to date. The device is compact, robust
and energy efficient. Such a parallel ultrafast random number generator is
expected to have a broad impact on information security, cryptography,
authentication, data integrity, and Monte Carlo simulations,
etc..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ever-increasing demand to improve the security of
digital information has shifted the field of random number generation from
relying solely on pseudo-random algorithms to employing physical entropy
sources. Ultrafast physical random number generators are key devices for
achieving ultimate performance and reliability in communication and computation
systems. Parallel random bit generation schemes can greatly improve the
generation rate and scalability by producing many random bit streams
simultaneously. The aim of this project is to develop a massive-parallel
ultrafast random bit generator. It is based on a novel scheme of spatial
demultiplexing of a highly multimode semiconductor laser. Ultrafast beating of
numerous lasing modes produces distinct temporal fluctuations of emission
intensities at different spatial locations. These random fluctuations enable
parallel random bit generation in 100 to 1000 spatial channels. Each channel can
produce independent random bit stream at a rate up to 1 Tb/s. The cumulative
rate will approach 1 Pb/s, which is three orders of magnitude higher than the
fastest physical random bit generators reported to date. The quantum mechanical
noise will guarantee the true randomness of the generated bits. The preliminary
studies have provided the proof-of-concept demonstration. Systematic
experimental and numerical studies will be conducted to (i) understand the
origin of randomness and quantify the entropy generation rate, (ii) find the
fundamental limits for the number of parallel channels and the speed of random
number generation, (iii) integrate photodetectors with the laser on a chip, and
(iv) achieve real-time generation of random bit streams with direct interface to
a computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.