* 1953451
* Collaborative Research: Brain Size, Metabolism and Sociality in Ants
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,11/30/2023
* James Waters, Providence College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 11/30/2023
* USD 145,852.00

The brain is an extraordinarily complex organ that generates behavior.
Understanding brain size, structure, and function are among the most important
frontiers of science. Brain size is considered to be influenced by social life,
but the relationship is unclear. The research will address two significant
questions: how does the brain change with body size, and how is brain function
affected by the social nature of species. These questions will be addressed by
comparing different species of ants, which are remarkably variable in size and
social life. Ant brain sizes will be computed using a novel method and a new
highly sensitive technique will allow energy use in individual brains to be
measured. By comparing colonies that exhibit large size and division of labor
with less socially complex small colonies, the effects of social life on brain
size and energy use can be understood. Broad insights into the factors that
affect brain evolution in all animals, including humans, will be gained. The
project will train the next generation of scientists to become skilled in
research, and will engage teachers and students to improve the experience of
K-12 science education. The science curriculum of students from underrepresented
groups and diverse minorities at the Laboratory Schools of the University of
Chicago and Boston-, Phoenix-, and Providence-area schools will be enriched. The
project will broadly address critical national needs to improve science literacy
and inspire career choices that will enhance the global competitiveness of the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis that complex social life
selects for increased brain size and adaptive compartmental allometries to
neurally support behavior is controversial and continues to be tested and
debated. Importantly, the energetic cost of operating the brain is virtually
unknown. Eusocial insects offer excellent models to address these questions of
brain evolution. The PIs will robustly sample brain size, scaling, and
metabolism in ant species that range widely in social complexity (colony size,
physical caste) and worker body size to test the hypothesis that the energetics
of ant brain tissue are independent of worker body size, morphological caste, or
species, and thus scale in direct proportion to brain size. Scaling
relationships of brain size and metabolism - and metabolic rates of brain
regions that have social functions - with worker body size and colony size will
be assessed. Respiration rates of individual worker brains and individual
workers will be measured to determine the integrative physiological principles
governing the evolution of brain size, structure, and function in the context of
ant social evolution. Employing an integrated workflow connecting labs between
research and primarily undergraduate institutions, brain templates from confocal
images will be computationally constructed to automate and thus rapidly quantify
brain size and structure. Scaling relationships of functionally differentiated
brain regions and estimates of brain and body metabolic rates will be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.