* 1953891
* Combinatorics of Interacting Particles and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Olya Mandelshtam, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 168,067.00

The proposed project explores structures that lie at the intersection of
combinatorics, representation theory, statistical physics, and integrable
systems. The proposed research also has many applications: the key object of
this work, the asymmetric simple exclusion process (ASEP), has been studied as a
model for traffic flow, as well as in biological processes such as translation
in protein synthesis and kinetic biopolymerization. In the longer term, the
proposed project has the potential to have an important impact on these
applications. Some of the topics of the proposed project are accessible to
younger researchers, with several projects intended for work with students.
Workshop organization, outreach, and activities aimed at improving climate in
STEM are also planned. This project is jointly funded by the Combinatorics
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

The principal goal of this project is to study the remarkable connection
between particle models such as ASEP and orthogonal polynomials. The first part
of this work concerns Macdonald polynomials of type A as an application of the
combinatorics of the ASEP on a circle, through recently discovered formulas that
use multiline queues to connect probabilities of the ASEP to symmetric and
nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials. It is proposed to use those new formulas to
explore Schur positivity of modified Macdonald polynomials: one line of attack
is to study the quasisymmetric Macdonald polynomial. The second part of this
project concerns the extension of the results obtained for Macdonald polynomials
of type A to the type BC setting to discover formulas both for Koornwinder
polynomials and probabilities of the multispecies ASEP with open boundaries.
Thus far such formulas exist only for the two-species ASEP case corresponding to
a special case of Koornwinder polynomials, studied in earlier works. It is
proposed to merge those results with the multiline queue approach to find a new
object that incorporates boundary conditions and admits any number of species.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.