* 1953712
* Novel Statistical Frameworks for Local Inference in Neuroscience of Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Bharath Chandrasekaran, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,976.00

Learning to make decisions is important in almost all aspects of our lives. How
humans learn is a topic of intense study in many diverse fields including
psychology, linguistics, and the neurosciences. Learning to categorize is
particularly crucial for humans and other animals in our interactions with our
environments - whether it is a friend or a foe, edible or non-edible, the word
/bat/ or /hat/ etc. As we learn to categorize information, our brain and
behavior fundamentally change. These longitudinal trajectories evolve
differently in different individuals and across brain systems. While recording
and analyzing human behavior and neural function have become sophisticated,
statistical methods for characterizing local similarities and differences in the
underlying neural and behavioral process dynamics across individuals and groups
are still emerging. This project aims to address this critical gap through the
development of novel statistical frameworks for complex behavioral data on
learning in adults. This collaborative project will provide trainees with
experiences in a broad range of interdisciplinary topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
common theme underlying the statistical research undertaken in this project is
the assessment of the local dynamic behavior of the learning processes - how
similar or different these processes are, including especially how similarly or
differently they might be influenced by the associated predictors, across
learning stages and brain networks. Through innovative adaptation and
amalgamation of classical ideas and recent advances in diverse areas in
statistics, including sparsity inducing priors, tensor factorization techniques,
functional data analysis methods, locally informative sampling strategies, etc.,
novel generic statistical frameworks and associated computational machinery for
local inference in longitudinal settings will first be developed. This
frameworks will then be adapted to specific models for neural learning
processes. The principal investigators will use carefully designed learning
experiments in one domain of research - how adults learn novel speech categories
and theories to validate the results obtained by the new statistical models.
While human speech learning is an interesting and well-studied problem on its
own, insights gained from this application are generalizable to other domains of
studies that involve human learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.