* 1953793
* Enhancing linguistic infrastructure through the documentation of conversational expression of an endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Marianne Ignace, Sealaska Heritage Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 04/30/2024
* USD 314,857.00

Worldwide, Indigenous and minority languages are experiencing rapid decline in
daily use and number of speakers. Xaad KÃ­l, Northern Haida (hdn), an Indigenous
language of coastal Southeast Alaska and northern British Columbia, Canada, has
only six remaining fluent speakers. While Haida grammars and dictionaries exist,
most sources do not document language use in conversational daily life, and none
provide audio-visual documentation. This project documents Alaskan and Canadian
elders conversing in this endangered language. Recorded conversation will
demonstrate how speakers express politeness, objection or agreement; describe
daily life; and relate events from the past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conversation
will be elicited using guided conversation; nonverbal stimuli such as photos and
images; and task-oriented activities. These recordings, along with twenty hours
of archival audio, will be translated, transcribed, annotated, and archived for
public use in both Alaska and Canada. This new resource on the Northern Haida
language will make invaluable cultural, historical, and linguistic data
available to the community, language learners, and researchers. Documentation of
this language will also provide a permanent record and linguistic infrastructure
of a language in imminent danger of extinction and will broaden and enrich
resources for comparative linguistic study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.