* 1953606
* Building Undergraduate Capacity in STEM at a Hispanic Serving Institution utilizing Culturally-Relevant Instruction with Micro-Credentialing
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Ronald DeMara, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,831,193.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to create and analyze a
supportive comprehensive system to build undergraduate student capacity in STEM
fields at HSIs. The project will support underserved and underrepresented
individuals in STEM to increase employability and representations in the
workforce by (a) training higher-education STEM faculty and graduate teaching
assistants in culturally-relevant instructional approaches, (b) digitizing
assessments and increasing peer-tutoring for students, and (c) incorporating
micro-credentialing and industry internships. The culturally-relevant
instructional approach will be integrated into undergraduate core courses
spanning multiple STEM disciplines for delivery of approximately 9,500 students
annually. This project also aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs that typically may not receive high levels of funding. To
this end, the investigators will work to transport the developed pedagogy
through technical and instructional exchange activities including a summer
training workshop conducted annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to:
(a) analyze the impact of culturally-relevant training for undergraduate
faculty, graduate teaching assistants, and peer mentors related to learner
achievement, engagement, and degree attainment; (b) employ and refine an
assessment infrastructure to promote student learning, retention, advancement,
and graduation at HSIs; (c) create an automated micro-credentialing tool that
would provide access to community internships while developing student self-
efficacy; and (d) develop culturally-relevant curricular materials to train STEM
faculty, graduate teaching assistants, and peer tutors. The project will advance
research related to culturally-relevant instructional activities in STEM, peer-
tutoring, and experiential learning opportunities inclusive of micro-
credentialing. Data collected in this research includes the following scales:
General Engineering Self-Efficacy Scale (GESES), Culturally Responsive Teaching
Self-Efficacy (CRTSE), and Culturally Responsive Teaching Outcome Expectancy
(CRTOE). Additionally, focus groups and survey research of all participants will
provide a robust information to inform STEM educational
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.