* 1953285
* SaTC: CORE: Small: A High Level Synthesis Approach to Logic Obfuscation
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ankur Srivastava, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,998.00

Use of untrusted foundries for integrated circuit (IC) fabrication has raised
concerns such as IC piracy and overproduction. Logic/Design locking (also known
as logic obfuscation) secures design details from an untrusted fab by
incorporating a locking key for hiding the functional and structural information
of the circuit. This project will develop a system level methodology to design
locked digital circuits which a) are rendered useless if the attacker uses any
incorrect key and b) are resilient to state of the art attacks such as
satisfiability attack (SAT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
several high level design optimization techniques that open new possibilities of
locking design details at the system level. The main optimization goal is
corruption of an application for any incorrect key. The techniques are designed
to automatically inform the gate level locking constructions to achieve
resiliency against SAT attacks. First, a few error critical inputs will be
identified at the application level following which the architecture will be
synthesized using appropriate system level decisions to render the circuit
dysfunctional for wrong input key.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project include a) addressing the obfuscation challenge at system level
leading to more secure hardware, b) supporting graduate education through PhD
students, c) research artifacts in the forms of papers, tutorials, lecture
slides and open source software, and d) undergraduate mentoring and minority
engagement through the University of Maryland (UMD) Advanced Cybersecurity
Experience for Students (ACES) program and UMD Clark Doctoral
Fellowships.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be maintained
well beyond the duration of the project and for as long as necessary subject to
university archiving guidelines and accessible via
http://srivastava.umd.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.