* 1953103
* Comparative Database of the Derivational Morphology of a Language Family
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Monica Macaulay, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 11/30/2023
* USD 331,409.00

The historical development of a language family can be difficult to ascertain
because the materials about that language family are widely dispersed. This
project creates new computational infrastructure (an accessible, searchable,
family-wide corpus database) that integrates dispersed material that can serve
as research infrastructure for a language family and for comparative analysis of
other language families. This new infrastructure will contribute to a more
accurate and reliable reconstruction of the language family, leading to improved
understanding of subgrouping within the family. The infrastructure database will
also be useful for future research and documentation (e.g. the writing of
grammars and other reference works) on languages of this family. This new
database will enable theoretical work on the synchronic structure of words,
advancing approaches to reconstructing polysynthetic languages, and can lead to
new lines of inquiry. Tagging the corpus with semantic features, geocodes, and
other such information will be invaluable for analytical work in the future, for
example, lexical semantics, morphology, dialectology, and typology, and will
have an impact on understanding these areas more broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes important contributions in building
infrastructure for comparison of languages within a language family when the
languages are morphologically complex. The infrastructure itself will be of
general value for other linguists who are engaged in work on language families
with complex morphology. It will also make major contributions to the
understanding of understudied areas such as lexical semantics, and it will allow
for a deeper understanding of complex and little understood areas in the
historical developments of the language family. It will further serve needs of
many communities where there is a focus on creating new vocabulary in the
languages of the family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.