* 1953310
* Linguistic and Anthropological Documentation and Analysis of an Endangered Language
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Florian Lionnet, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 10/31/2023
* USD 294,662.00

Languages spoken by small populations are threatened by globalization and
ongoing socioeconomic changes, yet they contain undocumented linguistic
infrastructure and cultural information. This project documents such an
endangered language, thereby providing new insights into important questions in
linguistic theory such as tone, vowel systems and vowel harmony, and speech
strategies. This linguistic analysis will also provide a deeper understanding of
regional population history and will advance the understanding of local plants
and plant uses. The results will be documented and disseminated via a reference
grammar, a multi-lingual lexicon, an ethno-historical monograph, an
ethnobotanical database of plants and plant uses, as well as by archived,
annotated language data. Societal impacts include training of local community
members in language documentation, fostering international scientific
cooperation through active collaboration among scholars, and training
undergraduate students in methods of language documentation and analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With data from a rare and underrepresented language, this
project will produce theoretical analysis that will influence linguistic
typology and theory in the domains of Advanced Tongue Root (ATR) harmony (there
is an unusual case of sounds having to be similar to each other), non-
concatenative tonal morphology and grammatical tone, logophoricity, and reported
speech. Through its linguistic analysis the research will produce a broader
context of the society, culture, and history in which this language is used. The
collected data will illuminate both the present-day ethno-linguistic landscape
of the region and unsolved issues in language classification, and the enrichment
with new language data of a growing comparative ethnobotanical database. The
result will be of use to a variety of sciences and
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.