* 1953346
* CDS&amp;E: Corrosion-induced Damage and Fracture: Pushing Micro-Scale Simulations to the Macro-Scale, in Both Space and Time
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Florin Bobaru, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 748,375.00

Corrosion can be a precursor to fracture and catastrophic failure in structures
and systems in all aspects of life. Understanding how corrosion-induced changes
in material properties at the small scale lead to fracture and damage at a much
larger scale can reduce costs to the broader economy by tens of billions of
dollars each year. It can also prevent loss of life from catastrophic failure of
man-made systems. The knowledge gained from this project will improve safety and
resilience in a broad array of material systemsâ€”ranging from transportation to
infrastructure and medicine. The project will train graduate, undergraduate, and
middle and high school students and will produce a handbook on modeling of
material degradation and failure. The knowledge gained from the research will be
broadly disseminated through an open-source computational platform, a simulation
app, and by organizing conference symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
create a new class of highly efficient nonlocal solvers allowing unprecedented
access to multiple spatial and temporal scales in simulation of material
degradation and failure caused by dissolution-type phenomena-- pushing the
currently reachable space and time-scales of computational models from
micrometers and minutes, to meters and years. This project creates efficient
solvers to perform massively-parallel, large-scale simulations capable of
linking the disparate spatial and temporal scales relevant in these problems.
Specifically, novel boundary-adapted spectral methods for peridynamic models of
diffusion, deformation, corrosion damage and fracture will exploit the
convolution structure of nonlocal operators to solve transient problems with
billions of degrees of freedom efficiently. The researchers will also perform
numerical analysis and error estimation for the new methods. A coupled mechano-
chemical spectral method for peridynamics will enable simulation of corrosion-
induced failure in materials at the structure-level while accounting for micro-
scale effects, thereby spanning length-scales and time scales previously
unreachable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.