* 1953087
* CDS&amp;E: Geometrical Regression Models Involving Complex Shape Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Chao Huang, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The need for quantifying shapes of objects arises in many scientific endeavors,
with prominent examples in anatomy, biology, physics, and computer vision. These
objects can be anatomical parts, biological cells, road networks, facial
surfaces, or dinosaur bones. In statistical shape analysis, one uses
mathematical representations to measure and analyze statistical variability of
shapes within and across subject populations. Furthermore, one studies
interactions of shapes with other related variables of interest. For examples,
in medical imaging one uses shapes of tumors to diagnose and treat diseases or
one studies the effects of aging on shapes of cellular structures to develop
appropriate drugs. Such studies are broadly termed shape regression, where one
forms statistical models for analyzing interactions of shapes with other
variables of interests. Shape can either be used a predictors or responses
depending upon the problem context. There is an urgent need to develop formal
statistical tools, especially regression models, for analyzing shape data in
many disciplines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While recent years have seen tremendous
progress in Riemannian approaches to shape representations, the development of
statistical models for shape regressions has been relatively limited. The two
biggest challenges are non-Euclidean nature of shape representations and lack of
registrations in given object data. Past approaches are restricted to
statistical models that use pre-registered data and globally linear
approximations on one hand, and machine learning solutions that lack
interpretable solutions on the other. The proposed research will provide
detailed interpretable solutions with ability to formally test relationships
between shapes and other variables, even when data is sparse. The key
innovations are: (1) use of locally linear approximations of shape manifolds to
reduce distortions, and (2) incorporate optimizations over nuisance
(registration-related) transformations inside regression models rather than as
pre-processing. The project will develop underlying estimation theory and
efficient computational solutions for implementing these methods across
scientific disciplines. These models will also be amenable to development of
real-time, scalable algorithms for analyzing large datasets, for estimation,
prediction and testing of models involving shape variables. This project brings
together a broad expertise from diverse areas such as computational Riemannian
geometry, statistical methodology, and scientific applications, to make new
inroads. This research direction, while clearly challenging, represents a fresh
perspective and a great opportunity to develop new statistics and to contribute
in major scientific advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.