* 1953448
* Capacity Building for Students and Faculty Through Partnerships, Research, Innovation, Mentoring, and Engagement
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2025
* Robby Petros, Texas Woman's University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 02/28/2025
* USD 2,448,091.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1: Building Capacity project aims to
improve retention and graduation rates for undergraduate STEM students at Texas
Woman’s University (TWU). TWU, the largest public university primarily for women
in the United States, is a Hispanic-serving Institution with an enrollment of
approximately 10,300 undergraduate students, 88% of whom are female. This
project intends to establish the TWU-Partnerships, Research, Innovation,
Mentoring, and Engagement (TWU-PRIME) Program to improve faculty engagement and
student learning and retention in STEM. This project includes three key
elements: 1) redesigning introductory courses in biology, chemistry, and
mathematics, 2) supporting faculty to include innovative, evidence-based, and
culturally relevant approaches in their teaching, and 3) providing opportunities
for students to engage in mentored research internships with local STEM
industries. These elements together are intended to improve STEM teaching and
learning to foster increased retention and graduation rates for STEM students at
TWU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TWU-PRIME seeks to build capacity by increasing STEM
engagement, retention, and graduation through three strategies: 1) improving
performance in STEM foundation courses through course redesign, 2) developing a
Faculty Community of Practice, and 3) launching meaningful STEM learning
experiences through mentored research and internships for students and the
development of collaborations between faculty and external partners. Course
redesign efforts will include personalized learning approaches, flipped or
inverted classrooms, cooperative learning, and/or case study teaching. Faculty
instructors in foundational courses in biology, chemistry, and mathematics will
be integrated into a community of practice, which will support both course
redesign efforts and integration of diversity competency development to
recognize students’ social identities and lived experiences. Research
internships with local community partners such as HealthTrakRx, Mentor LLC, and
the Noble Research Institute will be established to provide meaningful research
experiences for students and to facilitate the development of faculty
relationships with industry and research partners. These external partnerships
are anticipated to have long-term benefits for the workforce relying on STEM
graduates and to create new and meaningful knowledge about how cross-sector
partnerships contribute to STEM teaching and learning and to workforce
development. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.