* 1953362
* Establishing Roots to Grow STEMs: Affirming STEM identity, building community, and improving graduation rates through a multidisciplinary lower division curriculum
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Merri Casem, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,194,727.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to increase retention and
graduation rates of underrepresented STEM majors through a novel
multidisciplinary, multi-departmental, lower division curriculum and faculty
training plan that includes current and future STEM educators at HSI-serving,
four- and two-year institutions. Research shows that interventions that “root”
students in a community and “grow” their self-perception as STEM scholars
positively impact retention and graduation rates. Working at scale, this project
will build interventions into the first-year curriculum for all freshmen natural
sciences and mathematics (NSM) majors at a large comprehensive university
(estimated impact: 500-600 students per year). All NSM freshmen will enroll in a
unique, multidisciplinary course that blends instruction in critical
thinking/scientific reasoning with course-based interventions to enhance traits
of self-efficacy, identity, and belonging, and a seminar course highlighting
undergraduate research opportunities and STEM career exploration; all variables
associated with long-term student success. Student transitions to STEM careers
will be facilitated through a new collaboration between the NSM departments and
the campus office for internship. The capacity of faculty from NSM and local
two-year institutions to support underrepresented STEM majors will be enhanced
through training in inclusive teaching and reinforced by a training colloquium
for STEM educators from partner institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research-based project will involve five NSM departments and will impact all NSM
majors. The proposed research will add to the current knowledge base through an
investigation of three hypotheses: retention and graduation rates for STEM
majors are enhanced by multidisciplinary, course-based experiences that combine
academic content with psychosocial and NSM community-building activities; STEM-
related internships contribute to retention and graduation goals; and faculty
training improves retention by enhancing the STEM learning environment while
creating opportunities for STEM education scholarship. Assessment of critical
thinking skills and psychosocial traits will be achieved using validated survey
instruments. Retention and graduation data will be collected from the campus
office of institutional research. Expected outcomes from this project will
include validation of a course-based early intervention with documentation of a
2% annual increase in retention of STEM majors; increased awareness of STEM
career options, internships, and research opportunities as measured by student
engagement with campus resources and alumni employment data; increased
participation of faculty from four- and two-year institutions in training in
inclusive teaching in STEM; and increased faculty and student education research
productivity based on attendance in training workshops and evidence of
presentations and publications related to STEM education. Project dissemination
will be achieved through publication, presentation at national conferences, and
a training colloquium. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.