* 1953333
* LEAP-HI: Fighting Wildfires: A Data-Informed, Physics-Based Computational Framework for Probabilistic Risk Assessment and Mitigation and Emergency Response Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Ertugrul Taciroglu, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,007,200.00

Destruction caused by wildfires in the US has significantly increased in the
past two decades. While the federal governmentâ€™s spending on wildfire fighting
has been steadily increasing, wildfire severity has also been on the rise. The
focus of this Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and
Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) project is the creation an overarching computational
platform for wildfire risk management at multiple space and time scales. This
vision will be accomplished by creating and integrating transdisciplinary
scientific techniques in the fields of data analytics, computational modeling,
and model-based inference. The objective is to develop scientific foundations
for a live digital platform that evolves with new data and dynamically updates
the long-term (seasons/months ahead) to short-term (weeks/days ahead) pre-
ignition fire risks at regional and community scales, and predicts the post-
ignition fire behavior in near-real-time at the fire front. Once developed, the
computational platform will increase the efficiency of wildfire management
process by providing actionable information to decision-makers for pre-ignition
risk mitigation and post-ignition emergency response management. Involvement of
key stakeholders and utility companies, preparation of future workforce, and
K-12 outreach programs are integral parts of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research promises to provide a rigorous
computational approach to quantifying and predicting wildfire risk. Scientific
advancements that are anticipated include: (i) an overarching computational
platform for probabilistic wildfire loss assessment at different spatial and
temporal scales that evolves with data as they become available; (ii) an
integrated simulation framework including a wildfire model, urban-fire model,
and socioeconomic model to predict the wildfire loss in terms of economic and
social losses; (iii) a novel data-driven modeling approach for urban-fire
simulation, and a new empirical model for change in quality-of-life (QoL) due to
wildfire; (iv) new data collection modules and advanced data processing
techniques to collect refined data, process and infuse different sources of
data, and quantify uncertainty in the measurement data; and, (v) a Bayesian
model inference framework to quantify modeling uncertainties and update the fire
spread in ear-real-time by integrating new measurement data modules with the
wildfire model. In perspective, the project aims to lay the scientific
foundations of a holistic new computational platform to predict and monitor
wildfire risk. The resulting technology has the potential to positively
influence the wildfire management process, including the development of accurate
actuarial strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.