* 1953423
* Hybrid mathematical modeling for cell fate determination in clustered cell migration
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Bradford Peercy, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 372,258.00

Fate of the cell, arguably the most basic building block of life, is guided by
many things, internal drive and external influences among them. As cells grow in
community, differences arise and roles are established. How are different roles
established? What influences are paramount in deciding? What is the interplay of
roles and influences that produces the growing pattern, in time and space?
Mathematics seeks to discover patterns and applying mathematical modeling to
cells that are fated to migrate and travel in clusters will describe the balance
between intrinsic and extrinsic signals. In domains that are challenging to
visualize in experiments and that change over time, theory and computation can
guide discovery of the principles at work determining cell fate and decision-
making, ultimately to facilitate normal development and to hinder malignant
growth. This research will also train diverse researchers to fulfill their roles
in scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Successful cell migration is
critical for human development, immune response, and advancement of some
diseases, but much remains unknown. In particular, there are many gaps in our
knowledge of how cells navigate in vivo through complex tissue environments over
time. This project will leverage mathematical modeling and the simple,
genetically tractable, Drosophila ovary to address open questions about how
cells acquire motility, coordinate behaviors with neighboring cells, and move
within an organ. In many cases communication about these behaviors between cells
must occur through the extracellular space. It is unclear how extracellular
signaling molecules, such as chemoattractants and cytokines, are distributed in
tissues, and how spatially dependent differences in concentration may affect
signaling. For example, extracellular signal, such Unpaired (UPD), can interact
with the transmembrane Janus Kinase (JAK) to activate the Signal Transducer and
Activator of Transcription (STAT) responsible for the cell fate motility
decision. The hypothesis is that the heteromorphic extracellular domain impacts
signal distribution and motile cell behaviors, which can be revealed through a
hybrid agent-based model coupled to a reaction-diffusion model of extracellular
signal converted to intracellular signalling and movement. Based on imaging
data, we will accurately model heterogeneity in tissue structure and examine the
impact of this physical constraint on molecular diffusion and
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.