* 1953787
* Trans-formative Capacity Building: Targeted STEM Infusion Project Grant
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Kristine Sudbeck, Nebraska Indian Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 03/31/2023
* USD 194,108.00

The goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to support
Native-serving institutions of higher education in building their science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and research
capacities. The project directed by Nebraska Indian Community College (NICC)
titled “Transformative Capacity Building: Targeted STEM Infusion Project”
directly addresses TCUP’s goal through the establishment of a microbiology
laboratory and the development of a microbiology laboratory course that better
prepares their students to enter the workforce and/or matriculate to another
institution to pursue a four-year STEM degree. The project’s objectives are to
ensure that the laboratory is fully equipped and protocols and training are in
place that prioritize student and staff safety. The laboratory course will
include locally relevant content and evidence-based instructional methods and
will be pilot tested to optimize its effectiveness in support student learning.
The course is guaranteed fully transferable across Nebraska institutions of
higher education. NICC's videoconferencing capabilities successfully enable the
delivery of courses, including this one, to serve three campuses, broadening the
reach of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NICC’s mission is to provide quality
higher education and lifelong educational opportunities to all learners.
Expansion of the science disciplines at the college is one way to advance that
mission. The addition of microbiology, a required course and/or approved
elective for numerous STEM baccalaureate degree programs, supports students’
pathways to baccalaureate degrees as well as additional careers options for
graduates with public, private, and tribal entities. The project’s work to
strength NICC’s Laboratory Health and Safety Plan (HSP) and to train all STEM
faculty in the HSP protocols benefits all laboratory courses and degree programs
at the college, thereby building NICC’s capacity in STEM education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.