* 1953547
* Fundamental Acid/Base Properties of Hydrocarbon Carbon-Hydrogen (C-H) Bonds and Metal-Element Active Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Thomas Cundari, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 375,948.00

Professor Thomas R. Cundari of the University of North Texas is supported by an
award from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry to
computationally study novel catalytic methods for upgrading light alkanes (e.g.,
methane or natural gas, ethane, etc.) to more valuable commodity chemicals and
fuels (e.g. gasoline). The conversion of light alkanes to more valuable products
generally requires the use of metal-containing catalysts to speed up their
conversion to specific desirable products. Professor Cundari's students pursue
novel routes for conversion of this abundant domestic energy resource that do
not require dangerous, harsh or expensive chemical catalysts. The results of
advanced computer simulations of methane reactions are integrated with the
research of experimental collaborators to identify promising catalysts for this
important chemical transformation. The large data sets generated by Cundari
Group students are integrated with emerging machine learning techniques to
identify novel chemical entities for methane conversion. Early-career scientists
engaged in this research gain experience in cutting-edge research with
significant theory-experiment interplay in an area with obvious societal
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Thomas R. Cundari of the University of
North Texas is supported by an award from the Chemical Catalysis program in the
Division of Chemistry to investigate the fundamental importance of acid and base
properties of alkane C-H bonds and metal-ligand active sites, respectively.
Activation and functionalization of aliphatic C-H bonds is an important
challenge in commodity and fine chemical synthesis, for homogeneous and
heterogeneous catalysts. Cundari Group students employ quantum mechanical and
machine learning modeling to discern the extent of catalytic functionalization
without using super-acid/-base reagents. Simulations by the Cundari Group are
closely integrated with experiment and are further valuable chemistry community
by establishing benchmarks for accuracy and precision of important catalytic and
chemical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.