* 1953128
* Expanding the Fundamental Reactivity of Isocyanides
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Fraser Fleming, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Fraser Fleming of the Department of
Chemistry at Drexel University who is developing new ways to make and use a
chemical building block called an isocyanide. Key goals of this project are to
prepare more examples of unique types of isocyanides and to increase the number
of ways isocyanides are used to form molecules. Currently, there are only seven
examples of commercially available isocyanides, which limits the number of
compounds that can be made with these building blocks. This program is creating
simple ways to make more isocyanides and to use them to form new desirable
molecules for pharmaceutical and material applications. Professor Fleming works
with a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students and is leading
student retreats focused on work-life balance to ensure that future leaders
learn the practices required for high-performing leadership in the chemical
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isocyanides are valuable linchpins for
assembling heterocycles and peptidomimetics, which are privileged structures in
material and medicinal applications. A major limitation to the implementation of
isocyanides for accessing these desirable products is that there are only seven
commercially available examples. This research program is working expand these
systems by designing new reactions that form more complex examples of these
important building blocks and increase the types of bond connections that
isocyanides can be used to prepare. Specifically, this project is designing
methods for: alkenyl isocyanides to undergo conjugate addition reactions, aryl
isocyanides to participate in multicomponent processes to form complex
heterocycles, and boroalkylisocyanides to be prepared and used in cross coupling
reactions to form more complex isocyanide products. This research program also
serves as an excellent training ground for graduate and undergraduate
researchers who are also participating in retreats to hone their work-life
balance skills and to prepare for future leadership roles in chemistry
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.