* 1953104
* Enhancing Indigenous Language Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* John Lucy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2023
* USD 194,586.00

Developing and maintaining infrastructure is important for enabling future
research on disappearing languages. This award supports the modernization and
enhancement of language infrastructure in one of the oldest and most important
repositories of materials held in the country: the indigenous language
collections held at the University of Chicago. The collections, some extending
back a century, are currently dispersed across different units in the
university, have been catalogued differently, and are difficult to access. To
unlock the full scientific and social value of these collections, they need to
be physically consolidated, uniformly catalogued, and readily accessible both to
researchers and the public. The proposed enhancements will facilitate scientific
and historical research on languages, support heritage-language maintenance and
education efforts, and contribute to general public understanding of human
cultural and linguistic diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Chicago’s indigenous language collections include audio recordings in the
Digital Media Archives, language texts in the Archive of Indigenous Literatures,
unpublished linguistic and ethnographic manuscripts in the Manuscripts on
Cultural Anthropology, and indigenous language instructional materials. These
collections will be consolidated in the main library of the university, where
the staff have significant experience in long-term digital preservation. This
project integrates, standardizes, and enhances the heterogeneous metadata used
in the collections. Basic library cataloguing standards will be uniformly
employed and enhanced metadata on language, location, and content type will be
provided. Links will connect related items across collections and one unified
web portal for the consolidated collections will be developed. The portal will
include efficient browsing and finding tools and provides guidance on how to
navigate the site both for academic researchers and heritage speaker
communities. For materials not in the public domain, the site will explain the
procedures for obtaining access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.