* 1953813
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Attack-Agnostic Defenses against Adversarial Inputs in Learning Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Ting Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 01/31/2022
* USD 386,219.00

Deep learning technologies hold great promise to revolutionize the way people
live and work. However, deep learning systems are inherently vulnerable to
adversarial inputs, which are maliciously crafted samples to trigger deep neural
networks to misbehave, leading to disastrous consequences in security-critical
applications. The fundamental challenges of defending against such attacks stem
from their adaptive and variable nature: adversarial inputs are tailored to
target deep neural networks, while crafting strategies vary greatly with
concrete attacks. This project develops EagleEye, a universal, attack-agnostic
defense framework that (i) works effectively against unseen attack variants,
(ii) preserves predictive power of deep neural networks, (iii) complements
existing defense mechanisms, and (iv) provides comprehensive diagnosis about
potential risks in deep learning outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular,
EagleEye leverages a set of invariant properties underlying most attacks,
including the "minimality principle": to maximize attack evasiveness, an
adversarial input is generated by applying the minimum possible distortion to a
legitimate input. By exploiting such properties in a principled manner, EagleEye
effectively discriminates adversarial inputs (integrity checking) and even
uncovers their correct outputs (truth recovery). The specific research tasks
include: (i) identifying inherently distinct properties (differentiators) of
legitimate and adversarial inputs, (ii) developing attack-agnostic adversarial
input detection methods based on these differentiators, and (iii) analyzing
possible countermeasures by adversaries to evade such defenses. This research
not only facilitates the adoption of deep learning-powered systems and services,
but also enlightens designing and implementing robust machine learning systems
in general. New theories and systems developed in this project are integrated
into undergraduate and graduate education and used to raise public awareness of
the importance of machine learning security. More information about this project
can be found at the project homepage:
http://x-machine.github.io/project/eagleeye