* 1954692
* Workshop on Undergraduate Teaching with Mathematics and Statistics Action Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Allison McCulloch, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,801.00

This workshop aims to contribute to the national need for high quality
mathematics teaching by improving the preparation of future mathematics
teachers. The workshop focuses on helping mathematics education faculty develop
expertise with mathematics action technologies. These technologies include tools
and devices that compute and display the results of mathematical equations, such
as graphing calculators and computer simulations. This interactive workshop will
provide mathematics education faculty with opportunities to learn how to use
mathematics action technology as learners. In addition, the faculty participants
will consider the ways they might implement these technologies in their courses
for prospective secondary mathematics teachers. Approximately 50 faculty from
across the U.S. will participate in the workshop, gaining practice with
mathematics action tools that span the needs of different mathematics and
statistics courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to
improve faculty expertise in teaching undergraduate courses for future secondary
mathematics teachers. To this end, it will plan and implement a 2.5-day workshop
for instructors of undergraduate mathematics content and pedagogical methods
courses that are intended to prepare future teachers to teach mathematics with
technology. The project will provide beginning through advanced level sessions
in which faculty will learn how to use mathematics action technologies as
learners and consider the ways they might implement them in their courses.
Specifically the project will: 1) Provide workshop sessions on a variety of
mathematics action tools that span the needs of those working in geometric,
algebraic/function, and statistics contexts; 2) Provide workshop sessions that
range (and build) from basic functionality to more advanced functionality for
each mathematics action tool; 3) Provide workshop sessions that allow
participants to work at their own pace on specific functions of a mathematics
action tool of their choice with the support of experts; 4) Provide workshop
leaders for each technology tool who use the tool in content courses and methods
courses; and 5) Evaluate the effectiveness of the workshop through perceived
impact on faculty expertise and self-reports of mathematics action tool use in
instruction. Workshop participants are expected to leave with the expertise
needed to begin to incorporate mathematics action technologies into their
courses. What is learned about the development of participants' self-efficacy in
use of mathematics action technology will inform future workshop design and has
the potential to also inform future educational research
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.