* 1954882
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Robust Assembly of Compliant Modular Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Devin Balkcom, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 286,338.00

This project explores how flexible robots can be designed to move and join
together to form larger structures, such as temporary antennas, tent supports,
bridges, or tunnel reinforcements. The importance of the project lies in the
development of lightweight robots and large-scale systems of robots that can be
deployed quickly to form temporary infrastructure. Novel designs of flexible
robots, and the hardware and software systems to control them, advance the
fields of robotics, automated control, and mechanical design. Societal benefits
include humanitarian aid and disaster relief. Disasters ranging from virus
outbreaks to coastal storms require quick deployment of infrastructure, such as
wireless antennas for restoring communication, scaffolding for restoring power
or tents for impromptu patient care. The broader impact of the project will be
supported through the development and sharing of open-source design kits and
software packages to help with experiment replication and use in hands-on
educational activities, as well as interdisciplinary workshops and outreach
activities to involve members of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of these robots centers around the principle of
tensegrity: structures that contain rigid components that provide structural
integrity, and flexible components that distribute forces and allow robots to
adapt in shape to their environment. The primary contribution of the project
will be an end-to-end exploration of the mechanical designs, state estimation,
planning and control systems that enable a novel class of flexible modular
robots that deploy and assemble to form larger structures. The project will
design tensegrity robots with predictable and capable locomotion capabilities,
as well as with docking mechanisms to allow the formation of larger structures
from systems of robots. Simulation-driven design will inform what geometric and
physical properties modules and resulting structures should and can achieve. The
project will explore state estimation techniques that discover the current
geometric configuration of flexible robots in contact with each other and the
environment. Integrated planning and adaptive control techniques will build on
state estimation to allow fine motion skills required for locomotion and
docking. The work will be experimentally evaluated at each stage with physical
prototype designs that achieve subgoals ranging from first simple locomotion to
assembly of flexible structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.