* 1954519
* First Principles Simulation Methods for Strong Field Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Levine, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Benjamin Levine of Stony Brook University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop molecular-level models of interfacial chemical
dynamics. Lasers are used in many fields from advanced manufacturing, to
communications, to medicine. Strong laser pulses have arisen as powerful tools
for probing electron-nuclear motions in molecules on the short time scales.
Though lasers introduce large quantities of energy into molecules in a very
short time, the ensuing chemical motions (dynamics) are intricate. Chemical
dynamics in strong laser fields are challenging to model with standard
approaches, creating a need for more advanced simulation methods. An important
motif in laser science is recollision. In this process, the laser field plucks a
single electron from the molecule and then drives that electron back into the
remaining cation at high energy. The possible outcomes of such recollision
processes include scattering, the removal of a second electron, and the emission
of a high energy packet of light (photon). Recollision is of fundamental
interest and serves as the basis of advanced measurements with attosecond (one
quintillionth of a second) time resolution and high spatial resolution. The
Levine group will develop first-principles computer simulation methods for
modeling recollision. The work will provide the theoretical chemistry community
with new theoretical tools for modeling and interpreting strong-field laser
experiments. In the process, future scientists, including graduate and
undergraduate students, will be trained in chemistry, physics, high-performance
computing, and mathematics. Professor Levine plans to organize an international
workshop that will facilitate discussion about theoretical methods for modeling
chemical problems that challenge theorists. He will continue to work through the
Michigan State University local section of the American Chemical Society and its
associated student groups (Young Chemists' Committee, Woman in Chemistry) to
provide younger chemists with leadership opportunities and
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Levine group will develop a mixed ansatz,
in which the ionization of the full many-electron system is initially treated
quantum mechanically via time-dependent configuration interaction (TD-CI), but
upon separation from the molecule the ejected electron is treated
semiclassically. This novel approach to modeling electron dynamics will be
coupled to multiple cloning in dense manifolds of states (MCDMS), a nonadiabatic
molecular dynamics scheme capable of accurately and efficiently modeling coupled
electron-nuclear dynamics in the continuum of electronic states accessed during
ionization. Because this combined TD-CI/MCDMS approach will model the entire
ionization/recollision process in full quantum mechanical detail, it avoids the
need for common and potentially inaccurate simplifying assumptions about the
initial state of the system after ionization. These novel methods will be
applied to explicitly model the electron and coupled electron-nuclear dynamics
of several small molecules under irradiation by strong laser pulses, enabling
both validation of the accuracy of the new simulation methods and elucidation of
the intricate electronic motions underlying the experimental
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.