* 1954676
* CAS: Investigation of Earth-Abundant Metal Phosphides with Polyphosphide Anions as Catalysts in Hydrogen Evolution Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Edward Gillan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 448,709.00

Energy and fuel consumption grow as society prospers. However, our reliance on
fossil fuels is not sustainable and negatively impacts the environment. Hydrogen
(H2) is a high energy fuel that releases energy upon its reaction with oxygen
(O2) to produce water (H2O). Traditionally, hydrogen is produced from fossil
fuels. Some materials can convert stable compounds, like water, into hydrogen
using electricity or sunlight. These materials are known as catalysts (they make
it easier to perform a chemical reaction without themselves being changed).
Identifying strategies to increase catalyst efficiency to produce hydrogen can
favorably impact US energy independence strategies. Currently, the most active
catalysts for the production of hydrogen from water use expensive and rare
metals like platinum. In this project, Dr. Gillan of the University of Iowa is
developing new chemical syntheses to produce catalysts from metals such as
nickel that are less expensive and more easily found in the environment. Dr.
Gillan and his research students are examining new ways to split water into
hydrogen using these catalysts aided by electricity or light energy input. Their
experiments are improving understanding of how these catalysts function, which
impacts future directions in effective catalyst design. Dr. Gillan is creating
learning activities for undergraduate and K-12 students focused on industrially
important materials and alternate energy processes, designing energy research
opportunities for women and students from under-represented groups, and
improving university laboratory safety culture at the University of Iowa. Dr.
Gillan's project is jointly funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program (Division
of Chemistry) and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Division of Chemistry and by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Dr. Edward Gillan of the University of Iowa is
developing a fundamental understanding of how surface reactions and redox
chemistry of transition-metal phosphides with polyphosphide anions impact their
catalytic activity in the important hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). A facile,
solvent-free, thermochemically-driven synthetic strategy by the Gillan group
allows access to earth-abundant phosphorus-rich metal phosphides with MP2 and
MP3 compositions containing Fe, Co, and Ni metals. These crystalline metal
phosphides are used directly or grown on supported structures for examination as
HER catalysts in both electrochemical and photochemical environments.
Experimentally observed differences in catalytic activity are correlated with
key chemical, physical, and structural properties of the metal phosphides. The
binding of reaction intermediates to the phosphide surface is investigated by
solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and infrared spectroscopy (IR). The
experimental impact of P-P bonding in structural polyphosphide anions is
interpreted in the context of materials and bonding predictions from density
functional theory (DFT). In support of the broader impacts of this project, Dr.
Gillan is creating learning activities for undergraduate and K-12 students
focused on industrially important materials and alternate energy processes,
designing energy research opportunities for women and students from under-
represented groups, and improving university laboratory safety culture at the
University of Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.