* 1954621
* Phonon-Assisted Diffusion in Solids from First-Principles: Unraveling a New Mechanism for Fast Diffusion
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Sara Kadkhodaei, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2024
* USD 307,049.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion of molecules in liquids and
gases is familiar: perfume, for example, can diffuse in air. Diffusion also
takes place in high-temperature solids, and understanding how will be key to new
applications. Many technologically-relevant materials, in particular those with
high operating temperatures, experience different modes of collective atomic
vibrations that are highly correlated. The effect of these correlated vibrations
on diffusion is poorly understood, and existing theoretical models are extremely
limited in incorporating them into the diffusion description. This project
addresses this limitation by (a) devising a theoretical framework that describes
the mass-transport behavior affected by the correlated collective atomic
vibrations, and (b) implementing a computational tool to predict the diffusion
coefficient without requiring experimental input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The end
product will be an open-access software toolkit with predictive capability for
diffusivity, which will substantially accelerate the discovery and design of
advanced materials for applications such as solid-state batteries and fuel
cells. Educational activities include the development of a thorough tutorial on
advanced topics in the kinetics of high-temperature materials, which will be
distributed on the PI's website to provide a world-wide educational platform for
students. Also, a graduate-level course about first-principles modeling for
engineers will be developed by the PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There currently exist substantial gaps in
fundamental understanding and theoretical modeling of diffusion phenomena in
strongly anharmonic systems. Namely, (i) the effect of anharmonic vibrations on
diffusion phenomena is not well understood, and (ii) existing computational
models based on the harmonic approximation of zero-temperature energy fall short
of predicting diffusivity in these systems. The goal of this project is to
address these gaps by introducing a theoretical framework that combines
stochastic sampling techniques and ab-initio calculations to identify the
diffusion pathways on an effective energy surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
findings of this project will advance the fundamental understanding of
anharmonic vibration effects on diffusion and will significantly expand the
current limits of diffusion modeling capabilities. Additionally, it will provide
a-priori predictive capability without requiring experimental input, which will
substantially accelerate the optimization and design of new materials. The
outcomes of this project will contribute to the advancement of two lines of
materials research: (i) predicting diffusion properties for novel high-
temperature solid phases and (ii) gaining new understanding of various
diffusion-controlled processes (e.g., phase transformation, precipitate growth
and coarsening, oxidation, and creep) by providing accurate diffusive mobility
data for their simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The university is a Hispanic-
serving institution, and the PI will participate in two existing programs for
recruiting minority students and women to engineering at UIC. She will train
undergraduates and graduate students in research, and she will give introductory
lectures at local high schools and develop a new graduate-level engineering
course in first-principles modeling. The PI will release open-source software as
well as data on diffusivity using standard
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.