* 1954149
* Descriptive Inner Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Simon Thomas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 280,000.00

Set theory is a relatively new branch of mathematics that has its roots in
mathematical analysis and philosophy. Its philosophical beginning had to do with
the foundations of mathematics, which at the end of the 19th century and at the
beginning of the 20th century was not standing on firm grounds. Set theorists of
the time devised an axiomatic system known as Zermelo-Fraenkel with the Axiom of
Choice (ZFC), that removed all paradoxes of the time, and put all of mathematics
on firmer grounds. On the other hand, Cantor, working on questions coming from
the study of Fourier sequences, needed to device longer inductions then the set
of natural numbers allowed him to do. His work led him to what is now known as
cardinal numbers, ordinal numbers and above all the study of the real numbers.
His work led to what is called The Continuum Hypothesis, which was the first
open problem on Hilbert's infamous list of problems. Godel and Cohen eventually
showed that The Continuum Hypothesis is undecidable, i.e. neither provable nor
disprovable, from, ZFC, thus exposing a major weakness in the axiomatic system
ZFC. It does not decide simple questions about sets of reals, one of the most
basic mathematical objects. Descriptive Inner Model Theory is one part of what
is now called Godel's Program, which is the program of removing undecidability
from mathematics by studying stronger and stronger natural axiomatic systems
extending ZFC that decide more and more natural questions about sets of reals
and other mathematical objects. Godel himself suggested that the Large Cardinal
Hierarchy should be used for the aforementioned purpose. The goal of descriptive
inner model theory is to build canonical models for large cardinals and also
study their impact on the set of real numbers. For example, one of the greatest
achievements of the subject due to many authors is that given large cardinals,
projective sets of reals behave exactly as Borel sets of reals as far as their
regularity properties are concerned (i.e. measurability, category and etc). In
addition the project also provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is proposing to attack some of the central
open problems of the area such as the HOD Problem or the Iterability Problem.
The HOD Problem essentially says that in models where sets of reals posses all
regularity properties one may desire, the universe consisting of sets that are
hereditarily definable from ordinals is a canonical inner model for large
cardinals. It connects the desirable regularity properties of sets of reals with
the existence of large cardinals in a fundamental way showing that the
regularity properties of definable sets of reals are a consequence of large
cardinals and vice versa. The HOD Problem was isolated in late 90s and early
2000s as one of the most central open problems of the area. Iterability Problem
is of similar nature but avoids determinacy models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.