* 1954348
* Non-Born-Oppenheimer Effects in the Framework of Multicomponent Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sharon Hammes-Schiffer, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 680,000.00

Professor Sharon Hammes-Schiffer of Yale University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop computational methods for describing the role
of electrons and protons in chemical processes. The interaction or coupling of
electrons and protons plays a vital role in a wide range of biological and
chemical processes, including photosynthesis, respiration, and energy production
in solar cells. The development of computational methods that accurately
describe this coupling is challenging because electrons and protons are so light
that they must be treated specially, which is computationally expensive.
Professor Hammes-Schiffer is developing methods that describe electrons and
protons in a computationally practical manner. She is applying these methods to
specific processes of biological and chemical relevance to elucidate the
fundamental principles of these processes. In addition, she and her research
group are incorporating these computational methods into established quantum
chemistry software packages to benefit the general scientific community.
Professor Hammes-Schiffer is also maintaining and enhancing a website containing
software and educational tools including computer programs, tools,
demonstrations, and tutorials. This research facilitates technological and
biomedical advances in more effective solar cells and other renewable energy
sources as well as improved understanding of enzymes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Hammes-Schiffer is developing new theoretical
and computational approaches that provide insight into the underlying
fundamental principles of photoinduced proton transfer and proton-coupled
electron transfer (PCET) reactions, which play a vital role in a broad range of
biological and chemical processes. These approaches are designed to include
nuclear quantum effects, such as proton delocalization and zero-point energy, as
well as non-Born-Oppenheimer effects, in a computationally practical manner.
Hammes-Schiffer is developing these methods within the framework of the nuclear-
electronic orbital density functional theory (NEO-DFT) approach, which treats
key nuclei, such as the transferring proton(s), quantum mechanically on the same
level as the electrons within the framework of DFT. The multicomponent time-
dependent DFT (NEO-TDDFT) approach enables the calculation of excited
electronic, proton vibrational, and electron-proton vibronic states. Hammes-
Schiffer is developing NEO methods for computing minimum energy paths and
tunneling splittings for proton transfer and PCET reactions, as well as mixed
electron-proton vibronic excited states for photoinduced reactions. She is also
developing real-time NEO-TDDFT methods and other nonadiabatic dynamics methods
for the simulation of ultrafast electronic and nuclear dynamics, targeting
applications to photoinduced PCET reactions. She is incorporating these
approaches into well-established quantum chemistry software packages and is
creating tutorials to explain how to perform NEO calculations and highlight the
unique capabilities of this approach. Furthermore, she is maintaining and
enhancing a web site on PCET to convey useful information to the community and
to provide valuable tools, scripts, and programs relevant to studying
PCET.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.