* 1954660
* Collaborative Research: Testing Controls on Source, Sink, and Lifetime of Atmospheric Water with Numerical Tags and Stable Isotope Ratios
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Richard Fiorella, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2023
* USD 310,960.00

H2O is instantly recognizable as the chemical formula for water, but this simple
formula masks the fact that not all hydrogen atoms are alike. A small fraction
of the water on earth could be more accurately called HDO, where D stands for
deuterium, the heavier hydrogen isotope in which the nucleus contains a neutron
as well as a proton. Likewise, some water molecules contain 18O, an isotope of
oxygen which is heavier than ordinary oxygen by the addition of two neutrons.
These heavier forms of water share a subtle but important difference from
ordinary H2O: they evaporate more sluggishly and condense more readily,
preferring the solid and liquid phases to the vapor phase. When water evaporates
from the land or ocean surface the vapor is slightly depleted of the heavier
isotopes, and each time rain falls from a cloud the water vapor remaining in the
atmosphere is slightly lighter than the water that rained out.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The removal of heavier isotopes by precipitation suggests
that the abundances of heavier isotopes in water vapor and precipitated water
contain important clues for understanding the hydrological cycle and its
connections to environmental conditions. Results of research in this area are
promising but they are complicated by the numerous factors that can influence
isotopic composition. Among these are the temperature at the location where the
precipitation occurred, the height of the cloud that produced the precipitation,
the relative humidity over the ocean where the water vapor evaporated, and the
evaporation of lighter isotopes from raindrops as they fall through dry air.
Moreover, much of the research on water isotopes is based on correlations
between isotopic composition and variables relevant to physical mechanisms
(temperature in the region of rainout, for instance). These correlations can be
quite informative but correlations by themselves cannot definitively establish
causality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award seeks to establish direct,
causal relationships between the physical mechanisms relevant to isotopic
composition and the actual composition of water vapor and precipitated water.
The research is conducted using a model, the Community Earth System Model
(CESM), in which the mechanisms and their influence on isotopic composition are
known exactly. CESM is already equipped to simulate the physical processes that
determine the ratio of heavier to lighter isotopes, and it also tracks the
isotopic composition of water vapor as it circulates in the simulated
atmosphere. This project develops a new "water tagging" capability which allows
simulated water vapor to record information about conditions under which it
evaporated, for instance where and when it evaporated and whether it was
processed through clouds. This information is also transferred to the
precipitation produced when water vapor condenses. The tag information can be
directly compared to isotopic composition, allowing the influence of the
physical conditions and processes represented by the tags to be directly
assessed. Some simulations use a data assimilation system (known as DART) to
ensure that the simulated climate and circulation accurately represent their
real-world counterparts. Additional work uses a one-dimensional energy balance
model, which provides a reduced-complexity setting to develop new ideas and test
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has scientific broader impacts due to
the widespread use of water isotopes as a window on the functioning of climate
and the hydrological cycle. For instance isotope ratios in glacial ice cores
have been used to estimate temperature differences between ice ages and
interglacial warm periods, thus providing a valuable point of reference for
understanding current climate change. The water tagging algorithms developed
here will be made available to the worldwide user community of CESM, providing
users with a powerful tool for the interpretation of isotope data and its
application to a variety of research questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, researchers supported under this award conduct educational outreach
through a program focused on the Decker Lake Youth Center, a facility housing
post-conviction youth in the Salt Lake Valley. The outreach involves ozone
bioindicator gardens which demonstrate the hazards of ozone pollution, a common
problem in the Salt Lake Valley. Educational opportunities in correctional
facilities have been shown to reduce recidivism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.