* 1954895
* Data-Driven Many-Body Models for Molecular Simulations of Ions in Water:  From Ionic Clusters to Concentrated Electrolyte Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Francesco Paesani, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 490,635.00

Dr. Francesco Paesani of the University of California-San Diego is supported by
an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in
the Division of Chemistry. A quantitative, molecular-level characterization of
the structural, thermodynamic, dynamical, and spectroscopic properties of ions
in aqueous environments under different conditions is key to understanding
several fundamental processes, including ion-molecule reactions and ion-induced
nucleation in the atmosphere, acid-base reactions in solution, ion transport in
biological channels, and multiphase processes at air/liquid and solid/liquid
interfaces. A unified picture of the behavior of hydrated ions across different
phases and in different environments is particularly challenging, requiring a
quantitative assessment of competing enthalpic and entropic effects associated
with the interplay between ion–ion, ion–water, and water–water interactions,
which are further modulated by nuclear quantum effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
combining data-driven many-body potential energy functions derived entirely from
high-level ab initio reference data with both classical and quantum molecular
dynamics, Paesani will extend his many-body molecular dynamics (MB-MD)
methodology to the modeling of ions in water, from gas-phase clusters to bulk
solutions. The MB-MD methodology provides an accurate, yet efficient,
theoretical/computational framework for molecular simulations of aqueous systems
with high accuracy and predictive power. In this research project Paesani aims
to develop a microscopic understanding of single-ion hydration structure and
thermodynamics from small gas-phase clusters to bulk solutions in terms of
individual many-body contributions, determine single-ion hydration free energies
and ion–ion association free energies and decompose them in terms of elementary
ion–water and water–water many-body effects, and characterize water hydrogen-
bond structure and dynamics in electrolyte solutions as a function of ion
concentration and composition, disentangling ion–ion, ion–water and water–water
contributions. The theoretical/ computational methodology developed as part of
the proposed research will have broad impact on a wide range of user communities
from chemistry to materials science and biology, and will involve the training
and education of high school, undergraduate and graduate students who will
acquire a solid foundation in theoretical, computational, and physical
chemistry. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed project will provide the
students with the opportunity to work at the interface of different disciplines
which will prepare them for a wide range of careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.