* 1954925
* I-Corps:  Mobile air quality sensor module that can be attached to unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Carrie White, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be a device
to enable air quality and environmental engineers to collect mobile air quality
data via a drone (unmanned aerial vehicle: UAV). This will have a direct impact
on a wide range of industries that are required to gather air quality data
including but not limited to energy production, natural gas, and oil. This
device allows engineers to create air quality models from real geospatial data
rather than simulated data leading to more accurate emission values. These
accurate values will allow both companies and government agencies to better
track the direct effect air pollution is having on the environment and
communities. The device also may be used in identifying the environmental
effects and spread of air pollution from natural disasters such as wildfires on
local communities. In addition, the device may be used in military applications
to determine criteria and hazardous pollutant concentrations for special use
cases or battlefield scenarios. During the I-Corps program, the goal is to speak
with a variety of potential customers that include air quality engineers,
environmental engineers, and leak detection and repair (LDAR) supervisors as
well as government agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to
make the device adaptable across a variety of industries and use
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a previously
developed mobile air quality sensor module that can be attached to UAVs to
perform advanced air sampling techniques that enable geospatial data logging of
pollutant concentrations in real time. The device is comprised of low-cost, high
quality sensors that are interchangeable within the printable circuit board
(PCB). The device has the ability to simultaneously collect the following air
pollutants: Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2), Sulfur Dioxide (SO2), Particulate Matter
(PM1.0, PM2.5, PM10), Carbon Monoxide (CO), Ozone (O3), and Lead (Pb). Combining
the mobile air quality data collected by the device with unique machine learning
models, new micro and macro environmental insights may be seen across the
country. The proposed solution has been successfully evaluated with an alpha
prototype. The device that has been developed is unique to the air quality
monitoring industry and is currently not offered on the
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.