* 1954343
* Scaling Limits and Phase Transitions in Spatial Random Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Marek Biskup, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 329,999.00

This project is devoted to the study of various aspects of phase transitions and
critical phenomena. These originate in physics but the methods of study require
significant input from mathematics. A common feature of the problems discussed
in the project is that they involve systems of many constituents. It is here
where probability theory offers a number of indispensable tools. The specific
questions are typically set in the context of a complex microscopic system
defined in terms of mathematical concepts such as random walks or random fields.
The aim is to show that, as the system size increases, a new structure emerges.
This structure, sometimes called a scaling limit, often admits an independent
characterization that enables its study using the methods of mathematical
analysis. Particular attention is paid to the phenomenon of universality, which
refers to independence of the scaling limit to the details of the underlying
microscopic system. Understanding universality in its mathematically precise
form is one of the overarching goals of the project. The project provides
research training opportunities for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is divided roughly into two parts.
The first one is focused on the study of extremal problems for spatial random
fields. Drawing on earlier success of the analysis of the two-dimensional
Gaussian Free Field, the aim is to establish universality of the conclusions for
other examples of logarithmically-correlated fields such as the random walk
local time or the discrete-Gaussian model below the Kosterlitz-Thouless
transition. The interest here is on both the phenomena and the development of
techniques required to control such systems. The second part of the project is
devoted to the analysis of phase transitions in a number of systems of interest.
One of these is a system of interacting bosons, which is proposed to be analyzed
using a random-cycle representation. The aim here is to give a rigorous proof of
Bose-Einstein condensation at positive temperatures in suitable scaling limits.
Another model to be studied is that of interacting random walks; the aim here is
to describe the limit shape using a variational problem for the walk range. The
project naturally draws on recent advances in the field, some due to the PI. The
techniques involved span a number of topics in probability and analysis; for
instance, extreme order statistics, homogenization theory, permutation
statistics, fixed point theory. A number of problems have been designed with the
aim to include graduate students and postdocs in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.