* 1954837
* SHF: Medium: Configuration for Assurance: Safe, Live, and Secure Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Yanhong Liu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The ability to develop high-assurance high-performance distributed applications
at low cost will be key to the success and growth of search engines, social
networks, cloud and mobile computing applications. Languages and systems for
programming computer applications have always been at the core of computer
science, and the development of distributed applications is no exception. Yet,
correctness validation, performance optimization, and assured execution of
complex algorithms for distributed systems remain challenging. This project
develops an integrated framework and supporting methods and tools that enable
(1) specification, testing, simulation, and evaluation of practical distributed
algorithms, and (2) systematic compilation, optimization, and verification for
safe, live, and secure execution of distributed
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research extends DistAlgo, a very high-
level language for programming distributed algorithms, with systematic
declarations for dynamic distributed system environments and requirements. The
project evaluates the developed methods and tools by applying them to the most
important practical distributed algorithms, including for consensus, Byzantine
consensus, and blockchain consensus with stochastic failure and timing
scenarios, and for distributed storage. As part of this project, the
investigators develop a new freshman general topics course on logical thinking
for problem solving, especially including multi-party logical thinking, building
on a decade of successful teaching and crystallization of concurrent and
distributed algorithms, and on broad experience teaching computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.