* 1954967
* IGE: Adaptive Professional Training (APT) in STEM Graduate Education
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mary O'Riordan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 495,993.00

The remarkable expansion of science and technology into our society over the
last several decades have created an exciting landscape of career opportunities
for students trained in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). During this time, STEM graduate education has continued to rely largely
on traditional learning models. These learning models historically have not
emphasized professional skills development and career exploration, now
recognized as key to long-term career success in STEM fields. Many institutions
encourage students to address career and professional development needs through
optional extra-curricular opportunities. The sporadic nature of these
opportunities makes it difficult for students and faculty to learn about
programs and to use them for effective learning. Moreover, when professional
development and career exploration are not intentionally built into the arc of
graduate training and assessed for effectiveness, graduate programs risk poor
use of resources and an inconsistent training experience. This National Science
Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to the University of
Michigan will develop an adaptive professional training (APT) system that will
gather opportunities across the institution from different levels (e.g.
department, college, university, external) into a single system. The data and
knowledge gained from the system will help to guide skill development for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the idea that
providing a structured learning framework for professional development guided by
formative mentor feedback and artificial intelligence-directed recommendations
will enable more effective professional skill-building and student career
success. The proposed platform, the Adaptive Professional Training (APT)
learning management system (LMS) will integrate the following key innovations:
(1) a user-friendly online hub of learning opportunity listings across the
institution and beyond linked with defined by core professional skill
competencies, (2) adaptive and iterative learning recommendations tailored to
individual needs and interests based on both mentor and trainee input, (3)
portfolio building, and (4) program assessment capabilities to enable evidence-
based educational policy and resource optimization. This APT LMS represents a
new flexible learning paradigm by which diverse professional training
opportunities can be intentionally integrated into STEM graduate education. We
will test whether use of the APT LMS by a test student cohort, compared to a
control student cohort, will promote more intentional time investment in
professional development and more uniform improvement in defined competencies,
like science communication and increased awareness of learning resources. We
predict that this innovative educational approach will integrate student and
mentor input, enabling planning, documentation, and engagement in a systematic
manner, leading to more effective acquisition of the professional skills
associated with student career success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education.
The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to
graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move these
approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.