* 1954634
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the tempo and dynamics of Cambrian Earth systems in western Laurentia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* James Hagadorn, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 134,548.00

Rocks from the Cambrian Period (539-485 million years ago) contain fossils that
reveal the first diversification of animals on Earth. The timing, causes, and
impacts of this “Cambrian Explosion” are poorly understood. Yet clues to
understanding this event are buried in Cambrian strata that formed as oceans
flooded the world’s continents, and coastal environments blanketed the landscape
with vast swaths of sand, mud, and fossils. One of the best-preserved records of
these events is in the bottom of the Grand Canyon—in a package of sedimentary
rocks known as the Tonto Group. Although the Tonto Group has been studied for
nearly 150 years, the availability of new techniques makes it time to revisit
these classic exposures. This project will decipher how, when, and why these
rocks were deposited, and lead to greater understanding of the Cambrian
Explosion of life on Earth. The broader impacts of this research include
mentoring a suite of post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate scholars,
including recruiting and training Hispanic and Native American students. Impacts
also include outreach and distance learning through the Denver Museum of Nature
and Science, to help this research inspire younger audiences, including 4th-12th
graders in rural, first-generation, first-nation, inner-city, and culturally
diverse settings. Finally, this project will reach many of the six million
annual visitors to Grand Canyon National Park through Park programs, exhibits,
media, and NSF-sponsored field forums on Grand Canyon geology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cambrian rocks record dramatic changes in Earth systems
including atmospheric oxygenation events, large magnitude perturbations to the
carbon cycle, and the punctuated evolution of animal life. These events played
out within the global transgressive inundation of continents by advancing oceans
that deposited sheet sands, muds, and carbonates. Underpinning the research plan
is a novel, integrative approach to calibrating the timing and tempo of this
marine transgression. This approach combines: a) radioisotopic dating of the
youngest, penecontemporaneously deposited zircon crystals, which are hidden
amidst the detritus making up these sedimentary rocks; b) identifying changes in
the types of fossils in the same rocks, and; c) documenting changes in mineral,
chemical, and physical signatures of these rocks that record simultaneous,
related changes in the Cambrian Earth system—such as changes in sea level or the
collision and breakup of continents. Initial work has shown that the Tonto Group
of the Grand Canyon is tens of millions of years younger than previously
thought, that seas flooded North America relatively quickly, and that other
continental margins experienced the same event. The project will expand upon a
pilot study that was conducted in the Grand Canyon, and augment it with
contemporaneous strata throughout the western U.S. to test hypotheses about how
these flooding episodes relate to global biologic, tectonic, and geophysical
events and processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.