* 1954456
* Development of New Materials and Methods for Effective, Selective, and Energy-efficient Olefin/Paraffin Separation and Ethylene Detection
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Rasika Dias, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/2024
* USD 495,000.00

Important chemical feedstocks include a group of molecules called alkenes,
molecules that contain carbon-carbon double bonds. The alkenes are used in the
manufacture of many important plastics and include ethylene, which is used to
make polyethylene; propylene, which is used to make polypropylene; and a several
others. The alkenes are produced during the refining of crude oil. However, they
are always obtained as complex mixtures of alkenes and other petroleum
components. In order to obtain pure alkenes, crude oil mixtures are separated
using an energy-intensive distillation process. Presently, ethylene and
propylene purification alone accounts for about 0.3% of the worldâ€™s total energy
consumption. A more a efficient separation technique for alkenes would be of
great benefit. Toward this end, Dr. Rasika Dias, University of Texas at
Arlington (UTA), is supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program to develop metal
compounds that are capable of separating alkenes at room temperature and
pressure. The general method prepares copper compounds that bind specific
alkenes and can be induced to release the alkene in a targeted way. This
behavior may be used for the low energy purification of alkenes. As an ancillary
effort, the copper and related silver compounds are modified to detect alkenes.
This is important not only to monitor industrial environments, but also to a
number of fruit and flower industries as ethylene induces the ripening of fruit
(such as bananas)and the degradation of flowers. This project integrates
research into the educational experience for undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students, and prepares them for productive careers physical
science. Professor Dias plans to recruit students from traditionally
underrepresented groups including McNair and LSAMP programs, offering research
opportunities in his laboratory. High-school and Community College student
mentoring activities are also planned. Professor Dias organizes a symposium at
UTA inviting Assistant Professors and Postdoctoral Fellows to meet and share
their research findings. He also organizes a workshop on X-ray crystallography
to benefit area crystallographers and utilizes the UTA Planetarium facilities to
educate and excite young audiences (including pre-K) in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, copper and silver complexes of
multi-dentate pyrazolate ligands are synthesized and their abilities to
selectively and reversibly bind ethylene, propylene, and butane are evaluated. A
systematic study is undertaken to discern how the overall heat of the olefin-
binding can be managed through modification of the supporting ligands. The goal
of this research is to design compounds that facilitate olefin-paraffin
separations. A second focus concentrates on the development of sensors to detect
ethylene. In this effort, a family of luminescent copper and silver pyrazolate
complexes that produce optical signals upon exposure to olefins are prepared.
Overall, the project investigates the structure, bonding, and reactivity of late
d-block complexes with labile metal-ligand interactions. Students contributing
to this project will gain valuable experience in synthesis, modern
characterization techniques, and critical thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.