* 1954062
* Computability on Cones
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Antonio Montalban, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 210,001.00

Computability theory is an area within mathematical logic that studies the
complexity of countable mathematical objects. In mathematics, as we all know,
some objects, constructions, or proofs are more complicated than others.
Logicians have developed various ways of measuring this complexity. When one is
interested in countable objects, which are central to a wide range of
mathematics, the tools to measure these complexities come from computability
theory. The objective of this project is to draw connections between complexity
issues and structural issues to improve understanding of what forms complexity
can take. The investigator will also continue work on a book series that aims to
make it easier for the logic community to learn about the subject of computable
structure theory, to help graduate students reach a research-level understanding
of the subject, and to provide researchers with a modern
reference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main component of this project is the study
of the structure that emerges when considering computability theoretic
properties on a cone, that is, properties that hold relative to almost every
oracle with respect to Martin's measure. The project will study generalizations
of the uniform Martin's conjecture and the almost-everywhere structure of Turing
equivalence. The study of on-a-cone properties led to structural
characterizations for a variety of notions from computable structure theory over
the last decade. This project investigates the one-a-cone structure of the
Turing degrees, of Turing equivalence, and of other recursion theoretic objects.
The research will pursue two lines of inquiry. On the one hand, recent work
suggests Martin's conjecture is just the tip of the iceberg, and that there are
other situations where one can get a nice structural classification of
relativizable objects. This research will search further for such structural
classifications for equivalence relations other than Turing equivalence. On the
other hand, conjectures about properties of the Turing equivalence and its
interactions with its sub-equivalence relations may provide information on where
Turing equivalence is located in the landscape of Borel equivalence relations,
and the project will investigate this possibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.