* 1954422
* Cooperative Enamine-Hard Metal Lewis Acid Catalysis for New Asymmetric Organic Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hong Wang, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program is funding Dr. Hong Wang of the
University of North Texas to develop new catalytic methods to synthesize chiral
molecules. Chiral molecules exist as non-superimposable mirror images, the same
difference as left and right hands. Many molecules, especially naturally-
occurring organic compounds and many pharmaceuticals, are chiral and the two
mirror image forms of the molecule often have different biological properties.
Therefore, an important challenge in modern organic synthesis is to control the
handedness of the product. The reactions being developed in this project are
designed to provide concise and versatile synthetic pathways to construct 5- and
7-membered ring systems, with control of handedness, a difficult feat with
currently available synthetic methods. Dr. Wang is actively engaged in joint
efforts to attract a diverse group of students to science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Her outreach activities build upon
her research and includes outreach summer research programs for undergraduate
students from minority schools and high school students to establish interest in
STEM fields at an early stage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Hong Wang and her
research team are developing novel catalytic systems through merging enamine
catalysis with hard metal Lewis acid catalysis. The feasibility of the reversed
soft-hard strategy is investigated to solve the critical acid-base quenching
problem involved in cooperative acid-base catalysis. Also, under investigation
is which factors affect the formation of enamine from primary arylamines and
ketones. [3+2] and [4+3] reactions are developed using cooperative enamine-hard
metal Lewis acid catalysis to construct 5- and 7-membered ring systems. In
addition, a new class of bimetallic complexes is explored to serve as chiral
hard metal Lewis acid catalysts in asymmetric catalysis. The density functional
theory (DFT) calculations are carried out to understand the structure-activity
of these bimetallic catalysts and the mechanisms of the [3+2] and [4+3]
reactions. To address the broader impacts of this project, Dr. Wang is actively
engaged in initiating outreach programs to provide summer research opportunities
to undergraduate and high school students with a focus on attracting female and
minority students into STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.