* 1954002
* I-Corps: Intelligent risk management for the US crop insurance industry
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Kaiyu Guan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in providing
agriculture-related industries with novel field-level intelligence to inform
critical farming decisions in the form of granular metrics for sustainability
and productivity. Consumer packaged goods (CPG) companies could use these
sustainability metrics and related services to quantify and monitor the
environmental footprint on their contracted farmland, which may help to achieve
their sustainable sourcing targets. The farmland productivity metrics, when
incorporated with related financial information, are important for any farming-
related financial decisions. For example, the (re)insurance companies could use
these productivity metrics to assess the potential insurance risk before the
growing season starts, determine the pricing of reinsurance contracts, and
develop new index-based crop insurance products for developing countries. Farm
loan lenders could use these metrics to estimate the potential default risk for
individual farmers, and quantify the aggregated risk for their entire farm loan
portfolio. Our metrics could also provide a more comprehensive evaluation of
farmland’s suitability, profitability and farming riskiness for farmland
investors to make informed land investment decisions. Last but not least, the
commodity traders could also use the real-time yield forecast to predict the
potential price changes in the market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
explore the market for granular level sustainability and productivity metrics in
the agriculture industry. The technologies include satellite data, modeling
based on deep domain knowledge, artificial intelligence, and cloud computing
combined together to achieve a complete and scalable solution to assess field-
level information for sustainability, productivity, and financial risks. These
granular metrics include 1) crop metrics (e.g. crop types, crop yield, annually-
changing field boundary, for both past 30 years and forecasting; 2)
sustainability metrics (e.g. field-scale management practices, carbon emission,
storage and change of soil organic carbon, crop water consumption, soil
moisture, nitrogen leaching); and 3) financial risks (e.g. probabilistic
distribution of loss ratio for crop insurance, farm-level financial projection
for revenue).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.