* 1954923
* IGE: Innovations in Graduate Education- Identity, Structure and Belonging (IGE-ISB)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Frances Hellman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Advancement of underrepresented minority (URM) groups continues to be of
critical importance in science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields
(STEM). At each level of the educational and career pipeline (e.g. student,
postdoctoral, faculty), underrepresentation becomes more severe. At the most
advanced levels of the academic ranks, the postdoctoral and faculty levels, the
number of positions in the US has increased substantially over the past two
decades, providing a window of opportunity for diversification of the
professoriate. While the number of URM PhD recipients has grown, the URG share
of faculty positions in these fields has increased only modestly, particularly
at the nation’s research universities. If one important focus of diversity
efforts at research universities is to place URG scholars into the
professoriate, these scholars need to do more than complete their Ph.D. programs
– they must stand out in terms of the “gold standard” by which prospective
applicants for postdoctoral and faculty jobs are judged: their publication
record. A candidate’s publication record is the most important criterion for
potential employment in most four-year and almost all research universities, and
is a measure of success in the academy, including for promotions to tenure. This
National Science Foundation Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to the
University of California, Berkeley, will address disparities in outcomes,
including publication records, for URM doctoral students, while improving the
graduate education experience for all students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Identity, Structure and Belonging (ISB) project will tackle the persistent
problem of underrepresentation not at the level of individual faculty or student
perceptions, actions, or interactions, but rather, at the level of the
organizational structure of graduate programs. IGE-ISB will use a mixed methods
research approach that begins with synthesis of existing data, followed by
extensive qualitative data collection (participant-driven semi-structured
interviews), rigorous analysis, development of a “blueprint” describing how
features of graduate programs work to create equitable career outcomes; and a
quantitative self-assessment tool (a Likert-type questionnaire) by which
departments and universities can assess their graduate program design. IGE-ISB
will address this key research question: What are the underlying graduate
program structures reflected in everyday practices and routine day-to-day ways
of doing things in doctoral programs that produce equitable outcomes for their
students? How might departments alter their structures to establish processes,
procedures, and climate that are effective at preparing all, equitably, for the
full array of careers that lead from a PhD education, including academic
careers? What are the specific methods by which departments establish clarity of
expectations and a sense of belonging at critical stages of the doctoral
programs to enhance equitable outcomes? IGE-ISB will develop a blueprint of
graduate program features that lead to equitable career outcomes for students,
one that is pragmatic and applicable across departments, and that can be applied
at a national scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are
to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.