* 1954412
* Catalytic Asymmetric Routes to Structurally Diverse P-Stereogenic Phosphines
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Glueck, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor David S. Glueck at Dartmouth College for
designing new ways to make chiral phosphines. These molecules are important for
asymmetric catalysis, which is employed in the pharmaceutical industry to make
molecules with a highly specific shape used in pharmaceuticals. Current ways to
prepare chiral phosphines are inefficient and limited to a small number of
starting materials. These roadblocks to making chiral phosphines is a limitation
to the development of critically important catalysts. Professor Glueck and his
research group are developing catalysts that can efficiently make chiral
phosphines from a large pool of starting materials by controlling the formation
of phosphorous-carbon bonds. This project is also providing training for
graduate and undergraduate researchers, as well as broadening the participation
of underrepresented groups, especially Native Americans, in chemistry,
education, and research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asymmetric transition-metal
catalysis is used for the synthesis of single-enantiomer drugs. Chiral non-
racemic phosphines are key components of these catalysts but have limited
structural diversity due to challenges with asymmetric phosphine synthesis.
Since the activity and selectivity of the asymmetric transition metal catalysts
are intimately linked to the structure of the chiral phosphines, better ways to
make these molecules will support new transition metal catalyzed asymmetric
processes. Professor Glueck and his research group are developing several new
ways to prepare chiral non-racemic phosphines including: transition metal
catalyzed phosphine and diphosphine alkylation, and phosphirane ring-opening.
Studies to understand the dynamic and cooperative stereochemical effects in
these transformations are also being explored. More sustainable earth-abundant
first-row transition metal catalysts are being targeted for these
transformations to facilitate ligand substitution and turnover. These research
activities serve as a training ground for a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.