* 1954556
* CPS: Frontier: Collaborative Research: COALESCE: COntext Aware LEarning for Sustainable CybEr-Agricultural Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Nirav Merchant, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2026
* USD 3,002,820.00

One of the grand technical challenges of our generation is to get ready to feed
9 billion people by 2050 with sustainable use of water and chemicals. However,
we are facing unprecedented challenges in adopting sustainable agricultural
management practices, increasing production, keeping agriculture profitable and
coping with deadly biotic and abiotic stresses and diseases as well as changing
climate that threaten yield. This project aims to transform Cyber-Physical
System (CPS) capabilities in agriculture to enable farmers to respond to crop
stressors with lower cost, greater agility, and significantly lower
environmental impact than current practices. The objective is to make
foundational advances in AI, machine learning and robotics to individual plant-
level sensing, modeling and reasoning. This enables small autonomous dexterous
robots instead of the heavy farm equipment to monitor plants or small plots
individually and treat them with minimum amount of chemicals. This also lowers
the barrier to entry for small scale farmers, increases safety, minimizes runoff
as well as soil compaction. This project includes a significant collaboration
with the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign that is funded by the
National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) within the U.S. Department of
Agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research investigates multiple areas in
data-driven estimation, control, and adaptation of complex cyber-physical
systems, such as: (1) rigorous incorporation of domain knowledge and physical
principles into a machine learning (ML)-driven estimation/prediction/control
framework, (2) cross-modal information fusion for assimilating heterogeneous
data streams that differ in type (categorical, discrete, or continuous),
quality/accuracy/noise, and sampling frequency. (3) robust ML under a degraded
sensing environment, (4) data-driven supervisory decision-making under resource
constraints, such as data amount, data quality, privacy, and cost, (5)
distributed control and coordination of autonomous teams of robots operating in
harsh, changing, and uncertain field environments with partial observability,
and (6) soft robotic arms and manipulators, along with embedded control and
sensing systems, for agricultural manipulation by small mobile robots. The
broader acceptance of the framework is facilitated by the team's unique
collaboration with producer groups with direct connections to farmers. A wide
range of knowledge dissemination plans target the CPS community, the farming
community, and the general public. Education and outreach plans focus on the
farming population and the next-generation scientific workforce. Specific
activities and programs at the participating institutions are designed to
broaden participation of Native American, Hispanic, African-American, and female
students in computing and engineering. All research products and educational
material generated by the project are being made publicly available through the
project webpage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.