* 1954834
* CAS: Mechanistic Study of Reaction Intermediates in Nanoparticle-Enhanced Plasma-Assisted Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Stephen Cronin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 310,967.00

Toxic gases such as nitrogen oxides (NOx) and sulfur oxides (SOx), produced by
the burning of fossil fuels, give rise to smog and acid rain. Converting these
harmful pollutants to safer by-products is a significant and important
challenge. In this project, with funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of
the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Stephen Cronin of the University of Southern
California is investigating plasma-driven catalysis as a way to eliminate these
pollutants. Catalysts are substances that accelerate chemical reactions without
themselves being consumed. Catalysts require energy to function, and the
research team is investigating plasmas (the low temperature, glowing gas in
fluorescent lamps is an example of plasma) to deliver that energy. The
fundamental knowledge gained in this work enables improved systems for
remediating these harmful pollutants. The specialized techniques used to
investigate plasma-driven chemical reactions can also be applied to a wide range
of other catalytic reactions. Dr. Cronin is actively engaged in outreach
activities that build upon his research to promote engagement of students in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These
activities, which include a workshop for high school science teachers, are
directed at improving the education of promising high school students and
encouraging their interest in STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding
from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Cronin of
the University of Southern California is studying the vibrational signatures of
key reaction intermediates using in situ attenuated total reflection (ATR)-FTIR
spectroscopy. Here, a hot-electron, low-temperature transient pulsed plasma is
generated using nanosecond high voltage pulses across a substrate containing
nanoparticles (e.g., Pt, Ag, Au). These nanoparticles provide up to 1000X
enhancement in the generation of the plasma, which is localized to the surface
of the nanoparticles where it is most useful for catalysis. The low-temperature
nature of this transient plasma is crucial to maintaining the structural
integrity of these delicate nanoparticles and would not be possible with a
conventional radio frequency (RF) plasma. Dr. Cronin and his group explore
several test reaction systems, including NO, NO2, and SO2 remediation. While
these reactions have all been demonstrated using plasma-based processes, the
detailed chemical pathways of these plasma-assisted reactions are not well
understood. While other forms of spectroscopy have been performed extensively on
plasmas (e.g., LIF spectroscopy), ATR-FTIR is an inherently surface-sensitive
spectroscopy that provides new insights into the plasma-driven catalytic
reaction mechanisms through the elucidation of key intermediate species. By
identifying surface intermediates using several different types of metal
nanoparticle surfaces (e.g., Cu, Ni, Pt), Dr. Cronin and his group test several
hypothetical chemical pathways in both the gas and liquid phases. For example,
one hypothesis is that SO2 remediation is driven by OH radicals (i.e., SO2 →
HSO3 → H2SO4), which can be produced by the plasma. Dr. Cronin is actively
engaged in STEM outreach programs focused on female student recruitment into the
STEM fields and in high school student research internships, in support of the
broader impacts of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.