* 1954463
* New Directions in Thermodynamic Formalism for Geodesic Flows Beyond the Closed Riemannian Case
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Daniel Thompson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 281,027.00

A fundamental question in dynamical systems, systems that model natural
phenomena changing with time, is to understand their asymptotic behavior. That
is, given knowledge of the present, what can we say about the distant future or
distant past? In most situations, the answer must be given in terms of
probability. This leads to the question of identifying and studying natural
(invariant) probability measures. Thermodynamic formalism, which is a dynamical
theory originally inspired by statistical mechanics, is a framework for
answering this kind of question. The geodesic flow is the dynamical system given
by moving at unit speed along paths that minimize distance. This flow has
special importance because of its relationship with the geometry and topology of
the underlying space. The geodesic flow has inspired many important developments
in dynamical systems theory, in particular leading to the definitions on which
hyperbolic dynamics is based. This research project pursues a distinctive vision
for progress in this area, with focus on developing novel techniques suitable
for application to geodesic flows in more general settings. The award also
supports the training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four parts. Part 1 develops
fundamental results in thermodynamic formalism suitable for applications to
dynamical systems of geometric origin. The focus is on the non-compact world,
building on previous advances made for closed non-positive curvature manifolds.
Areas of interest include non-compact CAT(-1) spaces, non-positive curvature
manifolds with cusps, and as a long-term goal, thermodynamics for the Weil-
Petersson geodesic flow. Part 2 considers statistical and dynamical properties
for equilibrium states, particularly Central Limit Theorems and second order
differentiability. Part 3 develops a deeper dynamical understanding of geodesic
flow for CAT(−1) spaces. We investigate analogues of the SRB measure,
particularly in the setting of CAT(−1) metrics on closed surfaces. Part 4
concerns questions about Katok entropy rigidity in dynamical systems,
particularly for non-compact surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.