* 1954406
* IIBR Informatics: A generalized modeling framework for integrating multi-species data sources to estimate biodiversity processes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Elise Zipkin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 782,676.00

Biodiversity is linked to the health and integrity of ecosystems with species
varying in their contributions to ecosystem functions. It is critical to assess
the status and dynamics of whole communities of species and not just those
species that have large amounts of data. This project develops ‘integrated
community models’, a statistical modeling framework to simultaneously use multi-
species data sources to estimate the status, trends, and dynamics of
biodiversity. The objective is to create a flexible infrastructure for
estimating species and community processes that can incorporate multiple data
types on multiple species through simulations and empirical case studies on
animal communities including birds, small mammals, and butterflies. Estimates of
species distributions, abundances, and demographic rates form the basis of
scientific understanding of biodiversity dynamics and community responses to
external threats, delivering critical information for biological conservation.
The development of integrated community models will enable researchers to obtain
detailed inferences on species and communities across spatiotemporal scales
during an era of accelerated biodiversity loss. This project also provides
training to graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in hierarchical
statistical modeling and creates a K-12 outreach module to teach middle school
students about biolodiversity conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated
community modeling framework uses a hierarchical approach merging single-species
integrated models (which combine multiple data sources on a target species) and
hierarchical community models (which estimate multi-species occurrence or
abundance patterns but only from a single data source). Although there have been
recent advances in single-species integrated models and hierarchical community
models, both approaches have shortcomings: the former is limited to a single
species, whereas the latter fails to take advantage of the benefits gained from
merging multiple data sources and data types (e.g. estimation of both abundance
and demographic rates simultaneously, increased spatiotemporal coverage). By
bridging the gap between single-species integrated models and hierarchical
community models, integrated community models leverage the capabilities of both
and overcome traditionally narrow inferences (in terms of space, time, and
information gained) on biodiversity parameters. The modeling framework uses each
of the different available data sources to inform various components of the
underlying biological process model through hierarchical, observation models
linked together with a joint likelihood. The biological process models for
communities can range from simple (e.g. estimates of species occurrence) to
complex (e.g. estimates of species survival, reproduction, and abundance) and
depend on both the biology of the taxonomic group and the quantity/type of
available data. This project advances the fields of population and community
ecology because it allows scientists to take advantage of multiple data sources
(despite differences in sampling protocols and spatiotemporal data structures
and quantities), leading to increased accuracy and precision of species-level
dynamics and biodiversity metrics (e.g. richness, composition). The results of
the project will be made available at
https://ezipkin.github.io.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.