* 1954723
* Extending the Range of Nonadiabatic Processes that Can Be Treated with Analytic Representations of Coupled Potential Energy Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* David Yarkony, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

David R. Yarkony of Johns Hopkins University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry. The goal of the award is to build computational models of processes
that convert light energy into chemical energy, but can not produce the reverse
reaction. These are called nonadiabatic processes. Nonadiabatic processes are
involved in many important processes including vision, photosynthesis and
protecting our DNA against the dangers of the ultraviolet component of sunlight.
Professor Yarkony and his research group produce computational models using high
speed digital computers. The tools they develop add subtle but important
interactions to their existing model that can alter the outcome of a predicted
nonadiabatic event. Scientists frequently use light energy in an attempt to
manipulate the outcome of a chemical reaction. If the computational model is
sufficiently accurate, computer simulations can guide and inform experiments. If
the model is inaccurate, incorrect inferences are obtained. Professor Yarkony
has identified a class of light induced molecular breakup processes for which a
decades-old standard model fails. His group continues to study this failure to
establish its prevalence and the consequences of the errors. Professor Yarkony
mentors a group of students and postdocs. Together they develop software that
can be used by the community to explore the new
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Yarkony group is using fit coupled diabatic
state electronic Hamiltonians to study nonadiabatic processes. They take
advantage of the key strengths of fit representations, which is the use of wave
functions that include both static and dynamic correlations. Nuclear quantum
effects including the geometric phase (GP) and tunneling are calculated. In
order to treat intense laser fields and spin-changing processes, dipole and spin
orbit coupling terms must also be represented. The Yarkony group uses a two-step
approach in which Gaussian Process Regression is used followed by the
application of neural network techniques. The ability to extend the range of
problems that can be treated in this way provides an important new tool to treat
nonadiabatic processes. The accuracy of the diabatic potential energy matrix is
improved, while quantum tunneling can be treated rigorously and the GP is
properly included in full and reduced dimensionality
representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.