* 1954142
* Thermochemistry of Metal-Ligand Bonds (Singly and Multiply Charged) and Protonated Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Peter Armentrout, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Peter B. Armentrout and
his students at the University of Utah are exploring the structure and
reactivity of various molecules in the gas-phase, including metal cations
(“cation” means positively charged) and complexes composed of metal cations and
other molecules such as water (H2O), carbon monoxide (CO) and biologically
relevant amino acids and peptides. These studies are being conducted in the gas
phase because it is important to understand the inherent structure and
properties of these molecular systems, in other words in the absence of the
countless water molecules they would encounter in an aqueous solution. The
Armentrout research group is actually developing new techniques to deliver
charged molecules and complexes into the gas phase, either free of water or with
a selected number of water molecules or other organic solvent molecules. The
research includes four main thrusts: how strongly bound are solvent molecules to
doubly charged metals? How does the reactivity of a molecular ion change when
its electrons are excited by laser light or collisions? How do ionized peptides
decompose, and what are the molecular structures of decomposition products? Such
information is valuable in developing new catalytic systems, in understanding
biological function (including effects on health), and in environmental
remediation efforts. In all cases, these experimental studies are complemented
by theoretical examinations of the same phenomena. Students engaged in this
research project are gaining valuable experience in state-of-the-art physical
and analytical methods, including a technique called guided ion beam mass
spectrometry (GIBMS), and quantum mechanical
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is conducted using two types of
instrumentation. Thermodynamic experiments are enabled by using a guided ion
beam tandem mass spectrometer that permits measurement of absolute reaction
cross sections as a function of kinetic energy. This enables the direct
measurement of the energies required for cationized peptides to decompose or for
desolvation of metal dications or metal hydroxide cations. This apparatus is
also being fitted with an ion mobility source that allows separation of metal
cations in different electronic states or of different conformers of cationized
peptides. This instrumental combination enables quantitative studies of spin-
orbit coupling effects and direct measurements of the energetic differences
between different conformers, both of which are potentially transformative
studies. Structural studies involve the use of infrared multiple photon
dissociation spectroscopy conducted at the FELIX facility in the Netherlands,
which include experiments concerning cationized peptides and alkane activation
by metal cations. Broader impacts of these studies include a better
understanding of how to elicit sequence information in proteins, providing
thermodynamic benchmarks for theory, and elucidating mechanistic information
regarding transition metal catalysis, in addition to the educational aspects of
involving both undergraduate and graduate students in a full range of
experimental and theoretical work. A software package (CRUNCH) developed to
obtain thermochemical information from the experiments is undergoing continuous
updates and refinement and continues to be made available to other groups
interested in mass spectrometry based thermodynamic
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.