* 1954946
* IGE: Learning Communities of Graduates for Advancing Professional Skills (GAPS): Integrate Professional Skill Training with Thesis Research
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Gul Kremer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,978.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to the Iowa State University will establish sustainable learning communities of
Graduates for Advancing Professional Skills (GAPS) and design a new framework of
training that adapts the project management skills from industry to academic
research. The program will address two fundamental education research questions:
How can project management skill training be integrated with thesis research in
graduate education? What is the role (or value) of learning communities in
enhancing the training and retention of professional skills and effectiveness of
thesis research? Studies suggest that current graduate education focuses too
narrowly on thesis research, and graduate students are not well prepared with
skills for future work in industry or the academy. However, limited resources
and lack of faculty support prevent students from committing to skill training.
To address these challenges, this e program will develop innovative training
approaches to help students learn and practice project management skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing the framework of communities of practice, the
project will have two major innovations. The first is engaging students with
self-directed, learning activities to produce and evaluate new course content as
they learn from the curated online modules. The second is practicing the
professional skills integrated with the thesis research. This new learning model
has the potential to fundamentally change the culture of graduate education,
efficiently utilize the current resources, and obtain faculty buy-in. Associated
research design will explore factors that may lead to the success of a learning
community, help reconceptualize current graduate education and encourage broader
adoption of these new approaches within and beyond STEM fields. The evaluation
approach is informed by the pragmatic evaluation paradigm, and a variety of data
will be collected in the study including program participation data, document
analysis, student surveys, and faculty and industry partner interviews. The
program will rigorously test over multiple cohort iterations and with control
groups the benefits of this approach, including the synergy created between
thesis research and professional skill training through the GAPS program. The
goal is to disrupt the status quo of graduate education (courses followed by
individual research) and build sustainable GAPS communities that can effectively
improve professional skills for graduate students. Ultimately, the program will
improve graduate student job readiness and placement upon graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.