* 1954588
* RUI: Silyloxypyrone-Based [5+2] Cycloadditions: Mechanisms, Methods, and Mentorship
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dean Tantillo, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2024
* USD 231,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor T. Andrew Mitchell in the Department of Chemistry at
Illinois State University. Often referred to as the central science, chemistry
continues to demonstrate extensive utility. Organic chemistry advances biology,
medicine, physics, materials, economic development, national defense, and
environmental sustainability. Professor Mitchell and his students study
important bond-forming reactions called cycloadditions. These reactions perform
a crucial function within the discipline of organic synthesis by enabling
efficient and selective transformations of flat molecules to three-dimensional
building blocks that are embedded within biologically active compounds. Although
new reaction discoveries are intellectually fascinating, Dr. Mitchell is equally
passionate about training next generation scientists to ask important questions
within an organic chemistry CORE (Collaboration, Outreach, Research, Education)
curriculum in preparation for the chemical workforce. Collaboration invites
students in a research laboratory to work with a range of other scientists.
Creativity, teamwork, presentation, deeper understanding, and characterization
of new compounds are taught in this environment. For example, students learn to
think on their feet and engage in nuanced scientific discussions during lab work
and group meetings. Outreach provides opportunities for high school students,
many from underrepresented groups, to participate in research experiences during
the summer. Research in the undergraduate environment opens the door for greater
sophistication through mentorship, critical reasoning, and exposure to state-of-
the-art instrumentation as students take ownership of knowledge acquired in
coursework. Education in the classroom includes guiding students toward
confident inquiry while using various technological platforms to enhance content
delivery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main intellectual merit objectives of this
project are to expand the mechanistic understanding and the practical utility of
silyloxypyrone-based [5+2] cycloadditions toward construction of otherwise
inaccessible natural and unnatural heterocyclic scaffolds. The Mitchell research
group utilizes kinetic isotope effects, linear free energy relationship studies
based on the Hammett equation, and collaborative theoretical calculations to
elucidate various mechanistic scenarios of silyloxypyrone-based [5+2]
cycloadditions. These studies expand the knowledge of [5+2] cycloadditions and
lead to new directions such as asymmetric induction, intermolecular variants,
and others. Broader impacts illustrate the superb training ground of [5+2]
cycloadditions for next generation scientists. Several activities are integrated
with discovery through our CORE (Collaboration, Outreach, Research, Education)
program. This research has potential impact on the US chemical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.