* 1954776
* IGE: Mentoring for Life: Enhancing STEM Graduate Student Well-Being
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Wade Tornquist, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 05/31/2024
* USD 512,063.00

Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines have a
retention issue, especially for underrepresented graduate students. Although
students leave for many reasons, one underlying cause is a lack of attention to
mentoring and students’ well-being. Students who do not feel as if they belong
are more likely to leave as are students who are unable to develop a trusting,
supportive relationship with faculty. The loss of these graduate students
represents a potential loss to future scientific capacity. This National Science
Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to Eastern Michigan
University will pilot a Mentoring Certificate program designed to expose STEM
graduate students to evidence-based practices in mentoring and well-being. This
work will pilot, test, and validate mentoring interventions grounded in models
of graduate student socialization and socio-cognitive career theory, designed to
address the multiple underlying causes of declining well-being, and
simultaneously train graduate students to be effective mentors. The training of
graduate students to mentor effectively will ensure sustainability as these
students become faculty, supervisors, and mentors
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand how are
graduate student professional identity, career satisfaction, and sense of
belonging in STEM impacted by a mentoring program designed around student well-
being? Through interactive workshops, emotional well-being groups, and resource
development graduate students will gain the tools necessary to: (1) successfully
mentor diverse STEM students; (2) better manage their own emotional well-being;
and (3) advocate for improved mentoring experiences within their own
departments. STEM departments will have an opportunity to learn about the
proposed graduate training certificate and reflect on ways in which mentor
training and best practices can be integrated into departmental culture. An
evaluation study will provide the project team with formative and summative
feedback to inform their team processes and design of the intervention.
Qualitative focus group data will be used to expand upon and clarify
quantitative survey data. The evaluation of the Mentoring Certificate program
will provide evidence for which aspects of the program are effective for
enhancing graduate student well-being and success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.