* 1954340
* Subsurface Hydrogen in a Alloy Hydrogenation Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Andrew Gellman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 466,552.00

Catalysts, substances that increase reaction rates without themselves being
consumed, are responsible for the production of many of the chemicals and
materials on which society relies. Alloys are often more effective catalysts
than the pure elements from which they are derived because their properties can
be tuned by varying their elemental composition. However, this tuning poses a
challenging research problem because it can require the preparation and testing
of hundreds of different compositions to find the optimal catalyst. With funding
from the Chemical Catalysis Program, Dr. Andrew Gellman at Carnegie Mellon
University is developing and applying methods for the acceleration of such
research by measuring catalytic reactions over many alloy compositions
concurrently. These data are providing a comprehensive understanding of the
influence of alloy composition on catalytic reaction rates and selectivities. In
addition, these data are being used to develop machine learning models to
predict the catalytic properties of new alloys and identify likely candidates
for further testing and study. Dr. Gellman is actively involved in undergraduate
research as a means of encouraging young students, especially women, to pursue
advanced STEM degrees and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Andrew Gellman of
Carnegie Mellon University is integrating the use of surface analysis tools,
catalytic reaction kinetics, and microkinetic modelling to study catalytic
surface chemistry. His tools for concurrent measurement of catalytic reaction
kinetics at 100 different alloy compositions across a Composition Spread Alloy
film (CSFAF) provide comprehensive datasets to serve as the basis for
understanding composition dependent trends in alloy catalysis. Dr Gellmanâ€™s work
is enabling development of data rich approaches to catalysis modeling. His work
allows experimental demonstration of correlations between fundamental reaction
parameters such as activation barriers and catalyst characteristics such as
d-band energies; correlations that previously have been accessible only through
electronic structure theory. This methodology is being applied to ethylene
(C2H4) and acetylene (C2H2) hydrogenation reactions. Existing work on
hydrogenation reactions on Pd and Ni surfaces has suggested that subsurface
hydrogen can play a role in the mechanism and influence surface reaction
kinetics. Using a recently developed kinetic framework that includes subsurface
hydrogen in the mechanism, Dr. Gellman is determining its role in C2H4 and C2H2
hydrogenation on Pd and Pt alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.