* 1954975
* RUI: Aromatic Diimide-Stabilized Acenes, Biradicals, and Radical Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Dennis Cao, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2024
* USD 338,259.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Dennis Cao of the Chemistry
Department at Macalester College is developing a new approach toward stabilizing
molecular structures. These structures display promising organic materials
properties but are limited by instabilities that prevent their industrial and
medical applications. With these stabilized species, it will be possible to
develop new carbon-based materials for use in wearable electronics as well as
imaging agents for medical diagnosis. The project, which lies at the interface
of organic and materials chemistry. will further provide authentic research
experiences to undergraduate students in both classroom and research laboratory
settings. The research program will take place at Macalester College, an
exclusively undergraduate institution, and closely involve undergraduate
students in all aspects of the scientific process, ranging from hypothesis
testing to the dissemination of results. The creation of research modules for
introductory organic laboratory courses will engage many Macalester
undergraduates who otherwise could not participate in a chemistry research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to exploit an ortho-aromatic
diimide, known as mellophanic diimide, to provide stabilizing effects to three
classes of unstable target motifs: linear (aza)acenes, open-shell biradical
species, and radical ions. The electron withdrawing effect of the imide
functional group is expected to prevent oxidative degradation that normally
takes place in long (aza)acenes. These modifications will enable future
investigations into their semiconducting properties. The incorporation of imides
onto Clar sextet engineered aromatic compounds is anticipated to enhance their
open-shell character, a feature that can be exploited in the development of two-
photon absorbers and near-IR dyes. Cationic groups will be leveraged to increase
the stability of the reduced states of the electron accepting mellophanic
diimide under ambient conditions, setting the stage for paramagnetic and low-
energy, radical-radical interaction investigations. The experimental work in the
project spans organic synthesis and spectroscopic characterization and will be
further supported by computations. It is expected that the findings of this
project will facilitate the discovery of new organic optical and electronic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.