* 1954724
* Mid-infrared Intraband and Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopies of Doped Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Masaru Kuno, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports Professor Masaru Kuno and his research group at the
University of Notre Dame to study the optical properties of semiconductor
nanocrystals. Molecules and semiconductor nanocrystals react with light to
exhibit unique "fingerprints" that can be used in their identification.
Professor Kuno's research contributes to the development of new analytical
detection technologies for monitoring trace amounts of chemical and biological
substances that are important to health, safety, and national security.
Understanding fundamental optical properties of semiconductor nanocrystals also
has implications in the development of low cost infrared cameras in cellphones
and infrared detectors that can operate at room temperature. Professor Kuno and
his group develop hands-on outreach activities such as thermal imaging kits to
bring interest lower income and minority students in the South Bend Community
School system in STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in
nanocrystal (NC) synthesis have enabled the development of stable, self-doped
semiconductor NCs with significant doping densities. These NCs exhibit mid-
infrared intrabands and localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs). However,
little is understood about their dependence on the NC size, shape, surface
chemistry, and doping density/dopant activation. This is due to the
inhomogeneities present in doped NC ensembles, which is unavoidable in current
colloidal NC syntheses. Limited means exist for conducting highly sensitive,
mid-infrared optical measurements of single NCs. With this support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division, Professor Kunoâ€™s research team addresses this important need in the
field. The research team employs a newly developed, super-resolution infrared
absorption technique, called infrared photothermal heterodyne imaging (IR-PHI),
to measure the local absorption of self-doped NCs. These measurements, in turn,
can enable better understanding of the fundamental properties of these
semiconductor NCs and of the evolution of intraband transitions into collective
LSPRs at high doping densities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.