* 1954325
* Designer Silver Catalysts for Selective Bond Amidations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Jennifer Schomaker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Jennifer Schomaker of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin Madison to design new catalysts that
convert feedstock chemicals into useful building blocks for the synthesis of
pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals. The silver catalysts that are being developed
change common parts of organic molecules called alkenes and alkanes into
nitrogen-containing groups called amines. Importantly, these catalysts are also
being tuned to select a specific type of alkene or alkane to undergo the
amination process within a molecule containing multiple examples of alkane
and/or alkene bonds. Professor Schomaker and her diverse team of graduate and
undergraduate researchers are examining questions about how these catalysts work
in order to learn how to improve their performance for the advanced
manufacturing of chemicals and materials. Portions of this study are also being
adapted for undergraduate teaching laboratory experiments to engage students at
an early stage in research experiences. Green aspects of this project are being
pursued in teaching laboratory course activities that provide guided inquiry
opportunities for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of low-
cost, modular catalysts for the tunable conversion of C-H bonds to C-N bonds is
a long-standing challenge that is crucial for achieving streamlined syntheses of
important molecular fragments in pharmaceutical and material applications. To
address this issue, Professor Schomaker and her research group are designing
silver catalysts that can control the selective transformation of C-H bonds to
C-N bonds through metal-catalyzed nitrene transfer processes. These
investigations combine mechanistic, spectroscopic, and computational studies to
understand how the different structural elements of the silver catalysts
influence interactions with substrates and promote selective reactivity with
specific C-H bonds. Case studies are also being explored to illustrate the
impact of these new synthetic tools for the preparation of enantioenriched
amines, the construction of synthetic building blocks for pharmaceuticals, and
the design of novel amino sugars. Ultimately, this work is establishing general
design principles for new silver catalysts that can override innate reactivity
preferences and do not require a directing group for C-H
amidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.