* 1954773
* QCIS-FF: Quantum Computing &amp; Information Science Faculty Fellow at North Carolina State University
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Daniel Stancil, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2024
* USD 490,784.00

Computers have revolutionized almost every area of our lives, but there are
certain problems that machines based on classical logic and binary digits will
simply never be able to solve. In contrast, by representing data and performing
calculations in fundamentally different ways using the laws of quantum physics,
we anticipate that quantum computers will be able to solve problems that cannot
be solved with a classical computer. Examples of such problems include
optimization, improving the performance of machine learning, drug discovery, and
assessing risks. As an example, by creating daily ad hoc airline flight
schedules in response to unexpected delays, quantum computing could reduce
customer travel time, air traffic congestion and airline fuel costs. Quantum
computing appears to be at the threshold of exponential growth, but it faces a
world-wide shortage of talent. In addition, significant technical challenges
remain that are best addressed by Computer Scientists and Computer Engineers.
Consequently there is an urgent need to develop rigorous, flexible, and
interdisciplinary curricula to prepare computer science and computer engineering
students for careers in quantum computing. From a research prospective, there
are significant opportunities to make fundamental contributions at all levels,
from qubit design to applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help address this
need, North Carolina State University will recruit a tenure-track faculty member
in quantum computing as a joint appointment between the Departments of
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) and Computer Science (CSC). The
appointment will be at the Assistant or Associate Professor level. The new
faculty member will benefit from access to state-of-the-art quantum computers
through the IBM Q Hub at NC State. At present these include 20, 27, and 53 qubit
processors with quantum volumes up to 32. The faculty member will be part of a
growing multi-disciplinary quantum computing community at NC State involving
departments such as Chemistry, Math, Physics, and Materials Science &amp;
Engineering, as well as ECE and CSC. The Quantum Computing and Information
Science Faculty Fellow will play an active role in helping to grow this
community, in designing and implementing a quantum computing curriculum, and
advancing the state-of-the art in quantum engineering. Some of the areas of
opportunity for this new hire can overlap with existing faculty interests such
as cross-platform translation, debugging &amp; error detection techniques,
metrics for evaluating quantum entanglement, magnon spectra, quantum computing
for electronic design automation, and quantum computing for quantitative
finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.