* 1954454
* Research Initiation Award: Effect of the Universe Topology on Cosmological Perturbations
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Maksym Eingorn, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to North Carolina Central University has potential broader impacts in a
number of areas. The goal of this project is to develop a formalism for studying
the seeds of structure formation in the early universe in geometries that are
different from those that are typically assumed in cosmological research.
Undergraduate students are involved in this research and the project has
collaborations with a number of other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to develop an all-scale cosmological perturbation theory for the
following geometrical extensions of the conventional LambdaCDM (Lambda cold dark
matter) paradigm, which aim at revealing the shape and volume of the universe:
models with anisotropic spatial topologies and models with nonzero spatial
curvature. This theory will permit consideration of nonlinear contrasts of the
matter density. Thus, it will be suitable for high-precision simulations of the
cosmic structure growth at arbitrary - sub-horizon and super-horizon -
distances, as well as for the estimation of the cosmological backreaction
effects. Elaboration of the desired formalism will be based on the weak field
limit, and methods of discrete cosmology, particularly the presentation of
nonrelativistic matter in the form of separate point-like particles with the
corresponding energy-momentum tensor, in combination with the cosmic screening
approach will be employed. The all-scale description of the gravitational
interaction in the inhomogeneous universe within the selected models will assist
in distinguishing among the competing scenarios, the LambdaCDM paradigm and its
alternatives, deepening of our understanding of the universe topology, and
constructing an advanced model satisfying the data of present and future high-
precision observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.