* 1954927
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Modern Combinatorial Optimization: Incentives, Uncertainty, and Smoothed Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Aviad Rubinstein, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 597,896.00

Optimization theory is a central facet of computer science, and has driven the
theoretical foundations since its inception. The classical paradigm considers a
decision maker with all the relevant information available, and algorithms are
evaluated primarily on the quality of the solution produced and the speed with
which the solution is found. In modern applications, however, the decision maker
no longer has all the relevant information in advance. Perhaps they must instead
incentivize strategic agents to reveal this information, even when these agents
have their own interests in the solution produced. Perhaps they must instead
learn the relevant information in pieces online, making irrevocable decisions
along the way with only partial information. The overarching theme of this
project is the development of novel optimization theory subject to these modern
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project considers three
key angles. First, it considers the interaction between multi-item auctions and
communication complexity. For example, it aims to understand whether or not any
communication-efficient optimization algorithm, designed without incentives in
mind, can be made to also accommodate agents’ incentives without (much) loss in
performance. Second, it revisits the classical problem of submodular
maximization subject to a cardinality constraint (which is known to be
intractable on worst case inputs), and introduces a novel variant of smoothed
analysis for this problem. Finally, it proposes a new approach towards the
still-open Matroid Secretary Problem: a generalization of the Minimum Spanning
Tree problem where edges are learned one at a time and must be irrevocably
included (or not) in the spanning tree before seeing other
edges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.