* 1954791
* Electronic Structure, Dynamics and Transport in Strongly Interacting Systems.
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* David Reichman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 473,890.00

Professor David Reichman of Columbia University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop new theoretical and computational methods to study the
structure and properties of new materials. In this project, he will extend his
research on the theory of atoms, molecules and solid-state systems to make it
possible to study the properties of significantly larger molecules using
sophisticated computer models. His group will also develop new theories to
explain the interactions between molecules in the solid state and those in the
newest semiconducting materials. This work may be useful in the design of state-
of-the-art devices such as more efficient solar batteries and more powerful
superconductors. In addition, Dr. Reichman will further the education of
students in New York city via a hands-on program designed to teach students how
to build such novel devices in New York City
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Reichman will investigate a variety of
approaches for the computationally efficient selection of trial wave functions
in the auxiliary field quantum Monte Carlo (AF-QMC) method for efficient
transcorrelation within AF-QMC. He and his team will also investigate
computational approaches to calculate dynamical response functions within AF-
QMC. In the area of electron-phonon problems, he and his group develop novel
cumulant-based theory for the calculation of transport properties, as well as an
ab initio theory of phonon-inducted exciton binding energy renormalization. The
scientific component of the work will broadly impact the design of catalysts and
materials, while the outreach component will impact education of students within
the New York City public school system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.