* 1954577
* Designing and Implementing an Industry-aligned Robotics Technician Certificate Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 04/30/2024
* USD 298,108.00

A high need exists for robotics technicians in the Central Massachusetts
manufacturing and warehousing sectors. To help meet this need, this project will
develop a one-year robotics technician certificate program to teach skills
sought by regional robotics technician employers. The project will also develop
a pathway from existing K-12 robotics outreach programs into robotics
technological education. The robotics technician curriculum will be designed in
partnership with industry to help students develop technical, communication, and
problem-solving skills. Industry involvement will ensure that the robotics
technician program meets industry needs. Outreach activities will emphasize
recruiting students from underrepresented populations including Latinx students,
English language learners, economically under-resourced students, and persons
with disabilities. The program design will be shared with other institutions of
higher education that are interested in developing robotics technician
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and implement a one-
year robotics technician certificate program. It will first convene a Business
and Industry Leadership Team to help prioritize the skills desired by local
employers. It will then use the Developing a Curriculum process to build the
curriculum and identify best practices for delivery. Laboratory upgrades will
include a programmable, humanoid robot that will support hands-on pedagogy.
Professional development for faculty will include a Project-Based Learning
workshop and FANUC certification training. Students will be recruited from
existing K-12 robotics community outreach programs that already engage a large
population of underrepresented students. Thus, the project is expected to
strengthen opportunities for students with demonstrated interest in robotics,
including students from underrepresented groups, to enter an in-demand career.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.