* 1954389
* Tuning Antiaromaticity and Diradical Properties in Diarenoindacenes, Diindenoacenes, and Related Quinoidal Scaffolds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Michael Haley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division is
supporting the research of Professor Michael Haley of the University of Oregon
who is synthesizing molecules known as indenoacenes and arenoindacenes.
Professor Haley and his research group construct these compounds with systematic
structural differences to answer fundamental questions about how these changes
affect the electronic and material properties of these compounds. A key goal is
to develop simple methods to construct these compounds in order to study their
characteristics. Examination of the optical, electronic, and/or magnetic
properties of these molecules then determines how they can be tuned and
optimized for use in optoelectronic devices such as organic field effect
transistors and organic photovoltaics. Professor Haley and his research group
collaborate with material scientists, host visiting scientists from primarily
undergraduate institutions for extended stays in their laboratory, and have
continued substantial involvement of a diverse group of undergraduates in their
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-benzene-based conjugated systems,
such as indenofluorenes (IFs), have been recognized for their potential as
organic semiconductors characterized by low energy valence shells and a small
band gap. This project aims to create extended IF structures and IF derivatives
with heterocyclic groups to better understand the singlet-triplet gap in these
diradical systems and to compare to the original IF system. The team also
constructs novel asymmetric IF compounds to determine the effect of the loss of
symmetry on fundamental properties. The molecules prepared in these studies
present opportunities for practical applications in the areas of nanotechnology
and low-cost electronics. This project also serves as an excellent training
ground for graduate and undergraduate researchers with broad experiences in
organic synthesis, computational chemistry, crystallography, and understanding
the fundamental relationship between molecular structure and electronic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.