* 1954978
* IGE: Reimagining the STEM Doctorate: The Pathways to Entrepreneurship (PAtENT) program
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Harischandra Cherukuri, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Doctoral programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) are
designed primarily to train candidates in conducting original research and to
prepare them for careers as faculty members at institutions of higher education.
In this model, the capstone requirement for the STEM PhD is satisfied through
the publication of original research in academic journals, where the work must
be evaluated favorably by experts through peer-review. In recent years, there
has been an increasing participation of STEM PhDs in technology
entrepreneurship, through the development of patentable technologies, and the
formation of startup companies. The STEM PhD program, as it exists, does not
adequately provide this growing proportion of the STEM workforce who are active
in entrepreneurship with the necessary professional skills and preparation. This
National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC) will introduce a novel approach
in which STEM PhD students will develop patentable technologies as the capstone
requirement. These innovations will be implemented in a new program called
Pathways to Entrepreneurship (PAtENT), which will provide an alternate pathway
to earning a doctoral degree that has the potential to spur graduation rates,
generate employment in the local communities in which it is deployed, and
maintain the nation’s edge in technological innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the project will be to develop an
alternate roadmap for STEM PhD students that is scalable and reflects the
rapidly evolving workforce needs. This goal will be achieved without sacrificing
the technical rigor of the traditional PhD program, by subjecting the patent
applications to external peer review. An independent evaluator will collect
extensive data on the efficacy of the program, and address specific objectives
such as the alignment of the roadmap with the core scientific and professional
elements required for a PhD, assess the scalability potential of the pilot
study, develop recommendations for STEM programs at other doctoral institutions
across the country, and measure the participation rates and employment outcomes
of under-represented minorities targeted by the program. The evaluation will
consist of a mixed-methods design that will include surveys, polls and
interviews developed for current students and faculty, and reflective questions
for the project leadership. The project will emphasize the recruitment of female
and veteran students, groups that are currently under-represented in the
technology startup workforce. If successful, the project will help modernize
STEM doctoral programs to suit the needs of the country’s future as a knowledge-
based economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to
pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.