* 1954806
* Modernization of a Technical Welding Program to Better Serve Non-Traditional Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Lydia Ulatowski, Niagara County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for a highly skilled STEM
technical workforce. It aims to do so by producing highly qualified welding
technicians to satisfy workforce needs in the Advanced Manufacturing Industry in
Western New York. The project focuses on the unmet need for welders and
metallurgy specialists in the region, a need that is expected to increase more
than 7% by 2024. This project will address this workforce need by improving an
existing Associates in Applied Science in Welding Technology degree program.
Improvements include relocating the welding program from an off campus
vocational training center to a modernized, on-campus facility where it will be
more accessible to students. The program will combine for-credit programing with
non-credit certifications to produce highly trained welding technicians who are
prepared for long-term careers in welding technology. These improvements are
projected to double the number of students who successfully complete the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a state-of-the-art
welding and metal fabrication instructional lab on campus. Through the addition
of this lab, as well as modification of program hours to better fit the daytime
college schedule, the program intends to double its capacity and enrollment with
the expectation to serve 50 students each semester. The program will host
additional classes in the evenings, on weekends, and over seasonal breaks. The
project will develop partnerships with area welding companies to collaboratively
design course offerings and a customized curriculum with input from an Industry
Advisory Council. These efforts are designed to result in a robust program that
facilitates hands-on learning experiences centered on aligning student ability
with employment opportunities in the field. The project will inaugurate an
annual Industry Welding Day where students will showcase their work and have an
opportunity to participate in open interviews with prospective employers. This
unified approach is expected to increase enrollment, retention, and graduation
rates within the Welding Technology Program, and thus increase the number of
highly skilled technicians eligible for placement in welding careers. To better
prepare students for successful careers in welding, faculty teaching in the
welding technology program will earn Certified Welding Educator and Certified
Welding Inspector credentials. These certifications will better prepare the
faculty to educate students and evaluate their work. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.