* 1954437
* I-Corps:  Catalytic Membrane Reactor for Commercial Production of Biomass-Derived Fuel and Fuel Additives
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Robert Beitle, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is to develop an alternative source
of renewable energy and chemicals to help address the worldwide increasing
demands for energy. It will provide a new and abundant source of renewable
energy and chemical intermediates with long-term effects. Development of these
platform chemicals from renewable cheaper resources, such as waste crops, can
impact the economics of the chemical industry by leveraging new starting
materials. Technology breakthroughs from this work will enable broader adoption
of bio-based products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of technology for production of platform chemicals using a catalytic
membrane reactor. The technology focuses on simultaneous catalytic hydrolysis,
dehydration, and rehydration of renewable biomass to bio-based platform
chemicals and biofuels. The feed used in this technology is lignocellulosic
biomass instead of conventional monomers as starting materials accounting for
significant feedstock cost reduction. The competitive thermochemical and enzyme-
based technology have major disadvantages such as high energy demand, high cost
of enzymes, and involves multiple complex processing steps. Further, comparative
chemical conversion processes use corrosive acids or expensive ionic liquids
which are unacceptable with present day industrial norms. The technology uses
non-toxic, inexpensive, robust, and easily regenerable enzyme-mimicked catalyst
efficiently catalyzes multiple reactions with high desired product yield using
carefully selected solvent system. Furthermore, the proposed technology is
intensified using membrane process that helps in simultaneous catalysis and
separation of the products shifting the thermodynamic equilibrium preventing
product decomposition. Previous fundamental research has shown that the proposed
catalytic membrane can convert both cellulose and hemicellulose part of the
biomass, which opens the possibility of future developments that focus on
production of multiple other products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.