* 1954589
* Collaborative Research: Energy Efficient Voltage Controlled Non-volatile Domain Wall Devices for Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jayasimha Atulasimha, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2024
* USD 249,981.00

As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are increasingly deployed in low power embedded
device and Internet of Things (IoT) applications. They need to be able to learn
in real time while also being energy efficient. This necessitates the use of
multi-state memory which is more than the conventional binary “0” and “1”
states, is non-volatile such that information is retained when power is turned
off, and can be programmed with very little energy. The goal of this project is
to study and demonstrate synaptic elements of a neural network, which can store
the weights updated during learning using voltage-controlled magnetic domain
wall (DW) devices. Information is encoded as the position of a DW in a narrow
magnetic wire. Specifically, the research will focus on using the strain
generated by application of a small voltage to a thin piezoelectric layer and
transferred to a magnetic wire deposited on it to control DW position in an
extremely energy efficient manner. This research could lead to a dense, energy
efficient and robust hardware paradigm for implementing DNNs. Two graduate
students, one at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) and one at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), will gain multidisciplinary skills in advanced
nanofabrication, nano-characterization and modeling. The VCU-PI and MIT- Co-PI
will incorporate domain wall technology for memory and computing in the courses
they teach. The PI and Co-PI plan to host research interns in their labs
recruited from outreach programs for underrepresented groups in their respective
universities. The students will be trained on nanofabrication of nanomagnets and
other aspects of magnetic technology. The PI and Co-PI also plans to hold
nanomagnetism workshops for high school students and teachers in their
Universities collaboratively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative effort
between VCU and MIT work will study and demonstrate the use of racetracks
comprised of magnetostrictive metals such as CoFe, where DWs are moved using
Spin Orbit Torque (SOT) from an adjoining Pt layer and arrested
deterministically using voltage generated strain from a piezoelectric layer
underneath that modulate perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) in different
regions of a racetrack. The research team further plan to explore the use of
magnetostrictive Rare Earth Iron Garnets (REIG) that have lower saturation
magnetization and low damping, allowing for lower SOT applied for lesser time
due to large DW velocities in order to improve the energy efficiency of DW
devices. The proposed work will consist of complementary materials growth,
characterization, nanofabrication, advanced magnetic visualization, modeling and
simulation that includes: (i) Growth of metallic ferromagnetic and insulating
ferrimagnets (ii) Study of SOT-driven DW velocity in magnetostrictive racetracks
and proof-of-concept demonstration of arresting SOT-driven DW motion with a
voltage induced strain (iii) Performing micromagnetic modeling of domain wall
motion with SOT and its control with voltage-induced strain in the presence of
notches, edge effects and room temperature thermal noise and evaluating the
overall performance benefit of the proposed device in implementing DNNs. The
research in this project will advance the knowledge of DW dynamics under local
voltage- induced variations in anisotropy, in heterostructures that exhibit rich
physics of SOT and the presence of chiral DWs. It will also provide a proof-of-
concept demonstration of synaptic and neuron devices that could pave the way for
energy-efficient hardware implementation of DNNs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.