* 1954392
* Dynamics of Ions and Molecules in Concentrated Electrolyte and Acid Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Michael Fayer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Water is the most important liquid on Earth. It is involved in a vast number of
technological applications as well as being fundamental to biology. Our
understanding of water, at least in its pure form, is quite extensive. Water
molecules interact with each other via hydrogen bonding, where a partially
positively charged hydrogen atom on one molecule is attracted to a partially
negatively charged oxygen on another molecule. Hydrogen bonding causes liquid
water to have a significantly ordered structure, even ice-like in places. Most
of the time in nature and human-conceived technologies, water has other
chemicals in it, and when the concentration of these chemicals is high, much of
what we know about pure water no longer applies. Instead of connecting with each
other, water molecules become attracted to the positive and negative ions of the
salt or acid species. In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics
and Mechanisms-A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Fayer
and his students at Stanford University are employing a two-dimensional infrared
laser spectroscopy technique (2D-IR) to explore the structure and dynamics of
aqueous solutions containing high concentrations of salts and acids. Infrared
spectroscopy reveals the vibrational motions of molecules. 2D-IR reveals how one
molecule’s vibrations are affected by vibrations of nearby molecules, or the
motions of nearby ions. This project uses ultrafast laser pulses, a tenth of a
trillionth of a second, to make direct measurements on the dynamics and
structure of salt and acid solutions. Ultrafast 2D-IR can also reveal how water
molecules reorient themselves when they encounter other molecules or ions.
Although the structure and dynamics of concentrated acid and salt solutions are
very important to living systems and many industrial technologies, there is a
great deal that remains to learn about them. Two graduate students are involved
in this research project. In addition to gaining experience in advanced laser
techniques, they are also being training in theory and computational techniques
that aid in the interpretation of the experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aqueous electrolyte solutions are
important do to their ubiquity in chemistry, biology, and industrial
applications such as fuel cells, water desalination and battery technology. Ion
solvation structure, ion clustering and dynamics, and the dynamics of the water
hydrogen bond networks are among the interesting aspects of salt solutions.
Concentrated electrolyte solutions are sometimes referred to as “water-in-salt.”
In these solutions, the hydrogen bond network among water molecules is severely
disturbed. The ions cannot be fully solvated by water molecules and form pairs,
solvent mediated pairs, and clusters. The crowded ionic environment, which
produces strong electric fields, will restrain the motions of water molecules.
This project involves experimental and theoretical investigations of the
dynamics, structure, and interaction of ions and water in concentrated aqueous
salt solutions and acid solutions using various types of new ultrafast two-
dimensional infrared (2D IR) spectroscopies and ab-initio molecular dynamics
simulations. Previous studies of water dynamics in concentrated ionic solutions
used the oxygen-deuterium (OD) stretch of dilute HOD as the vibrational probe.
However, the short vibrational lifetime (1.8 picoseconds) makes it impossible to
observe relatively slow processes that occur in concentrated salt solutions.
This study employs long-lived vibrational probes, e.g., the CN stretch of
methylthiocyanate, whose relatively narrow absorption spectra makes it possible
to obtain detailed information on acid and salt solutions. 2D IR experiments are
being conducted on both concentrated salt and acid solutions. 2D IR chemical
exchange spectroscopy directly measures the proton hopping time in acid
solutions. Polarization selective 2D IR (PS2DIR) experiments measure water
molecule orientational relaxation. The new experiments are being combined with
high level ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, which are being performed
in collaboration with Profs. Thomas Markland of Stanford University and Aurora
Clark of Washington State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.