* 1954016
* Is Better Access to Information Effective in Improving Labor Market Outcomes? Experimental Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Rohini Pande, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 405,904.00

Provision of social insurance for low income people is not efficient for a
variety of reasons, including lack of information. Similarly, labor markets in
these areas do not function efficiently, especially for young women, to create
pathways for employment to get them out poverty and improve their wellbeing. The
proposed research will use field experiments to study the effects of information
on improving efficiency of the provision of social insurance and employment for
low income people, especially of young women. The project consists of two
studies. The first study investigates how improved information flows through the
bureaucracy improves the delivery of social benefits to impoverished recipients.
It will also study the mechanisms through which information affects bureaucratic
behavior and willingness to adopt information enhanced management tools. The
second project will study how information flows influences the efficiency of
labor markets in low income areas. The results of this research project will
provide important policy inputs for poverty reduction and will help establish
the US as a global leader in poverty reduction
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use two randomized control trial
methods to study the effects of improved information on the provision of social
insurance and employment among low income people. The first study aims to
understand how improving the flow of information within a multi-tiered
bureaucratic hierarchy can improve implementation of social protection programs.
It examines these issues in the context of timely delivery of wages to
impoverished workfare participants. The experimental evaluation considers
whether providing improved information at multiple levels of the bureaucracy is
complimentary, the mechanisms through which information influences administrator
behavior, and willingness to adopt information enhancing management tools. The
second study examines information flows in the context of a government-funded
training and job placement program. It specifically asks whether community
members can more effectively recruit high-potential candidates for training and
improve long-term employment and social outcomes for poor youth. The research
will also examine how information that youth receive affects program
participation and job retention by gender. Insights from this study will inform
understanding of how information by local recruiters affects match quality and
labor force composition, individual employment outcomes, and youths' economic
and social wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.