* 1954270
* Organic Chemistry in Harsh Reaction Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Robert McMahon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 626,762.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Robert J. McMahon of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison investigates the behavior of
organic compounds under extreme conditions of temperature, pressure, or
radiation. These conditions, which are similar to the conditions found in flames
(combustion) or in space, cause the degradation of organic compounds and
generate a complex mixture of highly reactive products. This project explores
the properties and chemical reactions of these reactive molecules. This research
provides a foundation for understanding two very different problems – one
involving combustion and another involving the chemistry of space. Combustion of
organic fuels is central to our nation’s energy supply and national economy. A
fundamental understanding of combustion offers the possibility of enhancing the
energy efficiency of fuel combustion and minimizing pollutants (soot) that arise
from incomplete combustion. In interstellar space, it is now known that hundreds
of different organic compounds exist throughout the galaxy in environments that
are harsh because they are so hot (near stars) or because they are so cold (far
from stars). Studying these environments is a crucial step in understanding the
distribution of organic material in the universe and identifying molecules that
could be precursors to life. This research program supports the education of
graduate and undergraduate students in the study of complex chemical problems as
part of an interdisciplinary research team. Training in mechanistic organic
chemistry provides a valuable foundation for subsequent careers in industry or
academia. Professor McMahon and his student engage in a variety of science
education and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses
challenges in mechanistic organic chemistry that are relevant to our
understanding of harsh reaction environments. The current proposal develops
these issues along three major lines: 1) generation, detection, and
characterization of key chemical targets by rotational spectroscopy, 2)
spectroscopy and photochemistry of carbon-chain molecules, and 3) quantum
mechanical tunneling in organic chemistry. The scientific impact of the proposed
research reaches beyond chemistry and cuts across diverse areas of contemporary
science. Studies of spin delocalization and spin polarization underpin the
development of new organic materials with novel electrical and magnetic
properties. Studies of reactive organic species contribute to a fundamental
understanding of combustion. The Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA), an NSF-
funded astronomical interferometer of radio telescopes in northern Chile, is
generating a deluge of new radio-astronomical data. These data can be
interpreted only by comparison with laboratory spectra of the type that are
obtained in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.