* 1954538
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Hydrology of the vegetation on vegetation: Comparison and scaling of rainfall interception and solute alteration by common arboreal epiphytes.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Clara Moore, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 158,628.00

Forests cover can significantly reduce the amount of rainfall reaching the
ground and alter its chemistry. This process, called "interception," impacts
water paths, soil erosion, and stormwater management costs. There are three
major parts of the forest canopy: bark, leaves and epiphytes (the plants that
live on the canopy). The effect of epiphytes on rainfall interception is not
well understood, yet they can live in any forest ecosystem and represent some of
Earth’s most water-absorbent land organisms. This study addresses this knowledge
gap by monitoring interception variables for a southeastern US forest that hosts
3 major types of epiphytes that differ in how the intercept rainfall (lichen,
resurrection fern, and Spanish moss). The study will involve multiple
measurements in water and epiphytes, as well as monitoring weather conditions.
Results will inform water and forest managers about conservation efforts for
epiphyte-rich forests. The research will be led by primarily Undergraduate
Institutions and will train undergraduate students in cutting-edge science.
Outcomes of the project will be incorporated into educational outreach efforts
reaching thousands of K-12 (kinder to twelfth grade) and undergraduate students,
high school teachers, and community members. It will also provide research
experiences to members of underrepresented groups, including those associated
with African American economically disadvantaged, and military
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first process in the rainfall-to-discharge
hydrologic flow path in vegetated ecosystems is the partitioning of rain by
forest canopies. Rain-canopy interactions have been documented to impact
stormwater runoff and infrastructure costs, supply hundreds of kilograms of
dissolved solutes per ha per year to soils and mitigate regional warming. A
major process that has been overlooked on this topic is the role of epiphytes
(plants that structurally live on canopies). Since epiphytes are ubiquitous
across forest ecosystems and many can store &gt;1000% of their dry weight in
water, excluding these organisms significantly impacts canopy water balances and
related solute exchanges. This study addresses this major knowledge gap at a
forest with high biomass of 3 common types of epiphytes (lichens, ferns and
bromeliads) that represent a water-control continuum, from poikilohydric (no
internal water control, like lichens) to homoiohydric (presence of internal
water controls, like the bromeliad, Spanish moss). Principal objectives are to:
(1) assess storage, evaporation and drainage dynamics for these epiphytes; (2)
evaluate ecohydrological traits that underlie epiphyte’s water balance and
determine their vulnerability to projected changes in climate; (3) quantify
epiphyte alterations to rainfall inorganic solute characteristics; and (4) scale
findings to estimate current and future relative stand-level influence of
epiphytes. Addressing these objectives may alter estimates and predictions of
major hydrological processes linked to climatologically relevant energy
exchanges and ecologically critical mass exchanges. The project will support 1
post-doctoral scholar and 6 undergraduate students to receive substantial
research experiences (field work, instrumentation, data collection and
processing, modeling and model evaluation, manuscript preparation, and results
presentation) in a timely &amp; critical subfield at the intersection of eco-
hydrology and hydrometeorology. The project will also disseminate information to
broad audiences through websites, workshops, interpretative signs installed in
the study forest area, sequential art, including graphic novellas and character
designs, and a time-lapsed video to be featured in a leading educational YouTube
channel with international viewership (MinuteEarth).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.