* 1954700
* Electronic Coupling and Polymorphic Heterogeneity in Singlet Fission Microcrystals Studied with 2D White-Light Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Martin Zanni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Martin Zanni’s
laboratory at the University of Wisconsin explores a novel property of some
materials that can convert light into electricity. In these materials, when one
photon, or unit of light, hits the material, multiple electrons can carry away
its electrical energy, a process known as singlet fission, whereas in most
materials only one electron is excited by one photon. Systems undergoing singlet
fission can benefit the design of photovoltaic devices like solar cells and
photodetectors. Although singlet fission has been observed in crystals, the
detailed mechanism by which it occurs is not established yet. Theoretical and
experimental studies show that the arrangement of molecules in a crystal plays
an important role in determining electronic and charge transfer couplings that
drive singlet fission. Hence, different crystal polymorphs (i.e. different
crystal packing/arrangement of the same molecule), often exhibit different
singlet fission efficiencies. By studying two model systems, this project is
providing better understanding of how molecular structure, its packing into
polymorphs, and its charge generation are related. These experiments are
contributing to a better understanding of how singlet fission might be utilized
for more efficient charge generation. Professor Zanni and his students also
continue their involvement in educational activities, including mentoring
undergraduate research students, participating in a program to provide peer-
mentoring and other support for minority, low-income and first-generation
graduate students, and presenting a science show and chemistry worksheet
activities to local elementary schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Zanni and
his students are studying singlet fission in two molecular systems,
triisopropylsilylethynyl (TIPS)-pentacene and rubrene, with the specific goal of
identifying and understanding the impact of non-equilibrium structures on
singlet fission. TIPS-pentacene is a solution processable organic semiconductor
capable of undergoing rapid and efficient singlet fission. In previous NSF-
funded work, Professor Zanni’s group revealed that TIPS-pentacene adopts
different packing structure depending on the film formation procedure. Even
small changes to the crystal structure alter the interactions between two
neighboring molecules, changing the electronic couplings of the singlet,
triplet, and charge transfer states. It was found that TIPS-pentacene
microcrystals contain small populations of slip-stacked geometries that improve
triplet state generation and also enable equilibration between the singlet and
triplet states. In this project, Professor Zanni and his group aim to extend the
understanding of how spatial variation in electronic couplings through defects
and polymorphs impact singlet fission and other energy transfer processes. The
slip-stacked structures are being studied by varying growth conditions,
annealing, imaging crystal growth, and other experiments. Rubrene is another
material that undergoes singlet fission and crystallizes into several different
polymorphs. Singlet fission kinetics are being studied in each polymorph, in
detail, to understand the relation between molecular geometry and charge
transfer dynamics. State of the art two dimensional white light (2D WL)
spectroscopy and broadband transient absorption microscopy (TAM) are used for
the studies. A second-generation 2D WL microscope is being built with pulses
centered in the blue part of the spectrum. The spectral range of this new
instrument allows for study of rubrene and many other important materials which
absorb at shorter wavelengths than TIPS-pentacene. This microscope is expected
to enable the imaging of exciton diffusion by independently scanning the
position of the pump and probe pulses. Crystal packing and spatial heterogeneity
of electronic couplings can strongly impact exciton and charge transport
processes. In addition, Professor Zanni and his group assist members of the
scientific community and industry in collecting and simulating 2D IR and 2D WL
data, as well as participate in the educational and outreach activities
discussed above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.