* 1954418
* A Specimen Processing Laboratory at Indio Mountains Research Station Headquarters
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Jerry Johnson, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2022
* USD 165,332.00

A new clean laboratory (500 sq. ft.) will be built at The University of Texas at
El Paso (UTEP)'s Indio Mountains Research Station (IMRS). This laboratory will
be devoted to lab research activities and for storing systematic collections of
local fauna. The further expansion of the facilities at IMRS will enhance the
stationâ€™s ability to house and service ecology and biology research, outreach,
and accommodate educational student groups. The clean building is necessary for
activities required today by cutting-edge science projects. IMRS has an
important function educating persons at all levels of scientific study in the El
Paso region, especially its high number of underrepresented Hispanics, which is
a key factor when developing programs to best serve the regional community. The
services associated with the new building will enable us to expand our present
programs and provide opportunities to more researchers, middle school teachers
and students, community college personnel, and university level educational
groups interested on aspects of the northern Chihuahuan Desert, which is one
probably of the least studied deserts in North America. Located next to the
Mexican border and a large urban area, a modern IMRS will become a major player
in ecological investigations and conservation
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chihuahuan Desert has few areas with
unrestricted access to places significantly conductive to field oriented
research and education. IMRS provides a much needed venue for conducting those
types of activities in mostly undisturbed terrestrial and aquatic environments.
This new clean laboratory will improve the efficiency of current researchers and
student projects. Additionally, the new laboratory will increase IMRS's ability
to better serve groups of researchers, educational, and outreach personnel.
UTEP, with IMRS being its major field investigation facility, is a foremost
educator of underrepresented Hispanics in science and technology. It's
enrollment of about 25,000 include over 72% Hispanic students, with a majority
female. Teachers and future teachers involved in IMRS activities will have a big
impact on the scientific competence of K-12 students enrolled in their
classrooms and should increase interests in minority students electing to go
into scientific disciplines at higher educational levels. The new facility
improvement will allow UTEP's IMRS to serve and increase the competency of more
people interested in Chihuahuan Desert studies by providing needed clean lab
space and fulfill the demands of an R1 research university.
https://www.utep.edu/indio/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.