* 1954842
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Increasing Communication Rates through a TActile Phonemic Sleeve (TAPS)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Hong Tan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 257,800.00

How much information can be transmitted through the skin? Conventional wisdom
would say not as much as vision or hearing. The researchers argue, however, that
there is a need to better understand how to "talk" to the skin in its own
language. The team has recently devised a sleeve with 24 vibrators that delivers
speech sounds in the form of distinct vibration patterns. Testing results from
more than 100 normal-hearing individuals (in addition to one participant with a
severe hearing loss) show that the vibration-based representation of speech
sounds can be easily learned and combined to "sound out" English words in
isolation. The best learners have demonstrated an ability to learn one English
word per minute, up to a vocabulary size of 500 English words. This is an
exciting breakthrough that can lead to a communication device for people with
severe hearing impairments and for those whose hearing is temporarily
compromised due to noisy environments such as firefighters. The main objective
of this project is to systematically explore ways that the communication rate
through the sleeve can be increased. Our goal is to reach at least 60-80 words
per minute, a communication rate that has been demonstrated by the Tadoma method
of speech communication, in which persons who are both deaf and blind place a
hand over the face and neck of the talker to understand speech. Such a
communication rate will make the sleeve a practical solution for the community
of people who need an alternate means for speech communication, such as the ones
with both hearing and vision impairments. If successful, the project will
facilitate a better quality of life (in terms of social interactions as well as
employability) for this disadvantaged community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the fundamental question of the information capacity of the
sense of touch within the context of increasing communication rates through a
haptic display of speech. The project leverages the team's research and
development experience on: (i) natural speech communication methods used by the
deaf and deaf-blind; (ii) wearable haptic technologies; (iii) an information-
theoretical approach to assessing human performance; and (iv) psychophysical
properties of the tactual sense. The project builds upon the researchers' recent
success at demonstrating their ability to develop tactile codes for the 39
phonemes of English that were highly recognizable in isolation and in words
formed from sequences of phonemes. The research is focused on increasing the
rate at which information can be transmitted through touch by trained
participants that include observers with normal hearing as well as those with
sensorineural hearing impairments who represent a major category of potential
end users of the device. The overall goal is to achieve transmission rates of
tactile speech stimuli that are comparable to those achieved by deaf-blind users
of the Tadoma method, and to employ effective methods of training users of the
display for reception of connected speech signals with a high degree of
accuracy. Experiments will be carried out in which users of the tactile system
are trained and tested on their ability to recognize phonemes, words, short
phrases, and finally conversational sentences. Durational properties of the
stimuli will be explored in these experiments with the aim of establishing the
lower limits on phoneme duration and the intervals between phonemes and words.
Estimates of effective communication rates will take into account both the
transmission rate and accuracy of reception, with the goal of demonstrating
effective communication rates on the order of 50-100 words per minute. A lower-
bound estimate for haptic communication rate in terms of bits per second can
then be derived from the transmission rate achieved at the end of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.