* 1954310
* Spectroscopic Signature of Noncovalent Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Steve Scheiner, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Steve Scheiner of Utah
State University is using modern quantum chemical calculations to predict the
way in which the molecular spectra of molecules are affected when two molecules
interact with one another in a weak (noncovalent) manner. Chemists and other
scientists use different types of spectroscopy to determine the structure and
behaviors of atoms and molecules. Infrared spectroscopy (IR) probes the
vibrations of molecules, the frequencies of which are specific to a molecule’s
geometry and the types of atoms it contains. Nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (NMR) measures the frequencies at which certain atomic nuclei flip
direction when exposed to an external magnetic field. In most chemical samples,
the molecules of interest are not isolated, but rather moving in the presence of
other nearby molecules (especially in the case of liquid and solid samples).
Professor Scheiner’s research seeks to uncover how molecules’ interaction with
their neighbors changes their vibrational and magnetic properties, and how these
changes would show up in IR and NMR spectroscopic measurements. These
interactions are called “non-covalent” because they do not involve actual
bonding (in other words, sharing of electrons) between neighboring molecules,
and are therefore weaker than actual covalent bonds. Yet non-covalent bonds are
very important to the structure adopted by many important systems, including
proteins, materials, and crystals, some of which are very useful in modern
technologies. Quantum calculations are a means of simulating non-covalent
interactions and then explaining them in terms of fundamental forces that cause
spectroscopic changes. This project involves two graduate students and one
undergraduate researcher. The students engaged in this research project are
gaining valuable experience in both cutting-edge quantum chemistry and their
application to real-world systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
a particular subset of noncovalent bonds, all of them related to the ubiquitous
and well-studied H-bonds that have become a mainstay of chemical and biological
structure and reactivity. Replacement of the bridging proton of a H-bond by any
of a large group of electronegative elements, lead to what have been called
halogen, chalcogen, pnicogen, and tetrel bonds, depending upon what family of
the periodic table this bridging atom is drawn from. The novelty of these bonds
has led to only initial efforts to link their properties and strength to the
spectroscopic features, primarily IR and NMR. Complexes of various sorts are
being designed that incorporate these types of bonds in a wide variety of
systems, spanning a wide range of strength and atom type. Spectra are calculated
and compared to other features of the bonding, so as to draw up a set of rules
and underlying principles that relate all of these properties to one another.
The goal of this project is to develop concepts that will aid experimentalists
as they examine their particular systems to understand what interactions are
present and which might be influencing the structures. The broader impacts of
this work include potential societal benefits from an increased understanding of
the forces that control biological and chemical structures, as well as
opportunities for the training of students in the application of a range of
quantum chemical methods to understand real systems. In addition to the formal
research training for students, Prof. Scheiner has developed a course for
graduate students and advanced undergraduate designed to introduce both
computational and experimentalist students to modern methods of theoretical
chemistry. The graduate students working on this CSDM-A project also take part
in the instruction of&lt;br/&gt;this course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.