* 1954054
* Graph Decompositions and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Chun-Hung Liu, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Graph theory is a central research direction in combinatorics. Graphs are
abstract mathematical objects that have been extensively used to model problems
in different subjects, such as in network theory, integrated circuit design, and
scheduling theory. A general approach for solving problems on complicated graphs
is to first decompose the original graph into more tractable pieces, solve the
problems on those pieces, and finally construct the answer for the original
graph from the answers for those smaller pieces. Different problems require
different decomposition techniques and many decomposition theorems have been
developed and successfully applied to solve long standing conjectures. However,
it is unclear whether those developed decomposition theorems are sufficient to
solve other open problems. The purpose of this project is to address this
fundamental issue by developing new structure decomposition theorems to enrich
the toolkit and applying them and other developed theorems to solve major
conjectures in graph theory and theoretical computer science. This project
includes many research problems that are suitable for graduate students and
advanced undergraduate students. Progress made on this project will advance
knowledge in mathematics and contribute to education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
aim of this project is to prove new decomposition theorems and apply them to
solve open problems in graph theory and computer science. An objective is to
prove a global tree-like decomposition theorem for graphs in immersion-closed
families and apply it to solve an open problem related to a conjecture of Abu-
Khzam, Langston, Lescure and Meyniel on graph coloring. In addition, a recent
newly developed notion for layered tree-decomposition will be considered in
order to generalize algorithmic results on minor-closed families to strictly
wider classes of graphs, such as graphs embeddable in a fixed surface with some
crossings allowed. Another objective of this project is to solve a conjecture of
Dvorak and Norin on island decomposition which is motivated by a strengthening
of a relaxation of Hadwiger’s conjecture on coloring graphs in minor-closed
families. The strategy for attacking the above problems is to further
investigate the structure of graphs, where new ideas will be involved, and the
PI's earlier results and other structure theorems in the literature will be
exploited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.