* 1954451
* Development of New Strategies for the Synthesis of Bacterial Carbohydrates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* WEIPING TANG, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting Professor Weiping Tang of the Pharmaceutical Sciences Division of the
University of Wisconsin-Madison to develop a systematic way to make bacterial
carbohydrates from common precursors. Carbohydrates play important roles in
inflammation, infection, cancer metastasis, and many other fundamentally
important biological processes. The development of efficient methods to
synthesize bacterial carbohydrates from simple, common starting materials is of
value for the study of biological processes that involve these compounds.
Unfortunately, bacteria use several hundred building blocks for carbohydrate
synthesis that are not readily available; this is in contrast to humans and
other mammals that use fewer than a dozen such building blocks. Bacterial
carbohydrates need to be individually synthesized and then linked into
oligomers, which is a time-consuming and technically challenging process.
Professor Tang and his research team are developing synthetic strategies to
address this roadblock and streamline the process for making these important
compounds. These studies are also providing scientific training to graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers, as well as younger generations of
students traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines. Professor Tang
actively participates in several collaborations where undergraduate and high
school students partake in academic research and develop a lifelong appreciation
for science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tang Research group is developing de novo
synthesis strategies to systematically prepare a variety of bacterial
carbohydrates with a high degree of stereocontrol over the glycosidic bond. In
one focus area, a transition metal-catalyzed C-H amination approach is being
optimized for the synthesis aminosugars and their derivatives. Simultaneously,
this investigation is also providing insight in how to use C-H amination
reactions in complex settings. In a second focus area, stereoselective reduction
of enones followed by olefin functionalization is providing a route to rare
deoxy sugars. These studies are simultaneously advancing glycoscience and
synthetic organic chemistry while facilitating the study of important biological
processes in bacteria. The program is also impacting chemical education at
multiple levels: graduate students area gaining synthetic expertise and
participating in mentoring activities that prepare them for leading positions in
industry and academia, and underrepresented undergraduate and high school
students and gaining hands-on experience and exposure to cutting-edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.