* 1954580
* Studying Nonequilibrium Steady States with Quantum Chemistry Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,10/31/2023
* David Limmer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 10/31/2023
* USD 335,600.00

David Limmer of the University of California, Berkeley is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop computational tools to study molecular systems
driven far away from equilibrium. Such nonequilibrium conditions occur
throughout the natural and synthetic world. Materials are seldom assembled
quasi-statically. Chemical reactions are often initiated with excitation. Life
would cease if not constantly supplied with sources of energy. Despite this
ubiquity, there are few numerical tools designed to glean macroscopic
consequences from these driven molecular components. Without such tools,
progress in chemistry is stifled. There are few physical principles to act a
guide, to bound possibilities, to explain observations and to predict novel
behavior. By using recent developments in an area of mathematics known as large
deviation theory, Dr. Limmer and his research group develop methods to fill this
void. This allows them to address contemporary questions in active, driven,
fluctuating, and flowing systems. These developments are done in conjunction
with an effort to enhance scientific literacy through youth based scientific
computing initiatives including games-based learning programs designed to convey
basic nonequilibrium concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to
develop novel numerical tools for studying driven molecular systems, Prof.
Limmer and his research group use results from large deviation theory. Large
deviation theory clarifies an isomorphism between algorithms to study
nonequilibrium systems and those employed in traditional quantum chemistry, by
defining an eigenvalue equation whose solution codifies the stability and
response properties of general nonequilibrium steady states. While solving this
equation exactly for interacting systems is exponentially hard, Dr. Limmer
develops techniques for approximating it formally and estimating it
stochastically. These techniques take inspiration from methods developed for
solving the Schrödinger equation, including using diffusion and variation Monte
Carlo, tensor products and many body theories. The class of algorithms Dr.
Limmer develops represents a fundamentally different way to approach the
simulation of driven molecular systems on a computer, which are predominately
simulated by direct integration of an evolution equation. These techniques allow
Dr. Limmer and his group to bridge the timescales available to simulation of
nonequilibrium systems to those relevant to experiment, by targeting rare
fluctuations. These techniques will be used to test the validity of basic
constituent relationships of macroscopic transport for describing flows on
nanoscales and for determining phase diagrams of active matter where traditional
free energy based methods do not apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.