* 1954241
* ANT LIA: Hypoxia Tolerance in Notothenioid Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Kristin O'Brien, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* William Ambrose
* 05/31/2024
* USD 918,722.00

Part 1: Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Global climate warming is
increasing the frequency and severity of low oxygen events in marine and
freshwater environments worldwide, and these events threaten the health of
aquatic ecosystems and the viability of fish populations. The Southern Ocean
surrounding Antarctica has historically been a stable, icy-cold, and oxygen-rich
environment, but is now warming at an unprecedented rate and faster than all
other regions in the Southern hemisphere. Antarctic fishes have evolved in sub-
zero temperatures that have been stable over long periods of time with traits
allowing them to thrive in frigid waters, but with diminished resilience to
warming temperatures. Presently little is known about the ability of Antarctic
fishes to withstand hypoxic, or low-oxygen, conditions that often accompany
warming. This research will investigate the hypoxia tolerance of four species of
Antarctic fishes, including two species of icefishes that lack the oxygen-
carrying protein, hemoglobin, which may compromise their ability to oxygenate
tissues under hypoxic conditions. The hypoxia tolerance of four Antarctic fish
species will be compared to that of a related fish species inhabiting warmer
coastal regions of South America. Physiological and biochemical responses to
hypoxia will be evaluated and compared amongst the five species to bolster our
predictions of the capacity of Antarctic fishes to cope with a changing
environment. This research will provide training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, and a postdoctoral research fellow. A year-long seminar
series hosted by the Aquarium of the Pacific will feature female scientists who
work in Antarctica to inspire youth in the greater Los Angeles area to pursue
careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;The overarching hypothesis to be tested in this project is that the
long evolution of Antarctic notothenioid fishes in a cold, oxygen-rich
environment has reduced their capacity to mount a robust physiological,
biochemical, and molecular response to hypoxia compared to related, cold-
temperate fish species. Hypoxia tolerance will be compared among the red-blooded
Antarctic notothenioids, Notothenia coriiceps and Notothenia rossii; the
hemoglobinless Antarctic icefishes, Chaenocephalus aceratus and Chionodraco
rastrospinosus; and the basal, cold-temperate notothenioid, Eleginops
maclovinus, a species that has never inhabited waters south of the Polar Front.
The minimum level of oxygen required to sustain maintenance metabolic
requirements (O2crit) will be quantified. Animals will then be exposed to 65% of
O2crit for 48 hours, and responses to hypoxia will be evaluated by measuring
hematocrit and hemoglobin levels, as well as metabolites in brain, liver,
glycolytic and cardiac muscles. Maximal activities of key enzymes of aerobic and
anaerobic metabolism will be quantified to assess capacities for synthesizing
ATP in hypoxic conditions. Gill remodeling will be analyzed using light and
scanning electron microscopy. The molecular response to hypoxia will be
characterized in liver and brains by quantifying levels of the master
transcriptional regulator of oxygen homeostasis, hypoxia-inducible factor-1
(HIF-1), and hypoxic gene expression will be quantified using RNA-Seq. Cell
cultures will be used to determine if a previously identified insertion mutation
in notothenioid HIF-1 affects the ability of HIF-1 to drive gene expression and
thus, hypoxia tolerance. The results of this project will provide the most
comprehensive assessment of the hypoxia tolerance of Antarctic fishes to date.
Broader impacts include research training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and a postdoctoral research associate, with a focus on
involving Native Alaskan students in research. In partnership with the Aquarium
of the Pacific, a year-long public seminar series will be held, showcasing the
research and careers of 9 women who conduct research in Antarctica. The goal of
the series is to cultivate and empower a community of middle and high school
students in the greater Los Angeles area to pursue their interests in science
and related fields, and to enhance the public engagement capacities of research
scientists so that they may better inspire youth and early career scientists in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.