* 1954943
* The 35th Summer Conference on Topology and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Jamal Tartir, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2023
* USD 35,000.00

This award supports participation in the 35th Summer Conference on Topology and
Its Applications (SUMTOPO 2020) taking place 13–17 July 2020 at Youngstown State
University in Youngstown, Ohio. Topology is an area of abstract mathematics that
emerged from analysis and geometry as its own discipline in the late 19th
century. It has since become one of the foundational disciplines of mathematics,
underlying much of mathematics and its applications to the sciences. Modern
applications of topology include logic, computer science, data processing, life
sciences, game theory, and enriched category theory. In keeping with its
predecessor conferences, SUMTOPO 2020 will be an important international event
that reflects the ever-expanding world of topology and its applications, with
sessions dedicated to natural and social sciences, category theory,
computational topology (including block chains and data science), algebra and
geometry, general and set-theoretic topology, dynamics and continuum theory,
asymmetry and many-valuedness, and enriched categories and topology. SUMTOPO
2020 will contribute to better understanding the topological structures inherent
in big data, as well as solidifying topology as a foundation of data science,
thus contributing to the NSF goal of Harnessing the Data Revolution. SUMTOPO
2020 will have special sessions for recent doctoral recipients and faculty at
smaller institutions to help them develop sustainable research programs, as well
as outlining strategies for recruiting women and minorities to mathematics.
Participants will comprise a diverse group of established researchers, junior
researchers, graduate students, and retirees, with special emphasis on
recruiting speakers and participants both internationally and from
underrepresented populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUMPTOPO 2020 features
sessions on Algebra and Geometry, General and Set-Theoretic Topology, Dynamics
and Continuum Theory, and Asymmetry, while beginning and/or expanding sessions
on Topology in Data Science for Natural and Social Sciences, Category Theory,
Computational Topology, Many-Valuedness, and Enriched Categories and Topology.
In each session, “topology,” whether explicitly stated or not, is a basis of the
session. In the natural and social sciences, scientists and mathematicians are
discovering that there are natural occurrences and phenomena that can be
explained or better understood using topology and that some of the explanations
raise new topological questions. Data science is of special interest in two of
the sessions in SUMTOPO 2020. Data science is not only a rapidly developing area
in its own right, it is also a driving force in important and on-going
developments in many disciplines including most if not all the natural and
social sciences. Topology is proving to be an integral part of the development
of data science and its applications. Regarding category theory, we want to
explore the ways in which category theory has influenced topology in the past
and the ways that category theory will continue to influence topology in the
future. Since the very nature of (big) data means that applications involving
data science must be computational, computational topology is a critical area of
focus. Computational topology also gives rise to new topological questions and
areas of research. An asymmetric topology is one for which the associated
specialization preorder is non-symmetric; while a many-valued topology is a
collection of open sets, each of which is a mapping from the carrier set of a
space to a designated complete lattice of “truth values.” In recent years it has
been discovered that these two areas of topology are linked to each other and to
computational topology, particularly to spaces and topological systems often
associated with programming semantics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference web
page is https://ysu.edu/sumtopo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.