* 1954665
* FET: Medium: Massively parallel DNA computation using DNA array synthesis, next generation sequencing and nanopore sensing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Georg Seelig, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Computing with molecular components can enable innovations in a range of areas
from health diagnostics and therapies to information technology. For example,
molecular circuits that can process the information encoded in the levels and
sequences of cellular molecules can be at the heart of embedded controllers for
biomedical applications. However, the ability to build molecular controllers
lags far behind the ability to engineer embedded control circuits for
electromechanical devices. This project aims to develop new methods of writing
and reading DNA circuits that will make it possible to scale up circuit
complexity by at least an order of magnitude over the current state of the art
and thus bring molecular controllers closer to practical applications.
Furthermore, this project will accelerate training of students and professionals
in the burgeoning field of molecular information systems. This area of research
inherently increases the diversity of people, perspectives, and backgrounds in
computing by bringing together the historically separated fields of computer
science and biology. To increase participation of underrepresented persons in
molecular programming research, the team of researchers will host summer interns
from Rainier Scholars, an organization that supports students of color from low-
income backgrounds in achieving academic success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project introduces technological innovations that will increase the scalability
of molecular circuitry. PIs will do this by taking advantage of massively
parallel DNA synthesis technology and coupling it to high throughput readout
methods, including next generation sequencing and nanopore sensing. These
advances are significant because the scaling up of DNA circuitry is currently
limited in two main ways: A first limitation is that the vast majority of DNA
gates and similar computational elements are assembled from individually column-
synthesized oligonucleotides because this technology provides low synthesis
error rate and control over the concentration of individual strands. However,
the cost of ordering individually synthesized oligos cannot scale. Array
synthesized oligos provide a promising alternative because cost per oligo is
orders of magnitude lower. But so far, array-synthesized oligos have not been
used for molecular programming applications because of the lower synthesis
quality, variation in concentration between oligos and the low yield of each
individual oligo in the pool. A second limitation comes from the use of
fluorescence-based reporters for reading out the results of a computation. That
is, due to spectral overlap between fluorophores, only a very small number of
outputs or variables can be monitored in a given computation (i.e. as many as
there are independent fluorescence channels, typically no more than 4 and only a
limited number of computations can be performed in parallel (i.e. as many as
there are separate reaction chambers, typically no more than 96). Next
generation DNA sequencing and nanopore sensing methods could theoretically be
used to read out hundreds to millions of DNA sequences or barcodes in parallel.
However, so far, DNA sequencing and nanopore sensing have not been widely used
to read out DNA computations because current gate architectures are not
compatible with these read out methods. This project directly addresses these
limitations to the current state of the art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.