* 1954319
* Total Synthesis of Complex Terpene Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Seth Herzon, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 03/31/2025
* USD 738,111.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Seth B. Herzon in the Department of
Chemistry at Yale University. The research focuses on the creation of complex
molecules, known as natural products, in the laboratory. A natural product is a
chemical compound or substance produced by a living organism—that is, found in
nature. The researchers are developing new reactions to achieve the conversion
of one chemical to another in unprecedented ways. Access to these molecules
allows the researchers to study their properties, including their biological
activities. The natural products are essential to the chemical industries
(pharmaceutical, fine and industrial chemicals). The training the students
receive provides them with the skillset needed to pursue STEM careers. Yale
University’s location in downtown New Haven uniquely positions the Professor
Herzon to conduct STEM outreach with pre-college students from underrepresented
and/or disadvantaged backgrounds. He participates in public science
demonstrations and mentoring activities, providing hands-on laboratory
experiences for local high school students. The research team designs and
implements these educational outreach activities into Yale’s Pathways to Science
Program, which has helped Yale faculty connect with over 1500 high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the total synthesis of
euonyminol/cathedulin and rearranged pimarane terpenes. Professor Herzon is
progressing toward the synthesis of both classes of targets. This research is
focused on completing the synthesis of euonyminol and elaborating this to
cathedulins. A central element of the work involves a late-stage directed C–H
bond oxidation, which may lead to novel methods for C–H activation. The scope of
a novel oxyalkylation of allylic alcohols discovered en route to euonyminol is
being evaluated, and attempts to render this process enantioselective are being
pursued. The research team is also focused on completing the synthesis of the
rearranged pimarane diterpene diaporthein B. The laboratory is utilizing an
advanced intermediate that contains all of the necessary rings and a key
bridgehead quaternary center of the target. A new carbonylative Stille coupling
of hydroxymethylstannanes, developed en route to diaporthein B, is being
developed. The application of the strategies developed herein to other related
natural products is being evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.