* 1954994
* Enhanced Marine and Environmental Science Training for Pacific Island Community College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Robert Richmond, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 10/31/2024
* USD 719,745.00

This project will address a critical need to enhance the technical workforce of
Pacific Islanders who are trained to address regional ecosystem stress and
degradation. The project plans to strengthen and modernize the marine and
environmental science training of Pacific Islanders at five minority-serving
community colleges: American Samoa Community College, College of Micronesia –
Federated States of Micronesia, College of the Marshall Islands, Northern
Marianas College, and Palau Community College. The future of these islands and
their populations depends on the technical skills and knowledge of local
resource managers, policy makers, businesses and stakeholders. This project will
support training of faculty and students to increase the success rate of Pacific
Islanders in STEM disciplines, which has traditionally been low.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on prior Advanced Technological
Education projects that helped to establish the marine and environmental
programs at the five minority-serving community colleges of the Pacific Islands.
The goal of this project is to develop and increase the participation of Pacific
Islanders in STEM technical careers. The project aims to provide: 1) enhanced
regionally relevant curricula; 2) professional development for community college
faculty and secondary school teachers; and 3) experiential learning for
students. The project will incorporate input from local agencies, businesses,
and stakeholders that have identified key technological skills needed by
community college graduates to fill positions within the government, non-
government organizations, and private sector. The formative and summative
evaluation will use multiple methodologies sensitive to indigenous cultures. The
technical skills and training obtained by students will allow them to serve
their home islands in critical areas, including natural resource assessment,
management, protection, restoration, and resilience. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation’s
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.