* 1954330
* Excellence in Research: Novel Label-free Optical Imaging Approaches for Early Breast Cancer Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Makarand Deo, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths among women in the
United States. Majority of the deaths is due to disease spreading to other parts
of the body (metastasis) and impairment of vital body functions. Early detection
and accurate diagnosis of metastatic breast cancer remains a challenge despite
the widespread use of mammography, due to limited sensitivity and specificity.
The study proposes to develop an integrated system with two novel screening
technologies to identify cancer cells among a cell population at very early
stages of the disease. The first technology uses two identical laser beams to
trap and stretch cells without any mechanical contact to characterize their
elasticity which changes in presence of cancer. The second technology is to
identify cancer-related biomarkers by using the principles of light scattering
from the cell or tissue samples, called Raman effect. The proposed technology
aims to predict the onset of cancer early enough to allow effective preventive
treatment and reliably differentiate between deadly vs. non-deadly, or localized
vs. metastatic breast cancers. In terms of educational impact, the study offers
experiment-centric teaching methodologies for high school teachers which may
help in attracting high caliber students to STEM disciplines. Innovative senior
undergraduate design projects will be developed aiming at student retention and
recruitment to graduate programs. The project will provide minority students an
invaluable experience and exposure to modern research practices and will prepare
them for successful STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study
envisions a novel strategy to integrate two optical screening technologies on a
microfluidic platform to identify cancer cells among a cell population at very
early stages of the breast cancer disease. The investigators hypothesize that by
performing two independent but complementary cell characterizations, it is
possible to identify the presence of breast cancer in cells even before the
structural disease manifestation begins to show up. The following two screening
methods are proposed: a) biomechanical characterization of cytoskeletal
elasticity as an indicator for malignancy using optical tweezer (OT) cell-
stretcher, and b) biophotonic characterization of cell biomarkers using Surface
Enhanced Raman Spectrometry (SERS). The project has two specific aims: 1)
OT/SERS profiling device development to produce a portable microfluidic platform
capable of performing bioelectric characterization of cells based on SERS
imaging and mechanosensitive characterization using a laser tweezer microstretch
assembly, and 2) Identification of non-invasive, pre-invasive, and invasive
breast cells from triple-negative, hormone receptor positive, and human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 positive models to test the ability of the
OT/SERS profiling device to distinguish early cellular changes that occur in
cancer progression. Instead of individually screening for numerous morphological
and biochemical markers of breast cancer, the investigators propose an
innovative approach to screen their combined phenotype by quantifying cell's
cytoskeletal elasticity and biophotonic signatures. The technology can be
adapted for early cancer detection in clinical setting using blood, saliva, and
other bodily secretions samples containing live cells. The study has potential
to significantly impact the field of cancer
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.