* 1954690
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Electronic Structure/Function Relationships in Base Metal Complexes Spanning the Oxo/Oxene and Imide/Nitrene Continuum
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Theodore Betley, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B program of the
Chemistry Division, Professors Theodore A. Betley of Harvard University and Kyle
M. Lancaster of Cornell University synthesize molecules and materials by
converting inexpensive, small molecules into higher value-added, more complex
molecules such as pharmaceuticals. To accomplish these transformations, the
group uses metal-based catalysts to speed up reactions and to selectively
produce desired products over less desirable byproducts. The knowledge gained
from their catalysis reactions may contribute to achieving a sustainable
chemical industry in the United States. The research team is particularly
focused on designing and developing catalysts that substitute abundant,
inexpensive and non-toxic metals for the precious and, in some cases, toxic
metal-based catalysts used today. Professors Betley and Lancaster are involved
in educational outreach activities to engage students at the pre-university,
undergraduate (internal and external to the university), and graduate levels.
The researchers organize and participate in interactive demonstrations for
students at the K-12 level from local grade schools and high schools.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project ,funded by the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics, and Mechanisms B program of the Chemistry Division, Professors
Theodore A. Betley of Harvard University and Kyle M. Lancaster of Cornell
University examine electronic structure design for C-H bond functionalization.
This collaboration between a synthetic inorganic chemist and inorganic
spectroscopist seeks to provide new perspectives on the correlation of radical
accumulation on main-group ligands towards base-metal Câˆ’H bond functionalization
catalysis. Such information is critical to advancing both fundamental
understanding as well as synthetic methodologies. The research involves the
synthesis and characterization of novel metal-ligand multiple bonded (MLMB)
systems that mimic biological monooxygenases that deliver diverse
functionalities into C-H bond substrates. The ability to selectively incorporate
functionality into unactivated C-H bonds represents an advance in converting
inexpensive chemical feedstocks (e.g. hydrocarbons) to value-added molecules
(e.g., pharmaceutical precursors). To this end, Betley and Lancaster seek to
synthesize MLMB complexes featuring N- and O-bearing functionalities to examine
and harness their reaction chemistry. Betley and Lancaster propose to leverage N
and O K-edge XAS as means to probe the sub-octet character of coordinated N- and
O-based ligand donors and to quantify metal-ligand covalency in coordination
complexes. These data will be used to rationalize periodic trends in the
reactivity (nucleophilic vs. electrophilic) of MLMB complexes across the late
first transition series. Undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
scholars from groups that are underrepresented in science are integral to
carrying out the sustainability aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.