* 1954579
* 8th Ibero-American Congress on Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Samuel Grushevsky, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 03/31/2024
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports the participation of US-based mathematicians in the 8th
Ibero-American Congress on Geometry, held June 22-26, 2020, in Morelia, Mexico,
at Centro de Ciencias Matematicas and at Universidad Michoacana. The Ibero-
American Congresses in Geometry, established in 1998, bring together
mathematicians from the US, Spain, and Latin America to discuss forefront
research in geometry. The Congresses are unique in representing a very broad
spectrum of mathematical fields, geography, and seniority of participants. The
format of the conference includes a large number of talks (about 50 expected),
allowing many researchers from the US and other countries to disseminate their
work to a wide audience. These interactions help foster cooperation among the
researchers working within the US and their international colleagues, and help
advance the field, broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference focuses on
recent developments in a range of fields in geometry united by the presence of
Riemann surfaces as tools or objects of study. Viewed via the prism of
differential geometry, complex analysis, mathematical physics, or algebraic
geometry, the field of moduli of curves and Riemann surfaces has been a rich
playing ground and a powerful tool for many mathematical disciplines. While
there are numerous regular conferences in all these fields, the Ibero-American
Congresses in Geometry are unique in their breadth of topics, geography of
participants, and wealth of presentations. More details can be found at the
conference website http://matmor.unam.mx/iberoamerican-congress-on-
geometry-2020/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.