* 1954120
* "Water-Like" Ionic Liquids for Enzymatic Carbon-Carbon Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Hua Zhao, University of Northern Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 490,628.00

Enzymes are special proteins that speed up (catalyze) various reactions. In
nature, enzymes generally perform their roles in a water-based or aqueous
environment. However, water is not always the ideal medium for chemical or
pharmaceutical processes. For instance, water may interfere with or prevent the
desired chemical reaction from occurring. In addition, many chemical raw
materials are not adequately soluble in water. For these reasons, enzymatic
reactions are often carried out in chemical solvents. However, enzymes are much
less active in organic solvents than in aqueous solutions, typically by several
orders of magnitude. In addition, the use of organic solvents can be harmful to
the environment and humans. Therefore, Dr. Hua Zhao of the University of
Northern Colorado, in collaboration with Dr. Gary Baker of the University of
Missouri-Columbia and Dr. Katie Mitchell-Koch of Wichita State University, is
developing novel nonaqueous solvents made of ions (called “ionic liquids”) that
resemble the structure and properties of water (are “water-like”) in which
enzymes are able to maintain the high activity of their natural environment. The
investigators are further applying these nature-inspired solvents to produce
intermediates useful for preparing valuable medicinal targets. This project
actively engages graduate and underrepresented (first-generation and minority)
undergraduate students, publicizes general knowledge of biocatalysis and green
chemistry through seminars and outreach events, reaches out to local high
schools, and encourages students at all levels to pursue careers in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Hua Zhao of the University of Northern
Colorado and Dr. Gary Baker of the University of Missouri-Columbia are designing
dual-functionalized ionic liquids that display both hydrogen-bond donating and
accepting properties of water, and evaluating how hydrolases (i.e., lipases,
proteases, and D-aminoacylase) behave in these nonaqueous media for asymmetric
carbon-carbon bond formation via Michael additions. A close collaboration with
Dr. Katie Mitchell-Koch of Wichita State University examines how protein
molecules interact with these “water-like” ionic liquids using molecular dynamic
(MD) simulations which will offer a molecular-level window into enzyme
activation and guide the design of dual-functionalized ionic liquids. This
project enables a new type of reaction-solvent system that is easily adoptable
to numerous biocatalytic applications. In addition, the mechanistic
understanding of the entire system provides valuable guidance and a general
methodology for other enzymatic carbon‒carbon bond formation reactions. Graduate
and undergraduate students (particularly first-generation and underrepresented
minority students) are fully participating at all stages of research activities.
The investigators engage in outreach activities with local high schools to
recruit students to the STEM disciplines. Seminars and outreach activities are
provided to the local community to facilitate broader public awareness of the
importance and thrill of STEM research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.