* 1954301
* Temperature Jump Infrared Electrochemical Spectroscopy (TIR-SEC) of Catalytic Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* John Asbury, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2024
* USD 432,175.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor John Asbury of The
Pennsylvania State University is using advanced laser techniques to understand
how to control complex reactions at the surfaces of catalytic materials. Many
sluggish chemical reactions can be accelerated by applying voltage to catalysts
- materials that are designed to direct the course of the reactions. In this
project, catalysts are developed to accelerate and direct reactions that can
reduce carbon dioxide to fuels or that can reduce nitrogen gas to ammonia for
fertilizers. Such reactions can play important roles in building sustainable
energy and agricultural systems in the future. The reactions occur by
transferring multiple electrons and multiple protons to the products that form
during the course of the reactions. Each time electrons and protons are added to
the product molecules, their chemical properties change. This project is
providing insights into how chemical reactions occur at the surfaces of
catalysts and what types of sites on their surfaces can most effectively direct
each electron and proton transfer step. Students engaged in this research
project are gaining valuable experience in state of the art laser techniques,
electrochemistry and catalytic materials design. The broader impacts of this
work include potential societal benefits from the development of catalysts to
more efficiently convert gases such as carbon dioxide and nitrogen to useful
products for more sustainable energy and agricultural systems as well as
opportunities to train students in the design of advanced spectroscopy and
electrochemical instrumentation for catalytic studies under operating
conditions. Some of the spectroscopy techniques developed in this research
project will be introduced into undergraduate teaching
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on time-resolving
reaction intermediates involved in multiple electron and proton transfer steps
that lead to the conversion of carbon dioxide to alkanes and gaseous nitrogen to
ammonia. The reaction intermediates are identified through their mid-infrared
vibrational signatures as they form on catalyst surfaces that are deposited onto
attenuated total internal reflection mid-infrared waveguides. The catalysts are
incorporated into operating electrochemical cells that allow chemical
intermediates to be monitored under operating electrochemical potentials. The
catalytic reactions are triggered by application of an electrochemical potential
and a short laser pulse that are followed by a mid-infrared probe pulse that
propagates through the waveguide. The waveguide consists of a silicon prism on
which the catalyst and working electrode are deposited, immersed in an
electrolyte, and sealed in a vessel to contain gases that are involved in the
reactions. The spectroscopic observations of chemical intermediates are
correlated with the activity of the electrocatalysts to provide insight about
how catalytic intermediates at various stages of the reactions influence the
overall activity and selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.