* 1954073
* I/UCRC Phase I (Site Addition):  Expansion of CICI to Add a New Site at UTA on Sustainable Utilization of Composites in Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 08/31/2019,08/31/2021
* Anand Puppala, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 130,481.00

The University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) is joining as a new site (CICI-UTA)
to the existing ?Center for Integration of Composites into Infrastructure
(CICI)?, a NSF Industry - University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) based
in West Virginia University. The mission of CICI is to accelerate the adoption
of composites into infrastructure applications with a particular focus on
structural applications. CICI-UTA research team participation will enhance the
integration of composite material utilization in various geo infrastructures
areas including deep foundations (fender piles), mechanically stabilized earth
walls (retaining walls), sheet piles, and others in both natural and extreme
soil environments. CICI-UTA will also work with all center sites in studying and
implementing composites underground under harsh environment; harvesting
composite samples for fundamental durability studies; and studying fibre-
reinforced polymer composites as reinforcements in expansive soils to mitigate
heaving failures. CICI-UTA will have strong educational and graduate training
programs, and will train skilled and high caliber doctoral and masters students
in civil engineering with special emphasis on composites. As a part of new
Hispanic Serving Institute (HSI), UTA team members will be able to recruit
Hispanic and other minority undergraduate and graduate students to involve and
train them in the proposed research works. Research team will work with CICI
sites to disseminate research results through conference presentations,
publications in technical journals, short-courses and other means. Also,
research results will be further integrated into the design, codes of practice,
and academic curricula as desired by the industry/end-users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CICI-UTA will complement CICI?s research efforts by
focusing and studying on different types of polymeric based geosynthetics and
geocomposites, biopolymers and geopolymers and their applications in civil and
military infrastructure in geotechnical, soil-structure and superstructure
related areas. CICI-UTA team will also focus on bringing out sustainability
aspects of using polymeric and other composites by addressing life cycle cost
benefits. Research topics will be formulated, screened and selected by the
Industrial Advisory Board members.