* 1954734
* RUI: CAS: Investigating Nanoparticles Dispersed in Organically Modified Silicates as Catalysts for the Reductive Functionalization of Carbon Dioxide by Organosilanes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Jean Fotie, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 265,000.00

Reducing emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), a significant long-lived greenhouse
gas, into the atmosphere is a major challenge. Despite efforts toward the
capture and storage of CO2, its conversion to valued-added chemicals could
provide an important incentive for CO2 recycling. The development of practical
chemical systems that enable conversion of CO2 into fine chemicals via
continuous industrial processes is a significant hurdle. Metal nanoparticles
dispersed in silicates are a class of materials that may meet this challenge.
Dr. Fotie at Southeastern Louisiana University is developing an understanding of
how nanoparticles derived from expensive, precious metals convert CO2 to useful
chemicals. This understanding is then being applied to improving the performance
of less active but more earth-abundant metals. Dr. Fotie is actively engaged in
outreach activities that build upon his research to promote engagement of
students in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines.
These activities are providing a unique opportunity to create a research
environment combining three very different groups of students at different
stages of their education; high school students from the Southeastern Louisiana
University Math-Science Upward-Bound program, Southeastern Louisiana University
undergraduate students, and Southeastern Integrated Science and Technology
(ISAT) masterâ€™s students. This unique leaning environment is enabling the
students to observe and interact with science
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Fotie from Southeastern Louisiana
University is developing a fundamental understanding of the reactivity of very
active and ligandless precious metals (Pt and Pd) and one earth-abundant metal
(Fe). These metals are nano-dispersed in a range of sol-gel-derived organically-
modified silicates and their behavior toward the reductive functionalization of
CO2 by organosilanes is observed. Control experiments and kinetic studies are
undertaken to provide insights into the mechanisms of these catalytic systems.
The research team is investigating the reusability and recycling lifetime of
these catalysts. These studies may provide answers to fundamental questions
about catalyst viability for a streamline fixation and conversion of CO2 into
useful building blocks. Dr. Fotie is actively engaged in STEM outreach programs
focused on the recruitment of high-school students from low-income families,
minorities, and groups under-represented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.