* 1954612
* Small Molecule Activation and Formation of Unusual Bonding Motifs with Low Coordinate, Low-Valent Rhenium B-Diketiminate Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Robert Bergman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 489,999.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry is supporting the
research of Professor John Arnold at the University of California, Berkeley. The
project aims to develop new methods for the synthesis of chemical compounds.
Synthetic chemistry plays a vital role in our society, providing a major
contribution to the U.S. Gross Domestic Product. The specific aim of this
project is discovery of new compounds that contain rhenium, a rare and
relatively unexplored metal. The new rhenium compounds form a variety of
derivatives that exhibit unusual structures, reactivity, and magnetism. The
discovery of new chemical compounds and the study of their properties enhances
the training provided to graduate and undergraduate students. The students
involved in this project organize frequent science outreach lessons for local
elementary school students, thus, gaining experience disseminating their
knowledge to audiences of all ages, while simultaneously providing beneficial
experiences to those audiences. Specifically, Dr. Arnold's students work in
conjunction with both the Bay Area Scientists in Schools program and the Oakland
Unified School District's Keeping Students Engaged in Science Collaborative to
develop and implement frequent chemistry demonstrations for local elementary and
middle school students that aim to engage younger students and educate them on
basic chemical principles. These lessons promote broader scientific knowledge
amongst younger students of all backgrounds while also encouraging their
curiosity and an inclination to pursue science as a career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemists take advantage of the ability of transition
metals to engage in unusual bonding interactions to activate otherwise
unreactive small molecules and promote useful reactivity pathways. Metal ions
and their associated supporting ligands facilitate these important processes by
controlling the steric and electronic environment around potential bonding
sites. In this project, with support from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor John Arnold and his research group at the
University of California, Berkeley are focusing on a low coordinate, low-valent
rhenium beta-diketiminate complexes, directed towards the activation and
degradation of strong bonds in diatomics and organic molecules. These efforts,
which integrate synthetic, spectroscopic, and computational components, help
inform on a wide range of industrially relevant chemical processes, from the
production of value-added chemicals and materials, to the design of molecular-
based electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.