* 1954065
* Support for Young Investigator Participation at the 8th International Conference on Flood Management (ICFM8), Iowa City, August 17-19, 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Witold Krajewski, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2022
* USD 45,405.00

The Eighth International Conference on Flood Management (ICFM8) is a flood-
focused international event attracting academic scientists, researchers,
practitioners, educators, and public officials involved in flood mitigation. The
conference is to be held in Iowa City, August 17-19, 2020. U.S. participants
will present their cutting-edge research, and also learn from international
leaders in specific knowledge areas and begin dialogue necessary to produce
actionable science for flood mitigation and increased resilience. ICFM8 will
likely attract about 400 participants, including record numbers of young
scientists and practitioners who will confront flooding's continuously expanding
socio-economic threat. Key outcomes of the conference will include guidance on
flood hazards, mitigation solutions based on "natural" and man-made approaches,
and identification of opportunities associated with the deployment of
distributed research programs to generate the knowledge, data, and models for
improved flood prediction, mitigation, and increased community resilience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of NSF funds will support participation at
the conference for U.S.-based graduate students and young professionals (i.e.,
postdoctoral scholars), with strong preference for underrepresented minorities.
The number of participants to be supported is an estimated 15 traveling students
and 35 local students. Bringing more graduate students and young investigators
to ICFM8 will allow them to network with peers and future employers and to learn
about available careers. A key impact of this conference will be the high level
of knowledge transfer and dissemination accomplished during the event and into
the future. Participating students and young investigators will gain enhanced
scientific and educational benefits through their
attendance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.