* 1954809
* CAS: Collaborative Research: New Hybrid Catalysts for Sustainable Cross-Coupling Reactions:  Using Atomic Layer Deposition to Immobilize and Enhance Molecular Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mark Losego, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 338,024.00

Chemicals like plastics and medicines are essential to modern life. However,
large-scale chemical production can require large amounts of energy and can
create toxic waste. Catalysts can reduce the energy needed to produce chemicals,
reduce waste, and provide large cost savings for chemical manufacturers. The
goal of this project is to develop new catalysts to make specific chemical
products while also reducing both energy usage and the creation of toxic waste.
This research is developing advanced catalysts that are both selective and
easily recovered for repeated use. Further, these catalysts are being used in
non-toxic and non-corrosive liquids, like water. Thus, these catalysts make
chemical production safer for workers and reduce hazards to surrounding
communities and the environment. This research program is studying how to design
these catalysts for use in chemical reactions that are otherwise difficult to
achieve under less hazardous and energy efficient conditions. This program pairs
Dr. Aaron Vannucci at the University of South Carolina, an expert in chemical
catalysis, with Dr. Mark Losego at the Georgia Institute of Technology, an
expert in materials synthesis. Ph.D. students funded by this project are being
jointly trained in both fields. This exchange of skills is expanding the
scientific training for students in both groups and will impact future students
at both universities. Dr. Vannucci is actively running outreach programs to
train high school teachers in the chemical sciences. Dr. Losego is directing a
materials analysis facility run by and for undergraduate students. These
programs promote interest, education, and training in STEM fields at multiple
levels. Skills exchanged during this project are being used to further enhance
these hands-on STEM training programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With joint funding
from the Chemical Catalysis Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research, Dr. Aaron Vannucci from the University of South Carolina
and Dr. Mark Losego from the Georgia Institute of Technology are collaboratively
developing knowledge about new hybrid catalysts that immobilize non-precious
metal molecular catalysts on oxide nanoparticle supports with nano-scale metal
oxide over-layers deposited via atomic layer deposition (ALD). These
molecular/heterogeneous catalysts have already shown excellent recyclability for
Suzuki cross-coupling reactions via simple filtration and washing.
Physicochemical studies are being conducted to understand not only the ability
for ALD layers to physically stabilize the catalyst molecules on the particle
surfaces but also the synergistic chemical interactions between the ALD metal
oxide over-layer and molecular catalyst that lead to enhanced catalytic
activity. Specifically, the investigators are developing strategies using ALD
processing and chemistry to control the local geometric and chemical environment
around the active site to achieve difficult C(sp3)-C(sp3) and stereoconvergent
coupling reactions relevant to medical research and drug discovery. These hybrid
catalysts adhere to many green chemistry principles including the utilization of
non-noble metals, operation in non-corrosive, aqueous solvents, and ease in
separation and recyclability. This program also supports extended student and
investigator exchanges at the collaborative institutions to cross-train the
Ph.D. students in orthogonal scientific disciplines of chemical catalysis and
vapor deposition processing. These knowledge and skill sets are being
institutionalized in each lab group and broadly impact current and future
generations of students. During these exchanges the visiting investigators are
developing programs to further enhance existing outreach and training programs
that support hands-on undergraduate education and high school teacher
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.