* 1954299
* Multiscale Analysis of Infinite-Dimensional Stochastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sandra Cerrai, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

When analyzing complex systems, it is important to be able to have a simplified
description of them. Oftentimes, such a simplification is realized by
considering a smaller number of factors that are considered more relevant to the
understanding of these systems and by neglecting all those factors that are
considered less relevant. However, some factors that may appear less important
at a certain time scale, turn out to play a crucial role at some longer time
scale. Thus, it is fundamental to understand correctly the interplay among
multiple scales of complex systems in order to have more effective models. This
project will introduce and develop new methods of asymptotic analysis for
stochastic partial differential equations. These are highly complex objects and
any effort that goes in the direction of their simplified and more effective
analysis is important, both for their deeper understanding and for the wide
range of their possible applications. This analysis requires the development of
new methods and the substantial introduction of new techniques which have to
range over many fields in mathematics, from analysis in infinite-dimensional
spaces to stochastic analysis and the theory of partial differential equations.
The project provides research training opportunities for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this research project is the study of
several asymptotic problems for systems that are described by stochastic partial
differential equations having multiple scales. Small stochastic and
deterministic perturbations of a system, which have a negligible effect on a
given time scale can become crucial on a longer time scale. Limit theorems in
the framework of the theory of large deviation and metastability, various
realizations of the averaging principle, small mass limits as in the
Smoluchowski-Kramers approximation will be the objects of the research. What
characterizes and unifies the present approach to all these asymptotic problems
is the effort to understand how they all interplay and interact with each
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.