* 1954430
* Photochemical Strategies to Activate Far-Red Fluorescence with Green Light
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Francisco Raymo, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 580,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Francisco Raymo at the University
of Miami and Professor Hao Zhang at Northwestern University are developing new
photochemistry and fluorescence methods to image intracellular components in
live cells. This challenging objective first requires the synthesis of a series
of structurally related organic dye molecules, which are designed to undergo
photoreactions initiated by green light. Photoreaction breaks off a portion of
the molecule, thereby generating a new fluorophore, or light emitting molecule,
which emits red light. Careful structure design also permits site-specific
labeling of intracellular components. The resulting fluorophores enable the
imaging of many sub-cellular components in live cells by using high resolution
fluorescence microscopy, with spatial resolution at the nanometer level. One
goal of these fundamental studies is the identification of optimal structural
designs to convert a non-fluorescent reactant into a fluorescent product under
mild illumination with green light, a wavelength that is innocuous to live
cells. This project is expected to have an immediate impact on photochemistry
and fluorescence imaging. Creation of innovative chemical tools to investigate
live-cell structures with unprecedented resolution has broader implications in
biology and medicine. These research activities provide an outstanding training
opportunity for the participating postdoctoral associate, graduate students and
undergraduate students. They develop laboratory expertise in chemical synthesis,
spectroscopic analysis and fluorescence imaging as well as learn how to culture
and manipulate live cells. In the process, they can refine their communication
and presentation skills, while also having the opportunity to supervise high-
school and undergraduate students in intensive laboratory experiences. This
project reinforces an existing student-exchange program with Miami-Dade College,
which provides research experiences for students from groups underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities in this project are aimed at
the development of a general sensitization mechanism to induce photochemical
reactions with green light, thereby providing access to a diverse collection of
photocleavable protecting groups with optimal properties for biological
applications. New photochemistry is based on modifications to BODIPY (boron-
dipyrromethene)-oxazine dyes, which undergo photocleavage of the oxazine
component. Dye structures include design elements for spectral tuning,
enhancement of aqueous solubility and site-specific attachment to cells.
Photoreactions with green light (500 â€“ 530 nm), a wavelength harmless to
biological samples, enable bright far-red light fluorescence imaging by
generating a new fluorophore. These fundamental studies contribute structural
designs to photoactivate fluorescence, under irradiation conditions compatible
with live cells, and simultaneously localize multiple spectrally-distinct
fluorophores at the single-molecule level with nanoscale precision using single
molecule localization microscopy. The unique combination of structural,
photochemical and photophysical properties engineered into the proposed
compounds can translate into probes with superior performance over the few
photoactivatable synthetic dyes developed so far for sub-diffraction imaging of
live cells. Thus, this research project, predominantly aimed at the chemical
synthesis and spectroscopic analysis of photoswitchable fluorescent constructs,
is expected to have an immediate impact on photochemistry and transformative
implications in fluorescence imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.