* 1954373
* Collaborative Research:  Simple Paradigms for Understanding Viscosity in Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Edward Castner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

The overarching goal of the joint project by Professors Margulis (U. of Iowa)
and Castner (Rutgers), funded by the NSF Chemical Structure and Dynamics
Mechanisms (CSDM-A) program, is to understand how the molecular structure of a
special class of liquids determines their viscosity. Viscosity is a measure of
how well a liquid flows (for example, pure honey is more viscous than water).
Professors Margulis and Castner are specifically interested in Ionic Liquids
(ILs). ILs are unique materials; like table salt they are solely composed of
positive (cationic) and negative (anionic) species, but unlike table salt, which
is a solid at ambient conditions, they are liquids at room temperature. The
reason why understanding and controlling the viscosity of ILs is important
relates to their many possible applications as lubricants, as solvents for
industrial processes or in advanced battery materials. On a microscopic length
scale these liquids are complex, with networks of positive and negative charges
separated by uncharged domains. The research team is using a battery of
techniques including computer simulations, nuclear magnetic resonance, as well
as X-ray and neutron scattering to attack these challenging questions.
Researchers in this study range from undergraduate level students to graduate
students to postdoctoral fellows, each contributing and gaining unique
experiences on experimental and theoretical tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the most pressing questions about ionic liquids is how to control their
viscosity for specific applications. These liquids are structurally and
dynamically heterogeneous with networks of charge being the stiffer component,
and it is the relaxation with time of the charge alternation pattern within
these that is directly linked to viscosity. The research team is seeking to
understand how this process of “charge-blurring” occurs. For this, they are
using theoretical calculations and molecular dynamics simulations as well as
X-ray scattering, neutron scattering techniques that allow for temporal
resolution of the dynamics of the different liquid structural motifs, and NMR
techniques. The ultimate goal is to derive a predictive and pictorial view of
what causes the viscosity for specific ILs. The broader impacts of the study are
manifold; they include supplying the community of researchers working on ILs
with an understanding of how viscosity might be controlled for different
scientific and technological applications. In addition to providing formal
training for graduate students and post-doctoral fellows, the project is
providing research experience for undergraduate students, including some from
Queensborough Community College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.