* 1954393
* Model Theory of Enhanced Light-Matter Interaction in a PT-Symmetric Hybrid Optical Cavity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* David Masiello, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 479,122.00

David J. Masiello of the University of Washington is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to construct theoretical models describing how light and matter
interact. Control of light-matter interaction is central to numerous advances in
quantum communication and information, sensing, and control of chemical
reactions. In this project systems called quantum emitter-photonic cavities are
the subject of investigation. These systems permit accurate modeling of light-
matter interactions, leading to predictive models that can be verified and
refined by experiments. Broader impacts of this work include Professor
Masiello's continued mentoring in several education and outreach programs,
including those which promote participation of under-represented groups of
minorities, women, and first generation students in STEM fields (for example,
Expanding your Horizons, Introduce a Girl, MESA Day, and the Sustainable
Horizons Institute). The research project itself is highly collaborative with
several experimental groups testing the theoretical
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the work may represent the next
fundamental step in progressing from single emitter-cavity systems to future
arrays of coupled cavities, such as those necessary for the simulation of
quantum many-body phenomena. The theoretical models will provide much needed
understandings of the interactions and hybridizations of the simplest possible
composite optical cavities, i.e., those composed of just two resonators. This
work provides a next logical step towards the fundamental understanding of
complex networks of coupled cavities, which are finding utility in optical
communications, computing, sensing, and the simulation of complex quantum many-
body phenomena. Specific objectives of this project are to develop the analytic
models necessary to rigorously describe cavity mode hybridization in a pair of
coupled optical cavities beyond coupled-mode theory and to elucidate the Purcell
enhanced emission of light from quantum emitters embedded at strategic locations
within hybrid nanophotonic cavities. Professor Masiello will also exploit PT-
symmetry in a coupled photonic cavity to control entanglement dynamics between
individual quantum emitters located in each cavity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.