* 1954644
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Supporting High-Value Analytics on Big Low-Value Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ahmed Eldawy, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 616,000.00

A wealth of digital information is being generated through social networks,
blogs, online communities, news sources, and mobile applications as well as a
myriad of device-based sources such as smart-home devices and wearable sensors.
Data analysts in a number of domains, e.g., government, public health, national
security, and public safety, stand to benefit greatly from the ability to
perform retrospective as well as interactive analyses over such data. The key
feature of this data is that an individual item, such as a tweet or a sensor
reading, is low-value by nature. Such data becomes of high-value only when large
quantities of such data are analyzed together. This project seeks new data
management techniques to enable data analysts to process large quantities of
such low-value data. The key challenge is to support analytic queries
efficiently and interactively, while being aware of the low-value nature of the
data, using cost-effective solutions such as cheap commodity
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for data analytics has been well studied,
both for centralized and parallel databases, for tabular data. However, given
memory prices where the high-value transactional data for a typical enterprise
can fit in the memory of a high-end server, most recent work has been on
analytics for memory-resident data. In contrast, this project aims to support
analytics over data arising from social, mobile, Web, and IoT data sources. This
data is much larger, so memory-residence is not cost effective for storage or
analysis, as only in aggregate do the data items become high-value. The project
has three main thrusts. The first thrust focuses on efficient storage and
resource-aware query processing for large volumes of data that are nested, semi-
structured, and lacking a predefined schema. The second thrust introduces a
flexible join framework to handle complex join queries – including joins over
spatial, temporal, and textual data – to allow multiple datasets to be combined
to increase their value. The third thrust, since big low-value often involves
sequences of events, focuses on efficient window query processing; parallel
processing of window queries, in order to scale, is essential for big low-value
data analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.