* 1954625
* Southwest Local Algebra Meeting 2020
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* David Jorgensen, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* michelle manes
* 12/31/2020
* USD 12,500.00

This award supports participation in the Southwest Local Algebra Meeting 2020,
held at Tulane University on March 7 â€“ March 8, 2020. This conference will
facilitate interactions between students and faculty from institutions in the
Southwest who have interests in ring theory. The study of rings, in the broadest
sense, is crucial to many branches of mathematics, including commutative and
non-commutative geometry, group representations, number theory, coding theory,
and cryptography. Algebraists in the Southwest region pursue research on a
variety of topics under the umbrella of pure and applied ring theory. The
meeting will bring together students and faculty from a variety of institutions
for inspiring talks, with ample time for scientific interaction, providing
opportunities for participants to begin new collaborations and catalyzing new
research projects. About 70 participants are expected, including students and
young and senior faculty from throughout the South and Southwestern USA. The
participation of students from underrepresented minority groups, women,
untenured faculty, and faculty at non-Ph.D. granting institutions is
particularly encouraged. Six experts will deliver hour-long talks on topics
within their areas of specialty. The lectures are intended to be accessible to
graduate students. The meeting will also feature three hour-long poster sessions
in which the participating students will present their research. Participants
will discuss several key problems in commutative algebra, including progress on
finding bounds for Betti numbers, a topic that has significant implications for
classical problems in combinatorics and algebraic geometry, including Cayley-
Bacharach theory. Several speakers work in combinatorial or computational
algebraic geometry and will also shed light on connections between these fields
and commutative algebra. Finally, the research expertise of one speaker is in
Representation Theory, providing an opportunity to introduce ring theorists to
problems in a different field close to their areas of work. More information can
be found at the conference webpage:
http://www.math.ttu.edu/~lchriste/slam2020.html.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.