* 1954046
* Fifth Workshop on Higher-Order Asymptotics and Post-Selection Inference; June 21-23, 2020; St. Louis, Missouri
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Todd Kuffner, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 02/28/2022
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports participation of graduate students, postdocs and other
early-career researchers in the Fifth Workshop on Higher-Order Asymptotics and
Post-Selection Inference (WHOA-PSI), to take place June 21 through June 23, 2020
at Washington University in St. Louis. The goals of the workshop include (i) to
provide a forum to disseminate and discuss the most recent advances in inference
after model selection or dimension reduction; (ii) to promote collaboration
between theoretical, methodological and applied researchers; and (iii) to
advertise applications for which new post-selection inference methods are
needed. The workshop features more than 30 invited talks and 2 poster sessions,
representing a large number of research groups who work in relevant fields from
all over the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New areas of substantial activity
within the past year include causal inference, the feasibility of selective
inference after machine learning methods have been employed, and Bayesian post-
selection inference. Post-selection inference in linear models remains a very
active research area, with no consensus yet reached regarding what should be the
targets of inference, which errors to control, what sort of conditioning should
be used, and how to combine statistical principles such as decision-theoretic
optimality, Fisherian relevance, robustness, and Neyman-Pearson approaches to
testing. Our understanding of when and how appropriate bootstrap methods can be
developed in the context of post-selection inference and high-dimensional
inference continues to evolve. This workshop provides an opportunity for further
discussion and progress on these important issues. It will also increase
awareness of applied problems in need of new inference tools. The website for
this workshop is https://www.math.wustl.edu/~kuffner/WHOA-
PSI-5.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.