* 1954853
* Collaborative Research: Infrared Control of Electron Transfer Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Igor Rubtsov, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2024
* USD 285,000.00

This collaborative research project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics
&amp; Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, is being carried out by
Professors David Beratan and Peng Zhang of the Department of Chemistry at Duke
University, and Igor Rubtsov of the Department of Chemistry at Tulane
University. The goal of this research is to use theory, modeling, simulation,
molecular design, synthesis, and spectroscopy to investigate electron-transfer
experiments at the molecular scale. The short-term payoff of these studies will
be a fundamental understanding of how to actively change chemical interactions
by manipulating light. Longer-term results may include the development of novel
functional materials with behaviors that are fundamentally quantum mechanical in
origin. The broader impacts of the project are derived from educating young
scientists on interdisciplinary topics at the interface of quantum dynamics,
spectroscopy and electron transfer processes. Students will be trained to work
in collaborative interdisciplinary research teams, developing fluency in
elements of chemistry, matierals and physics with potential future applications
in quantum science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Double-slit style experiments manifest
the dual particle-wave nature of matter. This interdisciplinary research project
explores how electronic propagation through covalent organic structures reveals
double-slit electron transmission phenomena. The “slits” are realized through
customized chemical synthesis, and a combination of novel visible, ultraviolet
and infra-red frequency transient spectroscopies will be used to switch and to
probe coherent double-slit style electron transmission through molecules.
Vibrational excitation of the structures will be used to turn on/off electronic
coupling pathways, thus inducing large changes in electron fluxes. The switching
will be sensitive to the symmetry and normal mode structure of the molecules.
The project explores the core enigma of quantum mechanics in the framework of
molecules, with important future links to materials for sensing, communications,
and energy science. The intensive collaboration of an interdisciplinary team
will design, synthesize, measure, and analyze electronic propagation through
customized double-slit style molecular structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.