* 1954545
* Geometry of Measures and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Tatiana Toro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 228,120.00

When dipping a frame in a solution of soap suds one produces a thin soap film.
Mathematically this object is a constant mean curvature surface. It is closely
related to the solution of the Plateau problem, which requires finding a surface
of minimal area that spans a given shape in space. This problem is a classical
question in the Calculus of Variations. The area is an energy functional, and
the expectation is that minimizing it will lead to a stable configuration. In
this project the PI addresses questions concerning the minimization of certain
energy functionals that take into account noise and small random fluctuations of
the phenomena being modeled. The expectation is that this theory will be better
suited to reflect actual minimization questions arising in nature. A fundamental
feature of the area functional is that it is invariant under rotations of space
(if that space is homogeneous). The PI will address geometric and analytic
questions in inhomogeneous and crystal-like spaces providing a model that
reflects nature more accurately. This project will contribute to US workforce
development through training and mentoring of graduate students and post-
docs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the PI’s goals is to show that “almost
minimizers”, which are minimizers to noisy variational problems inherit some of
the properties of minimizers of the same functional without noise. This study
requires using tools from calculus of variations, harmonic analysis and
geometric measure theory. The expectation is that the new ideas developed along
the way will find applications in other variational problems with free
boundaries. The aim of the project concerning further developing analysis on
non-smooth domains is to characterize the geometry of domains in Euclidean space
in terms of the properties of solutions to canonical (anisotropic) operators.
The project concerning the rectifiability of measures promises to reveal the
fine structure of measures defined on crystal-like spaces. The overarching theme
of this project brings together tools from Geometric Measure Theory, PDE,
Potential Theory, Harmonic Analysis and Calculus of Variations, building bridges
between these areas while transforming them by the influx of new
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.