* 1954176
* Improving Employability Skills of Advanced Manufacturing Technicians through Industry Mentoring and Experiential Learning Activities
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Dava Washburn, Grayson County Junior College District
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2023
* USD 517,639.00

Manufacturing has recently emerged as a major industry in North Texas, a
predominately rural region of the US. Although the manufacturing industry has
created many career opportunities for trained production technicians, it is
difficult to find appropriately skilled workers in the region. This project
builds on the results of a previous Advanced Technological Education project at
Grayson College. The previous project established an Associate of Applied
Science degree and certificate programs in Advanced Manufacturing Technology.
The current project will develop an industry mentoring program and a new
employability skills curriculum, to help address the needs of regional
manufacturers for skilled technicians. Currently, only 25% of high school
students in the region live within traveling distance to the collegeâ€™s dual
enrollment program in advanced manufacturing. Thus, to meet the needs of more
high school students, the project will also develop an online option for
advanced manufacturing technician education, with flexible lab hours for hands-
on instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are to: 1) improve
student employability skills through a formal industry mentor program; 2)
develop a new employability skills curriculum based on experiential learning; 3)
increase awareness of advanced manufacturing career opportunities among targeted
audiences; and 4) provide access for high school students in rural areas to a
dual enrollment program leading to a certificate or degree in advanced
manufacturing technology. The project evaluation will assess the effectiveness
of the industry mentor training program, the preparedness of students in terms
of employability skills, the level of public awareness of the advanced
manufacturing program, and the degree to which student access has increased.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.