* 1954532
* Excellence in Research: Research in Machine Learning and Its Application
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Negash Medhin, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 466,200.00

This project is aimed at developing a data-driven machine learning research
program accompanied by an integrated undergraduate educational curriculum in
data science and machine learning. The research team, consisting of faculty from
Benedict College, a historically black college and university (HBCU), University
of South Carolina, and North Carolina State University with complementary
expertise in optimization, control theory, statistics, applied and computational
mathematics, and engineering will develop new methods in machine learning and
employ these methods in a variety of applications, including modeling malaria
epidemics and diabetes; discovering constitutive laws and mechanisms for some
selected materials and life science problems such as modeling heart tissues and
designing synthetic ion separating membranes; incorporating machine learning
modules into a hybrid multiscale model for simulating angiogenesis (angiogenesis
is the physiological process through which new blood vessels form from
preexisting vessels, formed in the earlier stage of formation and development of
vascular system) of various organs and tissue constructs in 3D biofabrication.
Additionally this project will create an innovative training program to educate
undergraduate STEM students and to retool affiliated faculty in Benedict College
to prepare them for data science and artificial intelligence related jobs and
for conducting research using data-driven approaches in the future. The
computing and learning laboratory will provide the necessary computing facility
for participating faculty and students to carry out the research as well as
educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will focus on
several application problems that can be solved and improved using data science
and machine learning tools: (1) using a multi-objective optimization approach to
improve machine learning outcome in clustering, feature selection, knowledge
extraction, and ensemble generation in modeling malaria epidemics and diabetes
disease; (2) using Grey models to improve predictions in financial analysis; (3)
developing forecasting models for disease epidemics including malaria and other
diseases; (4) discovering constitutive laws and mechanisms in selected materials
and life science problems such as stress-strain constitutive relations based on
deep neural networks for heterogeneous heart tissues and organs and ion
transport mechanisms in synthetic ion separating membranes; (5) coupling machine
and deep learning tools to calibrate interaction energies and accelerate Monte
Carlo simulations in a hybrid multiscale model for
angiogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.