* 1954960
* QCIS-FF: Quantum Computing &amp; Information Science Faculty Fellow at the University of New Mexico
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Milad Marvian, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2023
* USD 545,365.00

Quantum Information Science (QIS) presents a transdisciplinary grand challenge
that will require unified efforts across engineering and science disciplines,
with the promise of revolutionizing future technologies in computing,
communication, and sensing. With this award the University of New Mexico will
hire a new Quantum Computing &amp; Information Science Faculty Fellow (QCIS-FF)
in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE). The QCIS-FF will
emphasize transdisciplinary transformative research and education, breaking down
traditional barriers between Engineering and the Sciences and beyond to all
relevant parts of the University. The QCIS-FF will be embedded in the fertile
QIS ecosystem in New Mexico including UNM, Sandia National Labs, and Los Alamos
National Lab, and become a full member of the Center for Quantum Information and
Control. The QCIS-FF will help lead the effort in education and workforce
development in QIS at UNM, through the development of new courses, curricula,
and degree programs. In all of these ways the QCIS-FF will act to advance QIS as
called for in the implementation the National Quantum Initiative Act of
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Growing expertise in ECE is essential to progress in
QIS. Key areas of QIS are traditional subjects of ECE including algorithms,
cybersecurity, optimization, and machine learning. The new QCIS-FF will push the
envelope and expand knowledge in these areas and in new transdisciplinary
subjects. This will be achieved in a variety of manners. The QCIS-FF will help
to launch new research and education initiatives, such as implementing UNM's
participation in the IBM Q Network, one of world-leading eco-systems in quantum
computing. This will enable Hub members to work directly with IBM to advance
quantum computing, with early, privileged access to the IBM-Q commercial
systems, such as the newly announced 53-qubit quantum computers. Participation
in the Q Network will link our QCIS Faculty Fellow and students as part of a
hub-and-spoke model of engagement with members from industry, academia, and
government. Other projects include the NSF Software-Tailored Architecture for
Quantum (STAQ) co-design project, CISE's largest investment in quantum computing
to date, consisting of an interdisciplinary team of theoretical and experimental
physicists, engineers, and computer scientists from seven universities co-
designing next generation quantum computers. Overall, the Faculty Fellow will
operative in a fertile QIS research environment at UNM. In education and
workforce development, the goals includes new courses in ECE and a cross-listed
retooling of existing QIS courses that will better serve the transdisciplinary
mission. These courses will be part of a new MS concentration in QCIS, and a new
university-wide PhD concentration in QIS that can be added to home departments
including ECE, CS, Physics, and Chemistry. The new courses will also provide
electives to undergraduate seniors and graduate students. These new initiatives
will be integrated with the existing programs in ECE such as the recently
established Managed Online Programs in the Internet of Things. UNM will partner
with the IEEE Quantum Initiative in the planning and development of education
workshops and to provide QIS teaching materials through their education portal.
They will also partner with LANL Quantum Computing Summer School developing new
curricula, educational materials, and mentorship of next-generation quantum
computing and information scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.