* 1954254
* Collaborative Research: CAS: Electrochemical Approaches to Sustainable Dinitrogen Fixation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Robert Crabtree, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 321,010.00

This award from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, supports a collaborative team consisting of Professors Alexander
Miller at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Alan Goldman, Frank
Felder and Gal Hochman at Rutgers University; and Robert Crabtree, Patrick
Holland, and James Mayer at Yale University. The team is designing new ways to
convert nitrogen into ammonia. Ammonia is the precursor to many useful
materials, including most fertilizers, latex, nylon, explosives and some
electrolytes for batteries. Present day methods for making ammonia are energy
intensive and rely on fossil fuels as a source of hydrogen. Acting on
preliminary results, the team is developing a processes that uses water as the
hydrogen source. Atmospheric nitrogen, which comprises ~78% of the air we
breathe, is the other feedstock. Key to this work are new molybdenum- and
rhenium-based catalysts that cleave atmospheric nitrogen into nitrogen atoms.
Graduate students receive hands-on training on calculations and laboratory
techniques to prepare them for future careers in energy and sustainability. In
addition to the laboratory work, the faculty-student teams are working with
economists to test the feasibility of diverse approaches to advanced
manufacturing. Outreach programs in three states are underway to educate the
public about nitrogen fixation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed collaborative
research project targets the discovery and mechanistic study of new molecular
catalysts for electrochemical N2 reduction. With funding from the Chemical
Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Miller of the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Professor Goldman, Felder and Hochman of
Rutgers University, and Professors Crabtree, Holland, and Mayer of Yale
University are developing catalysts capable of electrocatalytic NH3 production
via direct N2 splitting to form metal nitride complexes. Detailed studies afford
mechanistic insight that is guiding the design of new molybdenum and rhenium
complexes and reaction conditions for electrocatalysis. The diversity of systems
and methods available through this collaborative approach are being leveraged to
generate broadly applicable insights into the properties of transition metal
complexes that favor N2 splitting and protonation of nitride intermediates to
yield NH3 under conditions amenable to
electrocatalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.