* 1954848
* Ultrafast Vibrational Spectroscopy (2D-IR) of Carbon Dioxide in Ionic Liquid-Polymer Composite Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sean Garrett-Roe, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Sean Garrett-Roe’s laboratory at the University of Pittsburgh is using lasers to
study how new types of materials could be used to filter out unwanted carbon
dioxide that is given off by power plants, before it reaches the atmosphere.
This could be much less expensive than other current methods. These materials
could, for example, contain salts that are liquid at room temperature (ionic
liquids) within the structure of plastic membranes. One of the aims of Professor
Garrett-Roe’s project is to understand how to optimize the interactions of
carbon dioxide molecules with the new materials. The project is determining the
structures of the ionic liquids within the plastic membranes and using that
information to model the chemical features that control how carbon dioxide moves
through the materials. Parallel to the research, the grant supports the training
of graduate students in interdisciplinary scientific areas. Two undergraduates
per year from a historically black undergraduate institution visit for summer
research opportunities. In addition, the project develops teaching
infrastructure, specifically an online platform for teachers to develop, share,
and get feedback on new POGIL (Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning)
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project is to
understand carbon dioxide solvation in composites of ionic liquids and cross-
linked poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA). The project uses ultrafast
vibrational spectroscopy (2D-IR) on the antisymmetric stretch of the carbon
dioxide to report the structure and dynamics of carbon dioxide's local solvation
environment. The work tests the hypothesis that the solvation environment of
carbon dioxide is dominated by the anions of the ionic liquid, and that the
polymer matrix slows dynamics by increasing the entropy of activation for
reorganizing a solvent shell. The test of the hypothesis has three components:
(1) to determine the structures of the ionic liquid in the ionic liquid - PEGDA
ion gels with a suite of tools, including atomic force microscopy, polarized
light microscopy, and scanning electron microscopy, covering length scales from
tens of nanometers to microns; (2) to test a core-shell-matrix model of
solvation dynamics by recording 2D-IR spectra as a function of ionic liquid
volume percent; and (3) to determine the activation energies of bulk
thermodynamics and transport (solubility, diffusivity, and permeability) as well
as specific molecular dynamics (structural and rotational spectral diffusion).
This project advances 2D-IR spectroscopy by demonstrating a temperature- and
polarization-resolved approach to separate the activation energies related to
motion of the vibrational chromophore and the surrounding solvent. The research
supports important goals in advancing the nation's ability to compete in the
global, high-technology economy by providing the fundamental understanding
needed to develop next generation materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.