* 1954733
* 2020 Great Plains Operator Theory Symposium
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Greg Knese, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2024
* USD 39,999.00

This award provides funding to help defray the expenses of participants in the
"Great Plains Operator Theory Symposium," a conference series in which the 2020
event will take place during June 1-June 5, 2020, on the campus of Washington
University in St. Louis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a modest beginning in 1981,
the Great Plains Operator Theory Symposium has evolved into a major
international conference on operator theory and operator algebra. This symposium
focuses on recent developments in Operator Algebras and Operator Theory. Leading
researchers will discuss important new developments and propose problems for
future research. This symposium aims to be a conference covering broad areas
with large participation, including many young people, who are encouraged to
present their research. This award gives early career researchers, members of
underrepresented groups, and researchers not funded by NSF an opportunity to
attend and participate in this conference. The organizing committee will strive
to make this funding opportunity widely known. More information will be made
available at:
http://www.math.wustl.edu/~ylsong/GPOTS.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.