* 1954861
* ECR DBER DCL: Investigating Undergraduate Chemistry Students’ Reasoning and Conceptual Change Related to Graphs of Particulate-Level Variability
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Nicole Becker, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2024
* USD 496,573.00

A key learning outcome in undergraduate chemistry courses is the ability to
understand and predict the behavior of atoms and molecules. The types, amounts,
and other characteristics of atoms or molecules determine whether and how they
interact. With support from NSF’s EHR Core Research (ECR) program, this project
seeks to serve the national interest by examining the development of students’
ability to interpret and use graphical representations about atoms and molecules
and their interactions. The research will involve two studies: (1) Analysis of
individual student’s graphical reasoning and ideas about atoms and molecules, as
the student progresses through a general chemistry course sequence; and (2) How
students reason with and about graphs in a collaborative classroom environment.
This research is expected to increase understanding about how students’
abilities to use graphs for making inferences change over time. This evidence
about student learning can help education researchers and will better support
development of students’ knowledge about key concepts in chemistry. Since all
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields involve
graphical reasoning, the project findings may be applicable to other STEM
fields. Thus, translation of research findings from this research into practice
ultimately has the potential to improve teaching and learning in STEM courses
and benefit society by increasing the number of students who are successful in
these areas of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how
students learn about varied population schema, the idea that there are a range
of states for individual particles within a system at the particulate level,
which has been hypothesized to be a threshold concept for chemistry learning. In
addition, the team will study how students interpret and make inferences using
graphical representations related to varied population schema. Despite the
prevalence and importance of graphical models that relate to particulate-level
systems, there are relatively few theory-based qualitative accounts of how
general chemistry students interpret and make inferences from such models.
Models that relate to particulate-level variability, such as distribution graphs
and reaction coordinate diagrams, are particularly important. The research aims
of the project are: (1) to describe the impact of a general chemistry course
sequence on individual student’s conceptual structures pertaining to variability
at the particulate level, including their ability to interpret and make
inferences from graphical representations; and (2) to describe in-the-moment
dynamics of students’ joint sense-making during a collaborative learning
activity. To address aim 1, we will conduct a study with multiple semi-
structured interviews regarding graphical models related to the varied
population schema throughout the two-semester undergraduate general chemistry
sequence. This will involve the use of eye-tracking technology to analyze
features in representations that students attend to supplement their verbal
explanations. Moreover, interviews will examine the ways in which students
connect and use knowledge elements to make inferences about chemical properties
such as diffusion, reaction rate, and equilibrium. For aim 2, the project team
will investigate the discourse and dynamics of groups of students as they engage
in a graphical-reasoning focused collaborative learning activity designed to
emphasize the variability in a system. Analysis for both aims will be informed
by coordination class theory and the microgenetic learning analysis approach.
The success of the project will be assessed by an advisory panel comprised of
disciplinary experts in chemistry and experts in educational research. Research
findings will be shared via scholarly publications and conference presentations.
Learning materials developed will be disseminated via faculty workshops and on
the Chemical Education Xchange website. Thus, the project will advance knowledge
of how undergraduate students develop understandings related to interpreting
graphs that involve the varied population schema. In addition, it has potential
to inform the design and implementation of collaborative learning activities for
STEM education, and to propagate methodologies adapted from other fields for
broader use in discipline-based education research. This project is funded by
the EHR Core Research Program, which supports work that advances fundamental
research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.