* 1954939
* CAS: New Strategies for Sustainable Methods in Nickel-Catalyzed Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* John Montgomery, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 04/30/2025
* USD 904,913.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor John Montgomery of the University of
Michigan. Professor Montgomery works with graduate students and undergraduates
to develop improved ways to conduct organic synthesis. The approaches involve
identifying ways to convert simple and readily available feedstocks into high
value synthetic compounds and to identify new catalysts that improve the
synthetic efficiency and practicality of the synthetic methods developed.
Additionally, the methods use earth abundant metals to reduce cost and minimize
the formation of hazardous by-products. The synthetic improvements can be
applied in a number of settings including academic labs and pharmaceutical,
biotechnology, agricultural, polymer, and petroleum industries. Professor
Montgomery is highly committed to inclusive teaching practices and the
exploration of innovative ways to integrate his research, teaching, and outreach
focus within his research group. Professor Montgomery continues working with
first-generation/underrepresented minority students via a class he developed.
Broader societal impacts include development of outreach activities that will
provide community connections that encourage young students to be confident in
their ability to succeed and to consider STEM fields as they navigate their
educational paths and career choices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Montgomery
and his students develop new nickel catalysts that enable the discovery and
development of synthetic processes that provide rapid access to high-value
products. The development of aryl silyl ethers and enol silanes as versatile
substrates in synthesis enable novel disconnections that provide unusual and
synthetically-powerful entries to high value product structures. These methods
provide an important complement to the commonly employed addition of reactive
organometallics to electrophilic carbonyls. An integral aspect of the research
is the use of readily available, stable, and highly active nickel(0) catalysts
that can be broadly applied by non-specialists in many fields of research. The
methods may provide new approaches and strategies for organic synthesis that
enable the rapid, efficient, selective, and cost-effective preparation of high-
value structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.