* 1954093
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Cultural Interaction in Frontier Situations
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Jennifer Birch, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 30,194.00

Researchers across the social sciences seek to understand how processes of
colonialism and world-system expansion helped to create today's increasingly
globalized world. Because of its focus on material remains and long-term
continuity and change, archaeology is uniquely suited to provide insight into
the processes that brought societies with different political, economic, and
social systems into contact and the outcomes of those interactions. First
contact between Indigenous North Americans and European settlers occurred in the
context of this global colonial world, but Indigenous peoples in North America
were not simply passive or marginal actors within it. By focusing on the
community level, this research emphasizes the decisions and agency of Indigenous
people, allowing for variation in Indigenous reactions to colonization beyond
simple acceptance or rejection. The social phenomenon explored here also
occurred around the world in other colonized areas and along the edges of world-
systems, so the conclusions and methods advance understanding of processes which
are of broad, global interest. This project advances societal outcomes by
training one graduate student in STEM methods (the co-PI), and one undergraduate
in archaeological research and data management methods. It involves no
excavation and uses data from existing archaeological collections, increasing
the value of publicly-held resources while maintaining an ethic of preservation.
Many of these collections are held by cultural resource management companies and
universities, creating infrastructure for future collaboration between academic
and industry researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the investigators
use radiocarbon dating and analysis of European trade goods (such as metal
objects and glass beads) to investigate how three different Indigenous
communities participated in world-system expansion. The researchers examine when
and how different Indigenous communities in what is today southern Ontario,
Canada first interacted with European settlers by asking: Did all Indigenous
groups in the study region initially engage with Europeans at the same time?
Were they all interacting in the same way and accepting the same kinds of goods?
Or did some people avoid, refuse, or delay interaction with Europeans? These
research questions will be answered by: (1) Establishing, empirically, when
different sites were occupied through Bayesian chronological modeling of high-
precision AMS radiocarbon dates, and (2) Establishing the local and regional
distribution of objects of European manufacture, including metal tools and glass
beads. The radiocarbon dates will establish which sites in each community were
being used at the same time, and the trade good distributions will establish how
those communities were interacting with European settlers. This project will
result in the creation of 57 new AMS radiocarbon dates from Wendat, Tionontate,
and Attiwandaron sites dated to ca. AD 1550-1650, as well as the a novel
comprehensive database of European-manufactured trade goods on indigenous sites
in Ontario and Quebec, Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.