* 1954031
* Modular Synthesis of N-Glycans and Homogeneous Glycoproteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Chi-Huey Wong, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 539,919.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Chi-Huey Wong at The Scripps Research
Institute. Professor Wong and his research team are developing new ways to link
sugar molecules to form oligosaccharides (relatively small carbohydrates) using
chemical and enzymatic tools. These new methods for the construction of
oligosaccharides are then being used to assemble glycoproteins (proteins that
have sugars attached to them) and to understand how the oligosaccharide
fragments affect protein function. Glycoproteins perform many important
biological functions that are central to the immune, digestive, and reproductive
systems, for example. Since most proteins in higher organisms are modified with
oligosaccharides of varying sequence, length and branching, at multiple loci,
there is considerable microheterogeneity for any given glycoprotein. This makes
it difficult to establish clear structure/function relationships for
glycoproteins. The development of methods for the defined synthesis of
oligosaccharides and their use for the assembly of homogeneous glycoproteins is
critically important for such studies. The work being done in the Wong group is
also providing graduate and undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral
researchers, with interdisciplinary training in chemistry, chemical biology,
molecular biology, and biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
effect of glycosylation on protein folding, structure and function is vitally
important in biology and medicine and requires access to a large number of
complex structurally-defined asparagine-linked N-glycans. Professor Wong and his
research group are addressing this challenge by designing modular chemoenzymatic
methods for assembling oligosaccharides. More specifically, they are developing
methods to prepare multi-antennary N-linked glycans with fluorinated sialic acid
and fucosylated functionalities, as well as optimizing enzymes to achieve
transfers of tri-and tetrantennary oligosaccharides. The significant array of
N-glycans being prepared in these studies is then available to generate
homogeneous glycoproteins, such as monoclonal antibodies, for the study of their
activities. All modules, enzymes, and reagents being discovered are also being
made available to the community to provide a useful hybrid synthetic/enzymatic
toolbox to facilitate the critical need for better understanding of protein
glycosylation and to advance research in glycoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.