* 1954841
* Glycosyl Sulfonates for the Construction of Difficult Glycosidic Linkages
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Clay Bennett, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 470,859.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division is
supporting the research of Professor Clay Bennett of Tufts University who is
developing ways to make sugar molecules attach to each other at specific
locations without forming mixtures of products. Being able to control the
attachment of sugar molecules is important because it influences the reactivity
of these compounds in different systems. Chains of sugar molecules are called
oligosaccharides and are found on the surfaces of cells, are structural
components of plants, and often control biological processes. Professor Bennett
and his research group will determine which components of sugar molecules match
best with a reagent to help form the desired connections. They will then test
what they learn from these studies by making a known antibiotic compound.
Determining how to make sugar molecules link together at specific locations will
increase efficiency in oligosaccharide synthesis and decrease waste associated
with separating mixtures of products. The results of this research impact all
areas of activity that require carbohydrate synthesis, including agricultural,
chemical, and pharmaceutical industries. This project also involves outreach
activities to high school chemistry students to introduce the chemistry of sugar
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bennett lab is using sulfonyl chloride
promoters to control the stereochemical outcome of glycosylation reactions of
deoxysugars. These reactions are difficult to control due to the lack of a
directing group so finding ways to achieve this selectivity is important. Three
specific areas of investigation are being pursued: 1) monitoring the reactivity
of different deoxy sugars and sulfonyl chlorides to create a database cataloging
which promoter is best for which sugar, 2) determining the chemical interactions
that control these transformations, and 3) demonstrating the utility of the
method with the synthesis of saccharomicin B. Lessons learned from these studies
may allow for the synthesis of challenging oligosaccharides without the need for
wasteful separation procedures. This program will provide an excellent training
environment for a diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.