* 1954387
* Understanding the Mechanism of Mn-Promoted H2O Oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Julie Kovacs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 03/31/2024
* USD 449,516.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division of
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Julie Kovacs of the University of
Washington is studying new manganese compounds and their interactions with
calcium and water. The long-range goal is to discover pathways for producing
oxygen gas from water. This conversion is expected to be useful in the design of
fuel cells. The approach is inspired by the roles of manganese catalysts in
nature, which are known to form oxygen gas from water. This reaction is very
simple on paper, but Nature's mechanism has not yet been demonstrated. The
research examines how the structure of manganese catalysts influences their
interaction with calcium ions, which in turn influences the reactions with
water. In addition to this research, the grant is supporting work by Dr. Kovacs
and a group of graduate students who provide instruction to K-12 students with
the goal of enhancing their scientific literacy. As the Chair of the American
Chemical Society’s Division of Inorganic Chemistry, she guides strategic
planning with the goal of enhancing the leadership skills of younger chemists.
Collectively, these activities strengthen the nation's scientific workforce by
increasing its technical skills and diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support
from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division of the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Julie Kovacs of the University of Washington seeks to
develop clean energy alternatives to fossil fuels. Her research, which is
inspired by Nature’s photosynthetic water oxidation catalyst (OEC), requires an
understanding of the key oxygen forming step. Very little is known about this
step because it occurs following the rate-determining step. Sluggish water-
oxidation catalysts limit existing fuel cells. Fundamental scientific research
is therefore needed. The OEC catalyst stores oxidizing equivalents in
preparation for the formation of dioxygen gas. She is using redox active ligands
for this purpose. The redox inactive calcium ion is essential, and yet its role
is still not understood. A calcium hydroxide has been proposed to attack an
electrophilic manganese oxide. Kovacs’ group is testing this hypothesis using
synthetic manganese-calcium, manganese-strontium, and manganese-manganese
compounds. Molecules are designed to rapidly trap key intermediates. Transient
absorption spectroscopy and magnetic resononace experiments as as well as
computations complement the synthesis. In addition to her research, Dr. Kovacs
leads a group of graduate students who provide instruction to K-12 students at
the Seattle Public Library. As the Chair of the American Chemical Society’s
Division of Inorganic Chemistry, she guides strategic planning with the goal of
enhancing the leadership skills of female chemists. Collectively, these
activities strengthen the nation's scientific workforce by increasing its
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.