* 1954041
* CAS: Long Oligodeoxynucleotides Directly from Automated De Novo Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Shiyue Fang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Dr. Shiyue Fang in the Department of Chemistry at
Michigan Technological University to develop automated tools for making and
purifying long oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs). Long ODNs are chemically prepared
DNA (2'-deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules that contain 60 or more units called
nucleotides. They are used for genome construction, vaccine development, and
reducing input costs of DNA digital storage data. Currently, the preparation of
ODNs longer than 200 nucleotides is tedious and requires the inefficient
preparation and purification of many short ODNs followed by molecular biology
linking techniques. Dr. Fang and his team are working to address this bottleneck
to advance synthetic biology studies that require these compounds. New
sustainable technology is being developed to reliably make and separate long
ODNs with 500 or more nucleotides from complex reaction mixtures without
generating large amounts of solvent waste. Dr. Yinan Yuan, also at MTU, is
contributing expert assistance with ODN characterization. The project is
providing interdisciplinary training opportunities for a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students at MTU, as well as undergraduate students
from Finlandia University, a nearby primarily undergraduate institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of efficient methods for preparing long
ODNs is critically important for the advancement of synthetic biology, nucleic
acid vaccine development, and DNA digital storage data. Due to a variety of
roadblocks, existing technologies cannot produce long ODNs within the low cost
and short turnaround time demands of these research fields. Professor Fang and
his team are taking a holistic approach to achieving efficient methods for long
ODN synthesis and addressing this important need through the following
activities: 1) identifying optimal solid supports for long ODN synthesis; 2)
inventing new phosphoramidites to improve coupling yields in dG-rich regions; 3)
investigating catching-by-polymerization technology for long ODN purification;
4) developing improved characterization methods for long ODNs based on MALDI-MS
(matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-mass spectrometry); and 5)
designing protocols for enzymatic correction of errors in long ODNs. Through
these objectives, Drs. Fang and Yuan, are making progress toward the routine
automation of de novo 500-mer ODN synthesis. The key to success here is the use
of catch-by-polymerization technology to polymerize failure sequences and
simplify purification. Graduate and undergraduate students working toward these
goals learn a wide range of skills including organic synthesis, nucleic acid
chemistry, surface reactivity, automated synthesis, MALDI-MS, electrophoresis
and DNA manipulation and sequencing. Inclusive training in these fields and
techniques is increasing diversity in STEM fields and in the future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.