* 1954924
* RUI: Mechanistic Studies of Ruthenium-Catalyzed Ester Hydrogenation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Anthony Chianese, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 335,631.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professors Anthony Chianese and Jason Keith at
Colgate University to understand how catalysts operate at a molecular level for
a chemical process called ester hydrogenation. This reaction is carried out on a
very large scale in the chemical industry, often at high temperatures and under
high pressures of hydrogen gas. A major goal in the field of chemical catalysis
is the development of efficient processes that minimize the production of
hazardous waste and operate under energy-efficient conditions. Chianese and
Keith are using a combined laboratory and computer-modeling approach to
determine how the best-known ester hydrogenation catalysts operate. These
studies are contributing to basic scientific knowledge and helping to design the
next generation of improved catalysts. All of the research for this project is
being conducted by undergraduate students in the investigators' laboratories at
Colgate University. Participation in undergraduate research, especially early in
a student’s career, is increasingly recognized for its positive impact on
students and for broadening participation in the sciences. Professor Chianese
and the students working in his research group also devote a day each summer to
running an outreach activity for high school students attending Camp Fiver, a
residential summer camp that hosts a group of at-risk students New York City and
rural upstate New York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a previous NSF-funded project,
Professors Chianese and Keith discovered that ruthenium complexes developed in
their laboratory, as well as a widely used ruthenium complex known as Milstein’s
catalyst, undergo an irreversible chemical transformation to become active
catalysts for ester hydrogenation. This finding called into question previously
suggested mechanisms for how Milstein’s catalyst promotes ester hydrogenation,
as well as a wide array of related hydrogenations and dehydrogenations of polar
bonds. In the current project, Chianese and Keith are undertaking a detailed
experimental and computational study to understand precisely how Milstein’s
catalyst operates at a molecular level. This project draws upon Chianese’s
expertise in experimental mechanistic study and Keith’s expertise in
computational analysis of reaction mechanisms. One aim of these studies involves
determining how the inactive ruthenium precatalysts convert into their
catalytically active forms. Another aim focuses on understanding the individual
chemical reactions that make up the catalytic cycle for ester hydrogenation with
these complexes. This knowledge is being collected to assist in the rational
development of improved catalysts for ester hydrogenation and related processes.
This program is also providing valuable training for undergraduate students and
opportunities for at-risk high schools students to be introduced to chemical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.