* 1954856
* Theory and Application of Berry Phase Methods in Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* David Vanderbilt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved understanding of the
electronic properties of materials is fundamental to the development of many
modern technologies, especially in regard to electronic, magnetic, and optical
materials. In recent years, a class of mathematical methods based on so-called
"geometric phases" or "Berry phases" have begun to have a profound impact on our
understanding of the electronic structure of materials and our ability to
compute their properties. This research program is focused on further
development of these methods, both at the level of formal theory and in terms of
computational implementation. Much of the work is targeted to topological
materials, i.e., those in which the quantum-mechanical electronic wave functions
are twisted in a certain sense. Such materials are often characterized by
certain bulk properties (i.e., those that depend only on the interior of the
crystal sample) that nevertheless have specific manifestations on their
surfaces. An important theme of this project is to obtain a better understanding
of this kind of "bulk-boundary correspondence," especially as it applies to
magnetic and magnetoelectric properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports the training and mentorship of graduate students by contributing to
their career advancement and to the scientific workforce development. In
addition, the algorithms and computer codes developed in this project will be
contributed in open-source form for the benefit of the wider electronic-
structure research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research on the electronic properties of materials, with a special emphasis on
physical properties whose underlying mathematical description involves geometric
quantities based on Berry phases and curvatures. These are typically properties
for which macroscopic orbital currents play an important role, and include
electric polarization, orbital magnetization, anomalous Hall conductivity, and
orbital magnetoelectric couplings. The proper mathematical description of these
properties underlies much recent progress in the theory of topological insulator
and semimetal phases of crystalline materials. The goals of this research
activity include: (i) further development of the formal theory of electronic
structure, especially concerning descriptions in terms of geometric quantities;
(ii) in-depth studies of the relation between bulk and surface properties; (iii)
invention and dissemination of accurate and efficient computational methods for
computing materials properties related to these mathematical concepts; and (iv)
utilization of computational methods to identify promising new materials or
structures in which these properties can manifest themselves. A secondary focus
will be on electronic dynamics at both the sudden level, as for quantum quenches
across a topological phase boundary, and at the adiabatic level, in connection
with the dynamics of phonons in spin-orbit coupled magnetic materials. Methods
will include formal theoretical developments; implementation and testing in
terms of simple model Hamiltonians; and first-principles electronic structure
calculations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will be mentored and
trained in these methodologies, contributing to their education and career
development. The algorithms and computer codes developed in this project will be
contributed in open-source form for the benefit of the wider electronic-
structure research community. The program also holds out promise for the
identification and evaluation of new electronic materials that may ultimately be
useful for commercial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.