* 1954659
* RUI: Liposome Bilayer-Embedded Hydrophobic Palladium Nanoparticles for Selective Catalytic Reactions in Water
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Young-Seok Shon, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 213,156.00

Molecules that mimic the function of enzymes have been of interest for many
years. Enzyme mimics provide advantages over natural enzymes as they are easily
modified structures, improve stability, and lower cost. Mimicking the chemical
reactivity of natural enzymes requires models that maintain the complex
structures at and near the enzyme active site as these sites are responsible for
that reactivity. In this project, Dr. Shon of California State University Long
Beach is investigating a new approach to enzyme mimics where palladium
nanoparticles are embedded in the lipid layer of a liposome, which resembles a
cell membrane. The nanoparticle surface reactivity is modified by the attachment
of various molecules to it. The resulting constructs may provide the level of
control needed to simulate the interactions at an enzyme active site. Dr. Shon
is actively engaged in educational programs and outreach activities that build
upon his research to promote engagement of students ranging from high school
students to master-level graduate students in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities include the Keck Energy and
Materials Program (KEMP) for undergraduates and summer materials research
internships in Dr. Shon’s laboratory for high school students. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Shon of California State University Long Beach (CSULB) is
developing a fundamental understanding of how nanoparticle liposome embedding,
lipid phase transition, membrane fluidity, and surface ligand density and
composition of nanoparticles influence the non-covalent interactions between
substrates and nanoparticles and determine the catalytic properties of the
liposome bilayer-embedded palladium nanoparticles. For the investigation of the
influence of liposome encapsulation, various lipids are used to study the
effects of different phase transition temperatures. The molar ratio of lipids to
palladium (Pd) nanoparticles are varied to observe the influence of membrane
fluidity. Catalytic Pd nanoparticles with controlled core size and varying
capping ligand density and structure are used for isolating the effect of
surface ligands from other factors such as nanoparticle size, shape, and
morphology and liposome structure. Understanding the effects of the surface
composition and distribution of binary thiolate ligands adsorbed on Pd
nanoparticle catalyst surfaces may distinguish and control the electronic and
geometric contributions by the capping ligands. Ultimately, the findings are
applied to the development of optimized lipid-nanoparticle hybrid therapeutic
agents based on pro-drug activation and bioorthogonal enzymatic reaction. Dr.
Shon is actively engaged in STEM education by exposing undergraduate and
master's-level graduate students to the creative scientific research
investigations. He actively recruits women and minority students, traditionally
underrepresented groups in the STEM fields, to enhance the balanced advancement
of research and education. He is also expanding a high school student research
internship program in support of the broader impacts of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.