* 1954140
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track III: Partnerships Along the Headwaters of the Americas for Young Scientists Program
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jan Boll, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2024
* USD 300,592.00

Many towns and cities worldwide rely on water from glaciers, snowpack, and
groundwater in watersheds at high elevations, called headwaters. Water supplies
from these types of headwaters are predicted to shift with climate change. These
shifts threaten the viability of downstream communities that rely on these
changing water supplies for activities such as agriculture and energy
production. We need a diverse and globally engaged workforce to study these
changes in water resources. Focusing on Latin America, this Partnerships Along
the Headwaters of the Americas for Young Scientists Program trains graduate
students from across the United States to study these complex water management
problems so that we may ensure the viability of headwater-dependent communities
across the Americas into the future. This program will do this by providing
graduate students with research guidance and mentorship from established
scientists working across Latin America. The program will build synergies with
an existing NSF funded research coordination network (RCN), which has produced
an interdisciplinary team of collaborators from six countries and twelve
organizations stretching from Alberta, Canada to Patagonia, Chile.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will guide students to address
interdisciplinary, international and interorganizational water resources
challenges as they design their own research studies within diverse headwater-
dependent communities across Latin America. Pathways students and their mentors
will allow us to understand what strategies may best allow communities to
respond to changes in water availability. Study sites are located in Costa Rica,
Ecuador, Chile, Argentina, and Brazil. The research design process includes six
steps: (1) Preparation and planning; (2) A two week summer-school in Chile; (3)
An international research experience at one of the designated sites; (4)
Continued engagement and mentoring upon return to the US; (5) A culminating
event with oral, online presentations on the experiences; and (6) Continued
engagement in future RCN activities. The international research experience will
be two to four months in duration depending on the student’s timeline. From the
point of acceptance in the program through the culminating event, students will
be engaged in the Pathways Program for 18 months. By the end of this process,
this program will have produced water resources professionals with the
scientific and cultural know-how to work effectively in a variety of headwater
and communities. Through this program, these students will ultimately grow
research and outreach capacity at US institutions of higher education with the
scientific and cultural sophistication to work effectively in international
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the NSF Office
of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.