* 1954085
* Inner Functions, Spectra, and Scattering
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Alexei Poltoratski, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 220,000.00

This project focuses on applications of complex and harmonic analysis to
spectral problems for systems of differential equations. Systems of differential
equations allow researchers from various fields of science to model complicated
physical systems in mathematical terms. One of the canonical mathematical
problems concerning differential systems is the inverse spectral problem; the
problem of recovering the system from its spectral information. In this project,
we apply new methods of complex function theory and harmonic analysis to inverse
spectral problems. Our methods have applications in approximation theory,
prediction theory, signal processing and mathematical physics. Some of the
problems in this project belong to the area of Uncertainty Principle (UP) and
concern classical questions posed by such prominent mathematicians as Mark Krein
and Norbert Wiener. Our approach to the problems in this project is based on the
use of so-called Toeplitz operators. The next stage of the applications of the
Toeplitz approach to harmonic analysis and spectral theory is the main topic of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the proposed further applications of
the Toeplitz approach is an extension of the well-known Gelfand-Levitan theory
in the area of spectral problems for differential operators and connections
between Krein's canonical systems and the asymptotics of the Riemann zeta-
function. Successful completion of this step of the project will create a
systematic view of the large variety of problems of harmonic analysis and
spectral theory based on the new notion of Toeplitz order, presented in one of
PI's recent papers. The study of Toeplitz order is a continuation of the study
of the so-called Toeplitz approach to the UP developed in recent papers of
Nikolai Makarov (Caltech) and the PI. The next stage of the applications of the
Toeplitz approach contains several classical open problems of harmonic analysis
and spectral theory, including general completeness problems, spectral problems
for Schroedinger and Dirac operators and a Toeplitz operator version of the so-
called Krein - de Branges theory, which was designed to connect complex and
spectral analysis. The PI recently gave several mini-courses on the Toeplitz
approach in the US and at international research centers, including a course on
the Toeplitz order presented at a research program in Toulouse, France. All of
the courses were oriented towards early-career researchers and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.