* 1954426
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Separating Electronic and Geometric Effects in Compound Catalysts: Examining Unique Selectivities for Hydrogenolysis on Transition Metal Phosphides
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* David Hibbitts, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 246,125.00

The conversion of biomass, shale, and petroleum feedstocks into value-added
fuels and chemicals requires costly and rare metal catalysts to speed up the
chemical reactions. This design of less expensive and more earth abundant
catalysts is a major challenge to materials chemists and engineers. Combining
inexpensive elements with rare metals can reduce costs while maintaining or
improving catalyst performance. Previously, this strategy has been limited
because the dependence of the performance and stability on the structure and
composition of these catalysts was not understood. In this project, Dr. Hibbitts
(University of Florida), Dr. Flaherty (University of Illinois – Urbana-
Champaign), and Dr. Plaisance (Louisiana State University) are collaborating to
understand the fundamental behavior of metal catalysts with an initial focus on
metal phosphide materials. This understanding will guide the design of future
catalysts that provide targeted improvements in reaction rates and selectivities
of interest to the chemical industry. Drs. Hibbitts, Flaherty, and Plaisance
participate in outreach activities that excite and motivate students into
studying topics within STEM. Summer internships, mentor-mentee formations, and
interactive workshops are just some of the activities these faculty use at their
respective institutions to increase the size and diversity of the future
chemistry workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Division of Chemistry is enabling a multi-investigator
collaboration among Dr. Hibbitts (University of Florida), Dr. Flaherty
(University of Illinois – Urbana-Champaign), and Dr. Plaisance (Louisiana State
University). These researchers will develop a fundamental understanding of how
the electronic and geometric effects of P-atoms in transition metal phosphides
lead to regioselective rupture of C–O bonds in biomass-derived oxygenates.
Transition metal phosphides are stable, inexpensive, and productive catalysts
for hydrodeoxygenation because they selectively cleave sterically-hindered C–O
bonds that are difficult to activate with other metal catalysts. These C–O
rupture pathways produce value-added chemicals from biomass molecules. A broad
understanding of this class of materials and guiding structure-function
relationships do not currently exist but will be addressed in this project.
Where possible, synthesis and characterization of these materials will validate
density functional theory (DFT) predictions and
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.