* 1954380
* Monocoordinated carbon, boron and phosphorus species
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Guy Bertrand, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2023
* USD 510,000.00

Carbon is the building material upon which the elements of life (DNA, RNA, etc.)
are constructed. Carbon generally forms four chemical bonds. In this project
funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Guy Bertrand of the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department at the University of
California – San Diego (UCSD), seeks to prepare compounds that violate the four-
bond rule. The isolation of such new carbon species has been impeded by the
belief that they are inherently unstable. Professor Bertrand’s laboratory has
recently developed new methods to prepare compounds called carbenes, which
contain only two bonds to carbon. These methods are extended to carbynes,
compounds in which carbon contains only a one bond. The availability of these
species leads to better understanding of how chemical reactions of carbon take
place, which then permits control of the reactivity of carbon-containing
species. Ultimately, this research may help in the advanced manufacturing of
chemicals and materials as researchers may develop more selective approaches to
synthesis (fewer by-products). The Professor Bertran's laboratory collaborates
with the French Le Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). The
exchange of undergraduates and graduates between UCSD and CNRS-associated
universities enables the students to develop an international perspective on
chemical production and workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea
that monocoordinated carbon species may be isolable followed the discovery of
amino substituents that mitigated the intrinsic tendency of carbenes to undergo
dimerization and other reactions. Building on this idea, monocoordinated
aminocarbanions (R2NC), aminocarbynes (R2NC), aminocarbocations (R2NC+), which
feature six, five and four valence electrons, respectively, are prepared. Due to
the importance of low coordinate main group compounds, aminophosphinidenes
(R2NP) and aminoborylenes (R2NB), which are isoelectronic with the
monocoordinated aminocarbanions and aminocarbocations, respectively, are
synthesized. Some of the targeted species are non-isolable. Nonetheless, the
pursuit of these high risk, high reward leads to new methodologies for in situ
generated analogues. The fact that carbenes can simultaneously form two sigma
bonds and monocoordinated compounds may form three opens a new model of chemical
reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.