* 1954021
* Collaborative Research: Initiation, Propagation, and Termination: Understanding coupled hydrologic and glacier dynamic instabilities from the surge of Turner Glacier
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Timothy Bartholomaus, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 07/31/2024
* USD 671,486.00

Glaciers and ice sheets are rapidly shrinking, with implications for local water
resources, biogeochemical properties of streams, rivers, fjords, and oceans, and
global sea level rise. As air temperatures warm, melting water from glaciers can
be transported to the base of the glaciers where the ice meets the bedrock
below. The addition of this water has caused dramatic acceleration of ice flow
for some glaciers, small flow changes in others, and even deceleration for other
glaciers. Changes in ice flow can be dramatic and unstable, leading to rapid
glacier loss that cannot be predicted using current ice flow models. This
project aims to better understand the links between glacier hydrology and ice
flow by studying an event called a glacier surge during which the ice flow
increases dramatically for a period of a few years. The project will conduct an
integrated field, remote sensing, and modeling study of a glacier surge at
Turner Glacier in Southeast Alaska. The scientific insights gained here will
have broad applicability across glacier and ice sheet conditions in many parts
of the Arctic and Antarctic, reducing uncertainties in predictions of global
glacier loss in the coming decades. The project will strengthen the glacier
research programs at Idahoâ€™s two largest universities through interdisciplinary
inclusive research, outreach, and community building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will collect in-situ seismic, radar, geodetic, meteorological, and time-
lapse imagery of hydrologic and glacier dynamics instabilities occurring
throughout the upcoming surge of Turner Glacier. The team will combine in-situ
observations with satellite-derived glacier velocity, elevation, terminus
position, and subglacial plume data to map meltwater routing beneath the glacier
during the initiation, propagation, and termination of the surge. These data
will be paired with a state-of-the-art hydrologic numerical modeling to
investigate the evolution of the controls on the hydrologic and dynamic glacier
instabilities throughout the full surge. The unprecedented dataset, coupled with
modern models, will yield improved, process-based understanding of a
fundamental, 50-plus year-old, first-order question in glaciology: What controls
the initiation, propagation, and termination of glacier surges? Given that the
interplay between glacier hydrology, basal processes, and glacier flow remains
one of the most fundamental questions in glaciology, the results of this project
have broad societal impacts. Any insights into rapid instabilities in glacier
flow triggered by climate will considerably advance our predictive capabilities
of glacier change, and our ability to understand the impacts of ice mass loss on
the Earth system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.