* 1954587
* CHS: Medium: A Bi-directional Neural Interface for Bionic Prosthetic Legs
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* He Huang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,134,091.00

When individuals lose a lower limb, they rely on a prosthesis to restore their
basic mobility in daily living. But most modern robotic prosthetic legs operate
autonomously, without direct communication with the user, which limits the
functionality and versatility of these assistive devices. This project will
develop a novel bi-directional neural-machine interface that enables individuals
with lower limb amputations to operate and sense their prosthetic leg
intuitively and naturally. Project outcomes will have profound societal impact
by improving the mobility and stability, balance confidence, and overall quality
of life for the large community of individuals with lower limb amputation, while
alleviating phantom pain. In the longer term, the technology created by this
research may lead to a paradigm shift in the commercial development of medical
assistive devices other than prostheses. In addition, undergraduate and graduate
students in neural and rehabilitation engineering will be trained as members of
the research team, and K-12 students from underrepresented groups will be
engaged through educational and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop a novel non-invasive and bi-directional neural-machine
interface (NMI) for a bionic prosthetic ankle that enables seamless integration
of robotic prostheses and their users for improved mobility and stability. The
project will encompass three main thrusts: investigation of high-density
transcutaneous nerve stimulation and new encoding algorithms for evoking the
illusion of sensation in an amputated foot (a sensory interface); development of
novel EMG decoding algorithms based on machine learning and neurophysiological
modeling approaches for continuous neural control of a prosthetic ankle (a motor
interface); and design and fabrication of a bidirectional NMI that combines both
of the aforementioned sensory and motor interfaces to achieve embodied
integration of a prosthetic ankle within the user. The NMI prototype will be
validated on individuals with transtibial amputations when performing various
activities common in daily living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.