* 1954372
* CHS: Medium: Behavior360: Learning a Human Behaviorome in Uncontrolled Settings
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hassan Zadeh, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,155,043.00

With the maturing of mobile sensing, computing, and machine learning, scientists
can now build intelligent tools to better understand human behavior by analyzing
data from commercial, wearable sensors (such as smartwatches). The goal of this
project is to design, build, and evaluate novel algorithms that continuously
sense, model, analyze, and interpret human behavior from smartwatch sensor data
collected continuously in the wild. Machine learning methods will be designed to
infer behavior patterns from collected data as well as generate explanations of
behavior patterns that can be easily interpreted by humans with diverse
backgrounds. The computational methods will be evaluated using historical data
as well as new data collected in free-living environments. The relationship
between health and behavior will be explored by using machine learning to derive
clinical health scores from collected and modeled sensor data. The research will
involve students from diverse disciplinary and demographic backgrounds through
involvement in summer research programs and capstone
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals of this project are divided
into three aims. First, because continuous behavior sensing requires resources
that exceed the power capacity of current smartwatches, the investigators will
design algorithms that optimize the trade-off between predictive performance and
power consumption. Second, the investigators will create robust behavior models
that combine sparse label information with sensor data to automatically
construct a vocabulary of human behavior, and employ domain adaptation to
generalize models across people, times, and behavior types. Third, the
investigators will create machine learning methods to produce accurate and
interpretable clinical health scores from behavior data with automatically-
generated text explanations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.