* 1954315
* 2020 Solid State Chemistry Gordon Research Conference: Functional Inorganic Materials - Exploratory Synthesis, Advanced Characterization, and Computational Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* P.Shiv Halasyamani, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2023
* USD 27,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The 2020 Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) entitled Functional Inorganic
Materials - Exploratory Synthesis, Advanced Characterization, and Computational
Methods, is funded in-part by the several program in NSF's Division of Materials
Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. It will be held at
Colby-Sawyer College in New London, New Hampshire, beginning with the GRS on
July 25-26, immediately followed by the GRC that runs from July 26-31, 2020. The
cultivation of innovative approaches to address the most pressing challenges
currently faced is enhanced by the inclusive and collegial nature of the GRC, as
well as the emphasis on sharing unpublished data. A mixture of students, post-
doctoral associates, and early career scientists interact along side with
distinguished veteran scientists to discuss new and exciting scientific
directions. Through these interactions the expertise of scientists with decades
of experience inspires and educates future leaders. The GRC is specifically
structured to promote the exchange of ideas and creating collaborations between
researchers from academics, government laboratories, and industry. The GRS that
immediately precedes the GRC, is a meeting solely for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, which promotes an environment to introduce new graduate
students into a conference atmosphere. This allows all students and fellows to
present their work in a low stress environment, and it promotes networking among
peers. The organizers are committed to a meeting that promotes diversity, with
particular attention placed on encouraging participation of women,
underrepresented minorities, and people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid state chemistry has played an essential
role in the design, discovery, and optimization of new functional inorganic
materials to meet every-growing societal demands for smaller, faster, cleaner,
and more sustainable technologies. The road from exploratory synthesis to the
commercial application is complex and inherently a multidisciplinary path. The
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Solid State Chemistry is a unique meeting
that brings together a diverse group of scientists investigating solid state
materials and their applications. Researchers in this field are interested in
the discovery of new materials, their structure-property relationships, and
ultimately the use of these materials in technological applications. The 2020
conference focuses on functional inorganic materials - their synthesis,
characterization, and computational methods. Sessions cover the science of
synthesis, advanced characterization techniques, and diverse approaches to
materials chemistry. Other sessions focus on materials and technologies where
solid state chemistry is essential, such as energy conversion and storage,
magnetism, and electronics. Researchers from academia, national laboratories,
and industry provide a broad perspective that seeks to strengthen the links
between fundamental studies and applications. Speakers and poster presenters are
explicitly encouraged to emphasize advances and discuss unpublished results,
while sharing new ideas on synthesis, characterization, computation, and theory.
The organizers strongly encourage active contribution to discussions and
participation in poster sessions that offer an excellent opportunity for
presenting and learning about new and exciting
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.