* 1954868
* CAS: Forming Transition Metal Hydride Complexes via Excited-State Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jillian Dempsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2024
* USD 465,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jillian Dempsey of the Department
of Chemistry at University of North Carolina (UNC) is studying pathways by which
light capture and proton/electron reactivity can be directly integrated in
coordination complexes. The goal of this research is to establish new photon-
driven pathways for the formation of transition metal hydride complexes.
Transition metal hydride complexes are key intermediates in many catalytic
processes that drive the formation of fuels and commodity chemicals and thus
developing approaches to promote their formation with solar photons will help
improve sustainability in energy intensive catalytic reactions. The proposed
research activities will help develop a globally competitive STEM workforce by
providing students with training in synthesis, electrochemistry, spectroscopy,
and effective science communication. Complementary activities will take a multi-
faceted approach to increase diversity in science and enhance training of
scientists. Interactive table-top activities deployed at the UNC Science Expo
and local schools will introduce Kâ€“12 students to the science of renewable
energy. Professor Dempsey co-leads the Chemistry Women Mentorship Network, which
matches graduate student and postdoc women interested in academic careers with
extramural faculty mentors and provides resources needed to support successful
mentoring relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of coordination
complexes capable of undergoing proton-coupled electron transfer in their
excited states promises to reveal new photon-driven pathways to metal hydride
complexes. However, little is fundamentally known about how to directly
integrate light capture and proton electron reactivity in coordination
complexes, especially to yield transition metal hydride complexes. This work
will carry out systematic studies to address this gap in knowledge and
subsequently to apply an enhanced understanding to establish unprecedented
excited-state reactivity of coordination complexes. Specifically, this research
will 1) Provide a deeper understanding of excited-state electronic structures
that support proton-coupled electron transfer reactions and 2) Demonstrate that
coordination complexes can undergo a proton-coupled electron transfer reaction
in their electronic excited state to form a metal hydride complex. Ultimately,
demonstration that metal hydride complexes can be formed via excited-state
proton-coupled electron transfer will establish a new paradigm for light-driven
fuel and chemical production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.