* 1954336
* New Directions for Redox-Active Ligands: Ratiometric Sensors for H2O2 with 19F and 1H MRI Outputs and Functional Mimics of Superoxide Dismutase with Non-Enzymatic Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Christian Goldsmith, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

The overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) has been linked to a wide
array of health conditions, including many cardiovascular, neurological, and
inflammatory disorders. Currently, it is difficult to assess the concentrations
of ROS in vivo. The lack of reliable imaging techniques makes it difficult to
understand the roles of ROS in the human body. A pattern of oxidative stress may
be used to distinguish disorders that give rise to similar clinically observable
symptoms, and the ability to detect ROS overproduction in vivo could potentially
diagnose these conditions more quickly and accurately. In this project funded by
the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B Program of the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Christian R. Goldsmith of Auburn University is developing small
molecule sensors for the ROS hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) that gives rise to two
distinct magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) signals before and after their
reaction with H2O2. By comparing the signals, one may be able to directly assess
the concentration of H2O2 in a particular region of the body. Dr. Goldsmith is
also interested in observing how antioxidants interact with ROS. Dr. Goldsmith
is also engaged in outreach activities that heighten the involvement of
undergraduate students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). These activities include giving research talks at local colleges and
providing summer research internships in Dr. Goldsmith’s laboratory. These
activities are designed to improve both undergraduate science education in the
East Alabama area and the diversity of the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Christian R. Goldsmith is developing new
transition metal complexes that can detect and degrade reactive oxygen species
(ROS). The research produces redox-responsive contrast agents for magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and functional mimics of superoxide dismutase (SOD)
enzymes. The new MRI contrast agents are iron complexes with fluorinated redox-
active quinol-containing ligands. In their reduced Fe(II)-quinol forms, these
give rise to weak H-1 and strong F-19 MRI signals. After oxidation by H2O2, the
Fe(III)-para-quinone products display weak F-19 MRI but strong H-1 signals, with
the enhancement in H-1 MRI deriving from the increased paramagnetism and higher
aquation of the metal center. The contrast agents are therefore bimodal
ratiometric sensors for H2O2. The superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimics consist of
quinol-containing ligands coordinated to redox-inactive transition metal ions,
specifically Zn(II) and Ga(III). These complexes use the quinol/para-quinone
redox couple to alternatively reduce and oxidize superoxide and bypass the need
for a potentially harmful redox-active transition metal ion. New quinol-
containing ligands increase the catalytic activity by enabling superoxide to
more readily access the metal center. Given the involvement of ROS in disease,
these complexes may lead to improved diagnostic options for several health
conditions. The project’s reliance on inorganic chemistry, organic chemistry,
and biochemistry teach undergraduate and graduate students a broad array of
skills. Dr. Goldsmith’s laboratory are also presenting research seminars at
primarily undergraduate institutions in the East Alabama area and enable their
students to participate in cutting-edge scientific research by providing two
summer internships per year of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.