* 1954427
* Building Capacity in STEM Education Research via the POGIL Community
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Richard Moog, The POGIL Project
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 99,881.00

This project aims to promote discipline-based education research (DBER) within
the Process-oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL) community of practitioners.
Specifically, the project team will host a workshop for early- and mid-career
POGIL practitioners led by a team of five DBER scholars. The goal of this event
is to introduce current POGIL practitioners to the knowledge and skills involved
in design, implementation, and methodology of STEM education research. The
participants will be placed into teams of four based on their research
interests. Over the following year, the teams will be supported to develop and
implement a DBER project related to the POGIL approach. This support will
include regular virtual meetings where one of the DBER scholars will serve as
mentor. A final follow-up meeting will be held at the end of the year to assess
progress and plan for future work. The participants’ extensive experience with
students and POGIL learning environments will provide a rich base of practice
from which to develop and investigate meaningful research questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to be transformative for
the sixteen veteran POGIL practitioners who will participate, positioning them
to be new contributors of high-quality STEM education research. The results of
their research will provide new evidence about the impact of the POGIL pedagogy
on student outcomes, learning of diverse and at-risk student populations, and
instructors’ teaching skills. The project is designed to develop a large
research team that can explore POGIL pedagogy in multifaceted ways, thus
addressing a challenge posed in the NRC’s 2012 Discipline-Based Education
Research report. This project will also examine the impact of each component of
the conference model, including involvement of people with existing community
membership, conference session content and process, continued mentoring, and
team structure. This project may help integrate the large POGIL community of
practitioners more strongly with the DBER research community, thus enhancing the
opportunities for research to inform STEM pedagogy and for STEM pedagogy to
inform research. This project is supported by the ECR: Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research competition of the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. ECR funds
STEM education research projects that are focused on STEM learning and learning
environment, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM professional
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.