* 1954745
* Exploratory Synthesis and Reactivity of Volatile Transition Metal Complexes and Use as Molecular Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Gregory Girolami, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2024
* USD 495,000.00

Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a method to produce high quality, high-
performance solid materials. For example, CVD is used by the semiconductor
industry to form thin films of a variety of substances that are necessary for
the functioning of many electronic devices. Since there is pervasive need for
new types of films, there is a continuing demand for new compounds that can be
used in CVD. To meet this need, Professor Gregory S. Girolami of the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program
of the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation to develop new
compounds that can be used to form films of metals and metal oxides. Metal
compounds that become vapors when heated are prepared and their decomposition on
heated surfaces evaluated. The goal is to design better ways to deposit the
wires and insulators that are components of computer chips. The work involves
cooperation between Professor Girolamiâ€™s research group and microelectronic
companies, IBM and Intel. The project contributes to the education and training
of a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students. In addition Professor
Girolami writes short radio spots (TinyTech) highlighting recent scientific
advances of interest to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new
and better molecular precursors for the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of thin
films is a continuing need. This project prepares new volatile compounds of the
transition metals, investigates their chemical reactivities, and utilities them
as thin film precursors. Some of the objectives are the synthesis and
characterization of complexes containing coordinating groups that bind to metals
through oxygen, nitrogen, or boron-hydrogen bonds. Upon their synthesis, the new
compounds are evaluated for the CVD preparations of thin films. A diverse group
of undergraduate and graduate students are involved in the project that lies at
the interface of inorganic and materials chemistry. Outreach activities
involving the production and broadcast of TinyTech radio
spots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.