* 1954894
* First-Principles Simulation of Quantized Charge Transport in Extended Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yosuke Kanai, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 09/30/2023
* USD 497,418.00

Professor Yosuke Kanai of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
Program of the Division of Chemistry and the Condensed Matter and Materials
Theory Program of the Division of Materials Research to study the electron
transport in extended chemical systems. His research advances computational
methodologies and simulates electron motion using of a large number of
processors (or separate computers) to perform a set of coordinated computations
in parallel (simultaneously) - this is called massively parallel computing. They
are using this technique to study microscopic details of how electrons move in
materials i.e., how materials carry electrical current. This research may enable
modern electronics to continue to decrease in size, while increasing in speed
and complexity. A new class of materials called topological materials represents
a great opportunity to improve electronics if scientists can exploit their
unique electrical conductivity properties. Current scientific understanding of
how chemical features in topological insulators control the unique electron
transport behavior is largely lacking. By developing novel computational
methods, new simulations will enable a microscopic understanding of how electron
transport properties are governed at the molecular scale. The research
activities will also promote science education at the undergraduate level for
underrepresented minority students with interests in computational sciences,
Professor Kanai engages students through summer hands-on workshops where the
students build a parallel computer and learn about both hardware and software
development. The student will be taught to perform electronic structure
calculations and program simple code on the computers they
build.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large-scale, real-time time-dependent density
functional theory (TDDFT) method is formulated in the maximally-localized
Wannier function (MLWF) gauge. It is used to develop a fundamental understanding
of quantized charge transport in extended systems at the molecular level.
Topological Floquet theory is studied beyond the typical adiabatic evolution
limit by simulating quantum-mechanical electron dynamics in real chemical
systems. In particular, the quantized charge transport behavior is investigated
and how chemical moieties can potentially be used to control the quantized
transport is studied. The work further explores the novel concept of optically
gated transistors that exhibits quantized conductance. Improving the real-time
TDDFT code by incorporating advanced exchange-correlation approximations via
time-dependent MLWFs is an important aspect of this investigation. Professor
Kanai also provides hands-on tutorials on TDDFT methodologies at
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.