* 1954973
* Acquisition of a high-field variable-temperature SQUID magnetometer
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Dario Bilardello, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 436,154.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program grant
supports acquisition of a high field, variable temperature Magnetic Properties
Measurement System that will be housed within the Institute for Rock Magnetism
(IRM) at the University of Minnesota. The instrument will support studies of the
magnetic properties and behavior of geologic materials over a wide range of
temperatures and in variable applied fields with application to study of plate
tectonics and reconstructing Earthâ€™s pre-historic climate and environmental
conditions. The instrumentation will support hands-on student training in
methods of natural material magnetic analysis and have broad impact for U.S.
academic research in rock and paleomagnetism given its incorporation within an
existing NSF supported community facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetic
properties and behavior of geologic materials at low temperatures and in
variable applied fields are of fundamental importance in rock magnetism and
paleomagnetism: they offer unique insights into the carriers and origins of
natural remanence, and thus into important related geophysical phenomena ranging
from core evolution to lithospheric dynamics. Acquisition of a highly sensitive
superconducting quantum interference device based magnetometer in which samples
can be subjected to high magnetic field (up to 7-Tesla) and a wide range of
temperatures (from 1.8 to 1000 K) will add a new capability at the University of
Minnesota Institute for Rock Magnetism. Given broad geoscience community access
to the instrument through the IRM, a range of fundamental Earth materials
research will be supported including studies of the fundamental physical
behavior of magnetic minerals that provides information on the mixtures of
magnetic minerals and distributions of particle sizes in natural bulk samples
with applications in paleoenvironmental research and in characterization of
paleomagnetic remanence carriers. Research on deep Earth processes, lithospheric
dynamics, iron cycling in the environment, biogeomagnetism and planetary science
will benefit from this acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.