* 1954386
* I-Corps: A Lead Candidate for the Treatment of L-DOPA Induced Dyskinesia and Drug Addiction and Overdose
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Victor Hruby, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to help a
number of conditions, such as neurological disorders in the elderly and opioid
addiction, by providing a potential drug candidate with new chemical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a discovery of a drug
candidate for the treatment of L-DOPA Induced Dyskinesia (LID), and Drug
Addiction and Overdose (DAO). A new series of ligands with agonist/antagonist
activities on opioid receptors and alpha adrenoceptor showed promising in vitro
test results (binding affinity, microsomal metabolic stability assay, cytochrome
P450 inhibition, hERG channel inhibition &amp; induction, MDR1-MDCK
permeability, AMES test, hepatocyte stability, caco-2 permeability, and plasma
protein/brain tissue binding RED) and proved to be a potential drug candidate
for the treatment of disorders, LID and DAO, where the opioid receptors and
alpha adrenoceptor play biological roles. Animal tests studying the effect of
HCV-3 on animal models of LID yielded promising results. It is believed that
this technology is a solution for the treatment of LID and
DAO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.