* 1954091
* Stochastic Partial Differential Equations, Gauge Theories, and Scaling Limits
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Hao Shen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 198,459.00

A core problem of probability is to extract important laws and information from
complex and large random systems. Such random systems may be stocks with
fluctuating prices in financial markets, cancer cells generated by random
mutations in biological tissues, a large number of sub-atomic quantum
interaction particles, or how diseases randomly spread among people. This
project focuses on two types of models: motion of a large number of elementary
particles under the interaction of random quantum fields, and the growth of
polymers under random interference environments. Due to the generality of
mathematical models, the research results of these two types of models will also
be of great help in studying other systems, such as systems in materials
science, finance, and biology. The main mathematical tool to be used is called
stochastic partial differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the theory of stochastic partial differential equations will be
used to study stochastic quantization of gauge theories, which are fundamental
models in elementary particle physics. The PI will prove well-posedness of such
singular equations, show that the solutions have infinite dimensional gauge
symmetries, and expand the scope of regularity structure theory. The PI will
also study stochastic partial differential equation scaling limits of discrete
probabilistic models from statistical physics, such as directed polymers in an
environment of interacting particle systems. This will allow to demonstrate
universality of these stochastic partial differential equations. The main
methods and techniques are the new theory of stochastic partial differential
equations such as regularity structures, and their discrete versions. The study
brings together tools from different areas, such as stochastic analysis, partial
differential equations, quantum field theory, and statistical
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.