* 1954639
* Developing the Multilayer Multiconfiguration Time-dependent Hartree Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Haobin Wang, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 435,000.00

Haobin Wang of University of Colorado Denver is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop a computer simulation method called multilayer
multiconfiguration time-dependent Hartree (ML-MCTDH) theory for studying quantum
dynamics in chemical systems. Here, quantum dynamics deals with the motions,
energy, and momentum exchanges of chemical systems that are governed by the laws
of quantum mechanics. Quantum dynamics is relevant to quantum computing and
atomic optics. Professor Wang is developing ML-MCTDH as an advanced numerical
tool for reducing the huge parameter space in large chemistry and physics
problems to a manageable level using a combination of physical modeling,
mathematical reformulation, and computer software engineering. ML-MCTDH is among
the most mature and efficient contraction schemes for studying ultrafast motions
in complex systems. In some strongly systems, ML-MCTDH is the only known
approach that can provide reliable results for quantitative predictions and
analysis. The problems studied here can also offer a fundamental understanding
of photochemical processes and the design of chiral molecules. Haobin Wang’s
research also has a broader impact associated with science, technology, software
engineering, and mathematics education used in pharmaceuticals (and other
applications). Professor Wang is training graduate and undergraduate students
and providing research experiences for high school STEM teachers and students.
The numerical techniques and software developed in this project have potential
application to a broad array of applied problems, such a numerical solution of
differential equations, numerical linear algebra, and parallel
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to further
develop the powerful tensor contraction scheme, the multilayer
multiconfiguration time-dependent Hartree (ML-MCTDH) theory, for studying
complex molecular systems in more difficult physical regimes. Along this line,
Haobin Wang is developing techniques to solve pressing technical difficulties to
make ML-MCTDH amendable to very demanding problems: appropriate regularization
of the equations of motion and effective ways for choosing proper tree
structures in ML-MCTDH simulations. He is extending ML-MCTDH from simulating
wave functions to corresponding density matrices or equivalent wave functions in
a fictitious dual Hilbert space. The key to this possibility is to iteratively
or recursively implement ML-MCTDH with many more layers than before, which would
not be possible without solving the technical difficulties addressed in this
research. In addition, Haobin Wang is generalizing ML-MCTDH to handle other
classes of problems that require effective contraction of high-rank tensors. He
is employing the ML-MCTDH methodology to simulate hierarchy equations of motion
(HEOM) that aim at significantly pushing its limit. Variational principle will
be applied to derive the working equations by mapping the HEOM dynamics onto a
non-Hermitian Hamiltonian operator, which can then simulate quantum dynamics for
open systems. The development and practical implementation of ML-MCTDH will make
it applicable to truly challenging problems. The examples can also offer a
fundamental understanding of the relevant photochemical processes, which can
help control specific reactions as well as design new materials for
enantioselective phase transfer of chiral molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.