* 1954865
* Modeling Polymer-Coated Nanopores in Nature and Nanotechnology
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Rob Coalson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Rob Coalson of the University of Pittsburgh is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to carry out computational modeling of polymer-coated nanopores in
nature and nanotechnology. The primary inspiration for this work is the Nuclear
Pore Complex (NPC), a large protein complex that perforates the nuclear envelope
in eukaryotic cells and serves as the sole conduit of small and large
biomolecules into and out of the cell nucleus. The NPC is comprised of natively
unfolded protein filaments (nucleoporins) which extend from the pore wall into
its center. These filaments form a tight barrier to the transport of random
biomolecules through the pore. Hydrophobic (water-hating) segments on the
nucleoporins bind transiently to hydrophobic groves on certain globular receptor
proteins (Nuclear Transport Factors [NTFs]). These NTFs can simultaneously bind
cargo molecules earmarked for flow into or out of the nucleus. Upon binding to
the NTFs, cargos are ferried through the NPC pore due to the interactions
between the NTFs and the nucleoporin chains that line the pore. The Coalson
group seeks to clarify critical details of the transport process using coarse-
grained computer models, which are appropriate due to the imposing size and
scale of the NPC. At the same time, the efficiency of the NPCâ€™s operation in
vivo inspires the construction of synthetic polymer-coated nanopores that
function as molecular sieves, based on the size and chemical composition of the
molecules filtered through them. The Coalson group will pursue these
applications as well. Defects in Nuclear Pore Complexes result in serious
maladies, including cancer and numerous infectious&lt;br/&gt;diseases. The
relevance of NPC nanopores to human physiology suggests that this research may
ultimately contribute to improvement of human health, e.g., via the development
of pharmaceutical agents that correct for their malfunction. Within the research
group, biological nanopore research is carried out synergistically with teaching
and outreach activities, which include running an intramural (University of
Pittsburgh) seminar series on Biophysical Theory, and creation and
implementation of NSF-funded Summer Institutes focused on computational biology
for undergraduate and graduate students. These efforts contribute to education
in biological nanopore science and, more generally, molecular biophysics, over a
wide range of career stages and pathways: from undergraduates to senior
researchers (natural scientists, engineers and medical doctors). In addition,
the research on synthetic nano-devices, such as polymer coated nanopores, has
implications for nano-technology and nano-medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Coalson group elucidates nanopore structure-function relations by developing
novel physico-chemically grounded coarse-grained simulation models combined with
creative statistical mechanical analysis that includes Flory-Huggins models and
self-consistent field theory approximations. These tools enable the study of
larger systems and longer time scales than can be accessed by all-atom Molecular
Dynamics simulations, namely, mesoscopic scales where the collective behavior of
many large molecules impacts the pore's ability to select molecular cargos to
pass through it. Details of the NPC structure and transport mechanism inspire
the construction of synthetic nanoscale motifs in which (non-biological) polymer
molecules are grafted to the inside of a cylindrical scaffold, and then polymer
collapse transitions are exploited to open and close these nanovalves, thus
enabling them to be used for size-selective sieving of analyte molecules.
Polymer morphology changes can be controlled by the infiltration of specialized
nanoparticles, which are introduced into solution in appropriate amounts. In a
similar vein, the Coalson group designs polymer-coated nanoballs (e.g.,
spherical colloid particles) that stick preferentially to specific surfaces
within the relevant flow space (e.g., a biological cell). The ultimate goal here
is to develop nanoscopic directed delivery devices, with appropriate payload
molecules being contained within the nanoball.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.