* 1954443
* 2019 MRS Fall Meeting: Symposium EN14 - Thermoelectric Energy Conversion (TEC) - Complex Materials and Novel Theoretical Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Alexandra Zevalkink, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 3,000.00

Non-technical summary: The study of thermoelectric materials - which enable the
solid-state conversion of thermal energy into electrical energy - has grown
immensely in the past decade. What was once a niche research area has
transformed into diverse field spanning condensed matter physics, materials
science and engineering and solid-state chemistry. The complexity of the topic
(fundamentally, the study of electronic and thermal transport in a broadly
defined group of materials) means that it is difficult to be fluent in all
aspects of the field. For this reason, researchers benefit from the annual Fall
Materials Research Society (MRS) Meeting, which brings together a large number
of participants with diverse expertise. The symposium "Thermoelectric Energy
Conversion: Complex Materials and Novel Theoretical Methods" at the 2019 MRS
Meeting in Boston, MA attracts experts in design, synthesis, characterization
and modeling of complex thermoelectric materials. The three-day session includes
48 oral presentations, 18 of which are invited, and 54 poster presentations from
a diverse group of presenters. This symposium provides an ideal platform for
investigators from varied backgrounds to exchange recently-gained knowledge and
engage in new collaborations related to thermoelectric materials, enabling
progress towards the ultimate goal of efficient waste-energy recovery. Partial
support by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research facilitates participation of students, postdoctoral
researchers and junior faculty in this symposium.

Technical summary: This 2019 Fall MRS symposium highlights fundamental research
in the field of thermoelectric materials by focusing on two complementary
approaches for the development of new thermoelectric materials: (a) experimental
studies focused on the discovery, synthesis and understanding of materials with
complexity on the atomic and microstructural levels, and (b) development of
novel theoretical methods to predict such materials and structures and their
implementation. Part (a) emphasizes recent progress in experimental studies of
materials including but not limited to: (i) novel ternary and quaternary
materials from inorganic material classes such as chalcogenides, pnictides,
oxides, (ii) alloys including high entropy alloys, and (iii) multiphase and
multinary composites with hierarchical microstructures. As realizing high
performance thermoelectric materials requires a careful balance between various
transport quantities, complexity in compositions could offer a pathway to
solving this problem. Part (b) highlights new approaches to material discovery
and modeling, for example, by using new high-throughput strategies and a-priori
predictions of electronic and thermal transport properties. Partial support by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research facilitates participation of students, postdoctoral researchers and
junior faculty in this symposium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.