* 1954455
* Soliton Dynamics for Non-Linear Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Andrew Lawrie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 248,999.00

The natural world is governed by wave equations: the electricity on a circuit
board, the light in fiber optic cables, and even the black hole in the center of
the galaxy all propagate by wave dynamics. Though ubiquitous, wave-type
equations are far from well understood. The goal of this project is to
understand how waves are affected by interference with themselves or with their
environment. The research seeks to learn when and why some waves disperse, other
waves persist, and still others collapse. Knowing how waves behave drives
technological progress - smaller microchips, faster data transmission, and
deeper insights into the formation of the universe. The project provides
research training opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will study nonlinear wave equations that admit topological
solitons, which are used to model the physical phenomena described above.
Technically, these are coherent solitary waves with a nontrivial topological
invariant. Canonical examples include kinks in scalar field theories, harmonic
maps as stationary wave maps, vortices in gauged Ginzburg-Landau theory,
magnetic monopoles, Skyrmions, and Yang-Mills instantons. The goal is to
understand how topological solitons influence the dynamics, and to resolve two
long-standing, open questions. First, the investigator will try to prove that
nonlinear waves can be uniquely continued past a singularity that develops in
finite time by concentrating energy (bubbling) in a soliton. Second, the
investigator seeks to show that multi-soliton collisions are necessarily
inelastic for non-integrable wave equations such as the phi-4 scalar field model
and the wave maps equation. Crucial parts of this program are existence and
uniqueness proofs of solutions exhibiting finite time bubbling and global-in-
time multi-soliton dynamics. The techniques the investigator is developing to
address these problems will be useful in other related
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.