* 1954122
* Functionalizing Polyaromatic Materials with Boranes and Borenium Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2023
* USD 495,000.00

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are large, planar molecules through
which electrons can easily flow. They have found widespread use in organic
electronics, as chemical sensors, in catalysis, and in bioimaging. In addition,
some PAHs can provide an unusual type of oxygen, called singlet oxygen, for
applications in photodynamic therapy, lithography, fluorescent anti-
counterfeiting methodologies, and switches. The properties of PAHs can be
manipulated by attaching various chemical groups to the periphery of these large
molecules. The discovery of new groups for such attachment is important to
improving the performance of PAHs in their many applications. Professor Frieder
Jaekle, Chemistry Department, Rutgers University â€“ Newark, is supported by the
Chemical Synthesis Program to prepare PAHs that contain attached boron-nitrogen
groups. The judicious choice of the site of the boron-nitrogen unit allows for
the fine-tuning of electronic properties, which are utilized to maximize
responses to physiological or environmental changes. These PAHs are integrated
into polymers to improve their durability and are developed for applications
ranging from electronic components to molecular switches. Additionally, the
project contributes to the training of a diverse group of students in an
interdisciplinary research environment at the interface of organic, inorganic
and materials chemistry. Dr. Jaekle will organize outreach programs that allow
students and their teachers from local high schools to experience research
first-hand and to lear about career opportunities in STEM fields. The research
group recruits high school summer students through that ACS Project SEED which
is aimed at supporting socio-economically disadvantaged students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and
related pi-conjugated polyaromatic species are functionalized with B-N Lewis
pairs for applications in areas ranging from organic electronics to molecular
switches. One direction focuses on the site-specific introduction of functional
handles that allow for the fine-tuning of the optoelectronic properties. Through
the judicious choice of functionalization, the steric strain and the ensuing
contortions are systematically varied. At the limits of distortion, closed and
open structures may coexist, giving rise to stimuli-responsive properties.
Borenium ion formation is exploited to generate highly electron-deficient
charged systems that undergo reduction to extensively delocalized neutral
species at moderate potentials. The integration of these functional PAHs into
polymeric systems and their attachment to quantum dots is pursued. The research
is complemented by efforts to encourage participation of students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.