* 1954751
* CAS: Base Metal Catalysts for Carbon Dioxide Hydrogenation and Carbon-Carbon Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Connie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 440,000.00

This project is led by Professor Connie Lu of the University of Minnesota and is
funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry Division. The main
goal of this project is to convert carbon dioxide, a gas found in volcanoes, hot
springs and geysers, as well as in deposits of petroleum and natural gas, into
fuels. Professor Lu is testing new catalysts for this chemical conversion. The
catalysts used in this research are formed from pairs of metals. Notably, some
pairs, such as iron and aluminium, are promising candidates to accelerate the
desired reactions, while other pairs are less active. The Lu team focuses on
determining the structures of the active pairs. This research develops the
foundations for the design of future catalysts and renewable fuels. Students
gain international experience and exposure to US National Laboratories through
short research stays at the Max Planck Institute in Germany and the Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory, as well as site visits to Argonne and Oak Ridge
National Laboratory. These enriching opportunities build a stronger, more
experienced US workforce. Professor Lu and her team volunteer in the student-led
program, SciMentors, which helps underserved adult learners pass the GED exam
through tutoring and hands-on science experiments. This project contributes to
scientific literacy and addresses economic competitiveness of the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in catalyst design increasingly focus on the
use of base metals because of their low cost and low environmental footprint.
Funded by NSF's Chemical Catalysis Program, Professor Connie Lu of the
University of Minnesota is investigating Lewis acidic sigma-acceptor
metalloligands to enable new modes of reactivity at a base metal by leveraging
the M→LA bonding interaction between the base metal (M) and the Lewis acid (LA).
Recently, M−LA complexes have emerged as an important class of bifunctional
catalysts, where the LA has predominantly been a main group ion. For this
project, Professor Lu and her team are targeting M-LA catalysts centered on base
metals (Fe, Co, and Ni) and lanthanide ions to achieve the hydrogenation of CO2
to formate, and ultimately, to methanol. The team also aims to expand the
catalytic scope of these bifunctional complexes by targeting C-C bond formation
processes that leverage the unique cooperativity of the M-LA active
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.