* 1954166
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track III: Bioinspired Autonomy in Natural Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Teddy Ivanitzki, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/29/2024
* USD 162,672.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project develops and
implements a new model for transdisciplinary, international education in the
area of bio-inspired engineering, potentially adaptable to other fields. IRES
scholars under this program study autonomous mobility in complex natural
environments based on flying/gliding rainforest animals with the help of an
interdisciplinary mentor network located in Korea, Singapore, and Brunei. Each
year, 10 graduate students (i.e., 30 over the entire project period) are
recruited through broad advertising and a pool of 10+ feeder universities to
ensure the IRES program can be integrated into the scholars' thesis research. A
13-week IRES summer program starts with an orientation week at the VT campus
followed by a modular sequence of a setup period with an engineering mentor at
either Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) or the
National University of Singapore (NUS), a biology immersion in Borneo at the
University of Brunei (UBD), and finally a data analysis/engineering integration
module at KAIST or NUS. The proposed program will aid the development of a U.S.
workforce with engineers who have the transdisciplinary and intercultural skills
to pull together expertise and natural resources from around the world to solve
complex, transdisciplinary problems. Targeted minority recruitment and a
detailed dissemination plan will ensure that the project has a wide impact on a
diverse talent pool. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES program implements a novel
paradigm to bring international research experiences in STEM in line with the
need of solving transdisciplinary challenges through global collaboration and
the trend towards personalized learning. To achieve this, the paradigm
introduces the following key elements to international research experiences and
combines them in a novel manner: (i) focus on research and research-related
professional development experiences that are well integrated into the IRES
scholars' thesis research , (ii) leveraging a combination of natural and
academic resources in a variety of sociocultural settings, (iii) mentor network
offering students the opportunity to work with multiple mentors selected
according to their needs at the different program stages, (iv) modular
customizable approach to paths and schedules for individualized research
experiences, (v) pervasive use of a social media many-to-many communication
model to ensure coherence within each student cohort and its scientific and
social communities, and (vi) constant engagement of students and mentors with
the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) to accomplish the
professional development goals. The ASEE PI will make sure that all involved
faculty (U.S. and international) and students are aware of the professional
development opportunities and challenges of the program and receive sound advice
how to make best use of the provided opportunities and how to deal with the
challenges. Through this project, achieving the scientific goal of autonomy in
complex natural environments will have a transformative impact on societal
challenges related to environmental monitoring and clean-up, precision
agriculture and forestry, and novel forms of autonomous
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.