* 1954449
* Self-Coordination of Dyneins during Ciliary Beating
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Ahmet Yildiz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 05/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

The goal of this project is to elucidate the molecular mechanism of self-
coordinated oscillations of motile cilia. Motile cilia are whip-like structures
that protrude like bristles from the cell surface and generate a periodic
beating waveform. Ciliary beating powers the swimming of sperm and many small
organisms. Ciliary beating also generates fluid flow in the intestines and
lungs, and mediates cell signaling. The core structural component of a cilium is
the axoneme, which has a ring of nine outer microtubule doublets surrounding two
central microtubules. A detailed investigation of the mechanism that powers
self-coordinated ciliary beating will significantly contribute to our
understanding of how ciliary malfunction is linked to a group of defects known
as ciliopathies. The Broader Impacts of this Project will also help establish
educational outreach programs for high school students from underrepresented
groups in Oakland, CA. To attract a new generation to science, summer research
opportunities, seminars and science fairs will be organized in local public
schools. Undergraduate students will contribute to the Project by actively
participating in the research. The results of the proposed research will be
integrated into a new curriculum that will be developed for Physics
undergraduates wishing to pursue a graduate career in the life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic principle of ciliary beating relies on
a sliding motion between microtubules and two different types of dynein motor
proteins, the inner arm and the outer arm dyneins. To bend microtubules locally
in cilia, dyneins on one side of an axoneme must be active while those on the
opposite side are inactive. These states must switch periodically to propagate
bending along the length of the axoneme. The negative feedback mechanisms that
coordinate the activities of dynein motors across an axoneme remain to be
determined. To elucidate the mechanisms that regulate ciliary beating, this
project will test several predictions for the mechanical properties of
Tetrahymena inner- and outer-arm dyneins in vitro. Using single-molecule
fluorescence and manipulation methods, the project will complete three goals. It
will determine the mechanism by which dynein monomers step relative to each
other as the motor slides microtubule filaments. It will investigate the
emergent properties of dynein motors when functioning in large teams. The
project will also reconstitute a minimal system for ciliary oscillations and
visualize the movement of individual microtubules. The successful completion of
this project will reveal new molecular mechanisms of inner-arm and outer-arm
dynein coordination and determine minimum requirements for self-coordinated
oscillations of motile cilia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.