* 1954266
* Multidimensional Hypergeometric Integrals, Quantum Differential Equations, and Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Alexander Varchenko, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 12/31/2023
* USD 330,050.00

The development of mathematical analysis in the eighteenth century led to the
development of new special functions in addition to polynomial functions and
trigonometric functions. In particular, the famous hypergeometric function was
introduced and studied in the eighteenth century by Leonhard Euler and then by
the leading mathematicians of their time: Gauss, Jacobi, Kummer, Fuchs, Riemann,
Schwarz, and Klein. Modern versions of that function appear in different
mathematical and physical theories (such as representation theory, algebraic
geometry, gauge theory, statistical mechanics) and are considered in these
theories from different points of view. The goal of this project is to develop a
unified analysis and geometry of modern multidimensional hypergeometric
functions with applications to the above theories. It will lead to a better
understanding of interrelations between those parts of mathematics and physics
as well as to establishing new connections among them. The project includes the
training of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
research on representations of quantum groups, quantum cohomology and associated
quantum differential equations, KZ type differential and difference equations,
algebras of Hamiltonians of quantum integrable systems, Bethe ansatz method, and
hypergeometric functions. In particular the principal investigator plans to: 1)
construct integrable representations for solutions of the quantum differential
equations and different types of differential and difference KZ equations with
applications to the three dimensional mirror symmetry; 2) study the reduction of
these equations and their solutions modulo a prime number; 3) study of the
spectrum of commuting Hamiltonians in the associated quantum integrable
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.