* 1954291
* Helping Students Understand Real-world Applications of Mathematics by Connecting Industry to Math Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* James Martin, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2023
* USD 544,257.00

This project aims to improve mathematics education at the community college and
high school levels to ensure that students gain the mathematics skills they need
to enter STEM careers. To achieve this goal, the project will directly connect
math instruction with industry needs. By providing this connection, high school
and community college math educators can help their students see the
significance of math beyond the classroom. With substantial input from industry
experts, math educators will create industry-validated and classroom-tested
student activities designed to help students use math concepts within different
industry and technological contexts. The activities will include student tasks
and teacher notes about how to implement the activity in the classroom. In
addition, the activities will have introductory videos featuring diverse subject
matter experts, thus helping students from different backgrounds envision
themselves as successful STEM professionals. The project will also introduce
math students to STEM careers and educational pathways that they might not have
otherwise considered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration
between Wake Technical Community College, Wake County Public School System, and
WakeEd Partnership. The project responds to the call to teach math in the
context of real-world applications, which was issued by the NSF-funded Needed
Math Conference and the American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges.
It also builds on prior proof-of-concept workshops by the collaborators. The
goals of the project include: 1) effecting sustainable change in instructional
practice of math educators; 2) developing an online catalog of self-contained,
industry-validated math activities; 3) incorporating STEM-based activities into
math courses; and 4) increasing diversity in STEM. The project will incorporate
industry input and subject matter expertise during the development of
activities, which will be piloted in high schools across Wake County. The
project will also assess student success and feedback, and gather industry input
about that feedback. Formative and summative evaluation will be used to improve
understanding of how high schools, community colleges, and industry can
collaborate to build effective solutions to pressing educational challenges.
Evidence gathered through evaluation will advance knowledge about effective
teaching/learning methods. Dissemination will include conference presentations,
and validated activities will be available for download from multiple web-based
repositories. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.