* 1954480
* CAS: Structure, Bonding and Mechanism in  Iron-Catalyzed C-H Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* William Jones, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 03/31/2023
* USD 483,550.00

The development of sustainable, more efficient and selective catalysis remains
one of the key fundamental research goals in chemistry. Towards this goal, iron
catalysts that can directly transform carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bonds into new
chemical bonds of interest is a particularly attractive method, both in terms of
reaction efficiency as well as the wide availability, low cost and minimal
toxicity of iron. Unfortunately, the development of such reactions is currently
hindered by the lack of fundamental understanding of the catalytic species and
reaction steps involved. In this project, Dr. Neidig from the University of
Rochester is identifying which iron species are responsible for effective
catalysis, how these species react to form the desired reaction products, and
how catalyst structure and bonding relates to reactivity. The fundamental
insight obtained in these studies will serve to facilitate and inspire the
rational design and development of iron catalysts with improved performance in
C-H functionalization in advanced chemical manufacturing. Dr. Neidig is actively
engaged in several outreach activities that promote student training and
engagement in science, technology and mathematics disciplines. These activities,
which include research opportunities for both local community college and
underrepresented high school students as well, are aimed at encouraging the next
generation of students to pursue careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Neidig of the University of
Rochester, with funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, is developing a detailed fundamental
understanding into the active catalyst species and underlying molecular
mechanisms of catalysis in iron-catalyzed C-H functionalization. This insight is
achieved through an approach combining multiple inorganic spectroscopies
(magnetic circular dichroism, Mössbauer, electron paramagnetic resonance, and
resonance Raman), density functional theory, synthesis and kinetic and reaction
studies. Specific studies include defining the details of the
iron(II)/iron(III)/iron(I) mechanistic cycle and its broader role across
additional C-H functionalization reactions, as well as evaluating proposed
iron(III)/iron(I) and low-valent iron reaction manifolds for C-H
functionalization in order to identify and define alternative mechanistic
frameworks for targeted, rational methods development. Further studies are
investigating the reduced iron-phosphine complexes, reaction intermediates and
mechanism enabling effective C-H functionalization catalysis in the absence of
directing groups, including key ligand properties that enable effective C-H
functionalization. Dr. Neidig is actively engaged in STEM outreach research
programs with local community college students and faculty as well as
underrepresented high school students in the Rochester City School District, in
support of the broader impacts of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.