* 1954262
* Towards Absolute Asymmetric Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Tehshik Yoon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting research by Professor Tehshik Yoon of the University of
Wisconsin–Madison’s Chemistry Department. Professor Yoon is interested in
controlling the shape of molecules. Many important organic molecules, including
drug molecules and elementary biomolecules such as amino acids and sugars can
exist in either left- or right-handed forms. These two mirror-image forms
interact with biological systems in very different ways, so it is critically
important to control the handedness in the synthesis of organic molecules.
Professor Yoon leads a team of undergraduate and graduate students to
investigate if light can be used to control the handedness of organic molecules.
To do so, they have created a family of catalysts that absorb light and then
induce molecular transformations with excellent control over the shape of the
resulting products. This work takes an interdisciplinary approach combining
multiple areas of the chemical sciences. In addition, students in the Yoon
laboratory working on this project are helping to disseminate scientific
research to novice science students by producing a new podcast. The first season
of this podcast has been downloaded over 2500 times through a variety of free
podcasting platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chiral photocatalysts in this
project are octahedral iridium complexes whose ligands are arranged about the
metal with well-defined helical chirality. This class of compounds constitutes
an attractive starting point for these studies: they possess a robust and well-
studied photochemistry; they are quite effective photosensitizers for a range of
organic transformations; and they can easily be synthesized in stereochemically
pure form. The newly designed chiral photosensitizers resulting from these
studies are remarkably efficient asymmetric catalysts, and a multidisciplinary
approach to studying their reactions reveals a rich variety of mechanisms. These
studies offer a training opportunity for a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students in scientific fields of significant contemporary interest to
the chemical industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.