* 1954020
* I-Corps:  Use of films that control the amount of light in the neonatal incubator
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Bennett Ward, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential for this I-Corps project is to provide a
safe sleeping environment for premature infants in the Neonatal Intensive Care
Unit (NICU). Recent scientific studies have shown that a supportive light
environment in the NICU has a positive impact on the neurocognitive, optical,
overall physical growth and development of a premature infant. Moreover, optimal
light conditions in this space were directly linked with infants decreased
length of stay in the NICU. Currently, some NICUs use blankets to prevent
infants from being exposed to excessive bright lights. However, the use of
blankets comes with limitations (such as accumulating bacteria and blocking the
view of the infant) that pose safety and sanitary risks to the infant. This
device may help to provide a standard method of controlling the light
environment in the NICU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a device to precisely control the amount of light premature
infants are exposed to in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). Through the
use of electrical films, the device is able to mimic womb-like light conditions
for premature infants. Infants are exposed to cyclical lighting in the womb, and
the proposed device would offer cyclical lighting controlled automatically or
manually by the care provider. The proposed device would also collect data from
the infant’s vitals monitor and provide appropriate warnings, as well as
informing a predictive analytics system to improve the infant’s
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.