* 1954833
* Chirality Effects on the Acid-Base Properties and Conformations of Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jianhua Ren, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 420,589.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Jianhua Ren of The University
of the Pacific to utilize sophisticated mass spectrometry techniques and
computational methods to investigate how chirality change in amino acid residues
can influence the chemical properties of peptides. Amino acid building blocks
are chemically stitched together with amide linkages to form larger structures
known as polypeptides or proteins. Simple amino acids exhibit chirality or
handedness. The two mirror image forms of an amino acid are often referred to as
the D- and L-forms. Although nature seems almost always to choose L-amino acids
as the building blocks for proteins, D-amino acids have been found to be present
in all living organisms. In humans, D-amino acids are known to be critical for
signaling in the brain, and are also thought to be involved in the physiological
processes related to aging. Because proteins have complex folded structures, it
is difficult to determine the precise effect on shape and function of a
perturbation involving the insertion of D-amino acids. Professor Ren and her
students are tackling the problem by designing a library of peptides containing
various D-amino acids and systematically characterizing the chemical properties
associated with the shapes of the peptides when the amino acids are changed from
an L- to a D-form. This research is expected to providing insight into how the
handedness of individual amino acids in a protein influences shape and function.
The findings are expected to be of value to researchers in the biomedical
science in allowing for a better understanding of the molecular basis of protein
conformation; whereby understanding protein conformation is critical for the
design of novel therapeutic agents that target proteins. Students ranging from
high school through Ph.D. level who are participating in this project will gain
invaluable experience in cutting-edge spectroscopic techniques and in
computational modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes a
comprehensive approach to characterize the changes of intrinsic acid-base
properties and conformations of peptides upon changing the chirality of specific
amino acid residues. A library of D-amino acid containing peptides with
different levels of complexity are to be designed and synthesized. Their gas-
phase acidity and proton affinity will be measured using a triple quadrupole
mass spectrometer by application of the kinetic method. Conformations of the
peptide ions will be characterized by using infrared multiple photon
dissociation (IRMPD) ion spectroscopy and ion mobility spectrometry. Quantum
chemical calculations will be performed to establish predicted conformations,
energetics, and infrared spectra of the peptide ions. These theoretical results
will then be used to aid in the interpretation of the experimental observations.
The thermochemical and structural data obtained from this project will be
combined to construct a correlation among chirality, conformation, and intrinsic
acid-base properties of peptides. The broader impacts of this work include
potential long range scientific impact from an increased understanding of the
role that D-amino acids play in altering the fundamental properties of peptides
and proteins, and opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to
develop hands-on skills in mass spectrometry measurements and quantum chemical
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.