* 1954892
* Testing the Limits of Proton Coupled Electron Transfer (PCET) from Samarium(II)-Proton Donor Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Robert Flowers, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 460,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Robert Flowers in the Department of
Chemistry at Lehigh University. In this research, Professor Flowers and his
students are examining the mechanism of reactions of samarium (II) iodide
(SmI2), a widely used reagent in organic synthesis. This project is designed to
extend the reactivity of the reagent and to develop new reactions. The research
outcome could lead to the development of new organic reactions important for the
synthesis of biologically and pharmaceutically relevant compounds. In this
project, students are exposed to important areas of contemporary chemistry. The
educational experience centers around carrying out research in the context of
mechanistic chemistry. Mentoring of high school students provides meaningful
research experiences for those interested in scientific careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, mechanistic studies designed to test the
role, advantages, and applications of proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) in
reductions by Sm(II) reagents containing coordinating and chelating proton
donors are examined. These investigations are used to study and develop new and
synthetically relevant reactions that proceed through PCET from Sm(II)-proton
donor complexes to substrates which are typically recalcitrant to electron
transfer alone. These studies include the following specific aims: 1)
Examination of the relationship between the strength of coordination between
proton donors and Sm(II) reagents and its implication on the degree of O-H, N-H,
and C-H bond weakening; 2) The use of Sm(II)-proton donor complexes to expand
the range of substrates that can be reduced through PCET to refine and develop
new reactions; and 3) Examination of the basis of the unusual stability of
Sm(II)-proton donor complexes. The mechanistic results of the proposed work lead
to the development of new and useful reactions initiated by Sm(II)-proton donor
complexes and provide a rationale for the unique reactivity of the reagent
system. The protocols developed for the reduction of organic substrates are used
as the basis to develop alternative approaches for the direct reduction of
molecular nitrogen at room temperature. Integration of a range of experimental
techniques along with synthetic applications of proton-coupled, electron-
transfer in synthesis provides a dynamic intellectual environment for students
at all levels of study, including high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.