* 1954922
* CAS: Photoinduced Interfacial Charge Transfers with Organic Sensitizers using Low Energy Photons and Fundamental Physical Organic Design Concepts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Nathan Hammer, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2024
* USD 598,866.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Jared Delcamp and Nathan Hammer of
the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Mississippi
are developing new classes of organic dye molecules that exhibit interesting
light-matter interactions. The goal of this research is to design organic dyes
that absorb low-energy light to enable the design of higher-performing
electronic devices such as night vision technologies, infrared cameras, secure
display technologies, solar cells including transparent ones integrable with
buildings, solar batteries, and artificial photosynthetic systems. This project
relies on interdisciplinary research utilizing organic, inorganic, materials,
and physical chemistry. To encourage STEM involvement, outreach activities to
the general public and student groups with large populations of underrepresented
minorities are planned. A yearly summer research program brings STEM students
onto campus to conduct independent research related to this award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Near-infrared absorbing organic dyes capable of undergoing
interfacial charge separation at metal oxide interfaces are needed to advance a
number of emerging technologies. Metal oxide bound organic dyes that absorb low
energy photons (&gt;800 nm) and subsequently undergo charge separation in high
quantum yields are rare. Systems in these regions are often limited in utility
by excited-state and charge separated state lifetimes. The study of fundamental
physical organic chemistry is needed to enable the rational design of systems
using low energy photons. In this project, four types of systems are studied at
interfaces: (1) dyes with delocalized charge states after electron transfer to
metal oxides, (2) dyes with excited-state aromaticity for prolonging excited
states to promote higher quantum yields of interfacial photoinduced charge
separation, (3) double cross-conjugated dyes for lower energy photon
absorptions, and (4) Near-infrared absorbing chromophores incorporating
proaromatic functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.