* 1954778
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Introspective Perception and Planning for Long-Term Autonomy
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Joydeep Biswas, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Building and deploying autonomous service robots in real human environments has
been a long-standing challenge in artificial intelligence and robotics. Such
robots can assist humans in everyday activities and offer a transformational
impact on society. In order to successfully realize their benefits, however,
robots must be cognizant of their limitations, and when uncertain about an
action, they must be able to ask for human assistance. When robots are deployed
in novel environments, developers cannot fully foresee what errors the robots
may make, what may be the root causes of such errors, how human confidence in
the robotsâ€™ abilities may change as a result of such errors, and how well the
robots may learn to autonomously overcome errors and reduce the reliance on
human assistance. This project develops a comprehensive solution to these
challenges by introducing competence-aware autonomy, enabling robots to learn
what aspects of the environment, the situation, and the task lead to varying
levels of success. When asking for human assistance, a competence-aware robot
can offer evidence to explain its level of confidence. When left to act
autonomously, a competence-aware robot can hypothesize contingency actions to
help reduce its own uncertainty and to remain autonomous with high confidence.
Consequently, the project transforms the ability of researchers and
practitioners to deploy robots in unstructured environments where limited
knowledge is available prior to deployment. This enables workers with limited
robotics expertise to deploy robots more safely in unstructured environments and
teach them over time to be progressively independent. The project team will also
develop new course materials at UT Austin and UMass Amherst, mentor
undergraduate student researchers with special attention to underrepresented
groups, perform outreach activities to introduce programming with robots to
grade school students, develop conference workshops and tutorials on integrated
perception and planning research, and strengthen collaborations between academia
and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the need to build
competency-aware systems by introducing approaches to satisfy six core
properties of introspective perception and planning. They include: 1) an
approach to autonomously supervise the training of introspective perception by
relying on different types of consistency metrics; 2) an approach to learn to
identify causal factors of perception errors by considering both local and
global cues in sensed data; 3) an approach to analyze sequences of actions and
observations from logs to learn the impact of actions on introspective
perception; 4) an introspective planning approach that is cognizant of different
levels of autonomy, each associated with certain restrictions on autonomous
operation; 5) an introspective planning approach that is cognizant of the cost
of different forms of human assistance and can learn to minimize the reliance on
humans over time; and 6) an introspective planning approach that can learn from
human feedback about negative side effects and can attempt to explain them and
mitigate their impact. The project identifies key patterns of interaction
between these different components to enable a robot to autonomously learn to
plan around its limitations and minimize the reliance on humans. The team
conducts a comprehensive evaluation consisting of individual part-based testing
in high-fidelity simulation, and extensive real-world deployments of service
mobile robots across the University of Texas at Austin and University of
Massachusetts Amherst campuses, while performing key challenge tasks that
directly support the facilities of both universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.