* 1954814
* SATC: CORE: Medium: Principles and Algorithms for Visual Data Exploration Under Differential Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Narges Mahyar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,191,106.00

A fundamental part of data science is visual data exploration, which uses
visualization and user interaction to facilitate the discovery of new knowledge
and actionable insights from data. Visual data exploration is well-supported by
current visual analytics technology. However, in many domains, the data being
explored includes personal facts about individuals. Access to the data may
therefore be limited by privacy policies or regulations. This project will
develop novel visual data exploration technology that can support the discovery
of new knowledge while at the same time guaranteeing that individuals’ privacy
is protected. These technologies will be studied in the context of healthcare
data, government administrative data, and mobility data. This project will
expand the safe and effective exploration of private data, allowing a broader
community of data scientists to generate insights from a richer set of data
sources, including those previously off-limits due to privacy concerns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The visual exploration methods developed in this project
will provide guarantees in the model of differential privacy, which is emerging
as the dominant standard for protecting personal data. Enabling accurate visual
exploration of data while offering a guarantee of differential privacy requires
novel advances in privacy algorithms, visualization technology, as well as
careful evaluation methodology and experiments with human subjects. The
fundamental challenges of supporting data visualization under differential
privacy stem from the complex interaction between privacy algorithms and
visualization techniques. Algorithms for private data release can be better
designed if they are customized to visualization tasks. And special
visualization methods need to be used with noisy privatized data, including
those that communicate uncertainty and are robust to spurious visual artifacts.
The proposed research has the potential to transform the use of private data by
(i) investigating how current visualization and interaction techniques should be
adapted in the presence of noise introduced by differentially private
algorithms, (ii) developing new algorithms that oﬀer better visual accuracy, for
both static visualizations and interactive visual exploration, and (iii)
providing a benchmark and evaluation standards to accelerate innovation in
private visualization. The effectiveness and value of these algorithms will be
evaluated empirically by running a series of human-centered
evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.