* 1954298
* CAS: Photochemical CO2 Reduction Using Biomimetic NAD+/NADH Analogs
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ksenija Glusac, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry is
funding Dr. Ksenija Glusac of the University of Illinois-Chicago to develop
carbon dioxide-reduction chemistry through an approach inspired from nature,
particularly from photosynthesis through which plants use sunlight to convert
CO2 into useful carbohydrates. This project explores ways in which energy from
the sun can be utilized to meet our energy demand. The Glusac research group
aims to convert carbon dioxide to methanol, a liquid fuel that can be easily
transported and handled. The main challenge in this project is that, in addition
to methanol, many other products can be formed from carbon dioxide. Dr. Glusac
is exploring catalysts to perform the desired chemical reaction selectively to
form methanol with high efficiency. These catalysts are being made from earth-
abundant elements, with the aim of enabling their widespread use in future
devices. The catalyst needs to absorb light emitted by the sun and then use the
absorbed energy to perform useful chemistry. Catalyst/semiconductor hybrid
materials that can absorb sunlight and use the absorbed energy for the desired
conversion of carbon dioxide to methanol are being investigated. As part of this
project, Dr. Glusac is also developing online educational materials for students
and general population in the area of photochemistry, a branch of chemistry that
investigates how light interacts with molecules. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Inspired
by natural photosynthesis, Dr. Ksenija Glusac of the University of Illinois-
Chicago is investigating photocatalytic CO2 reduction by metal-free NADH analogs
that are photogenerated from NAD+ analogs using water as an electron and proton
source. The main hypothesis of this project is that, using a proposed hydride
transfer mechanism, the CO2 reduction can be selectively directed toward
methanol production. The research thrusts are grouped into two sections: one
addressing the “dark” portion of catalysis, namely the reduction of CO2 by
organic hydrides, and the second exploring the closure of the catalytic cycle
via photochemical regeneration of those hydrides. The experimental approach
involves studying the thermodynamic hydricities of organic hydrides and
investigating the kinetics of hydride transfer to either CO2 or an activated
form of CO2. The Glusac team is developing systems to effect thermal CO2
hydrogenation using a combination of NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide)
analogues and Lewis bases, with electrochemical regeneration of organic hydrides
using a proton-coupled approach, and photochemical regeneration of organic
hydrides using mid- and wide-gap semiconductors. This study is providing new
mechanisms for coupling thermodynamically uphill reduction processes with
visible light energy. Dr. Glusac's educational activities involve the
development of online lecture materials in the area of photochemistry. These
video lectures are enabling the dissemination of knowledge to students and the
general population interested in the fundamentals and applications of
photochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.