* 1954767
* Collaborative Research: ECR EIE DCL: The Influence of an Inclusive Climate on STEM Academic Early-Career Outcomes
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kevin Elliott, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 541,640.00

Researchers from the University of Michigan Ann Arbor will collaborate with
researchers from Michigan State University to implement an EHR Core Research
(ECR) project. The project will study how an inclusive educational and workplace
climate can affect academic STEM career outcomes, particularly for early-career
individuals from underrepresented groups. The proposers will develop a novel
construct of inclusive authorship climate in which intellectual contributions
are fully welcomed and valued throughout the research process. The proposers
will examine inclusive climate at the levels of the research group, department,
and profession, each of which likely shapes career outcomes for
underrepresented, early-career STEM scholars. Ultimately, this project will
advance understanding of how to promote diversity, equity, and inclusion in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study builds on the organizational theory of
Person-Environment Fit (PE Fit) which claims that career outcomes and attitudes
are positively affected by having an organizational environment that is
congruent with an individualâ€™s needs, skills, and values. The proposers argue
that for individuals in STEM from underrepresented groups, 'fit' requires an
inclusive climate (i.e., an environment that values differences and makes all
feel welcome). The researchers will develop, test and implement a survey of
3,500 graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and assistant professors in four
STEM fields for which faculty racial minority representation is low and gender
representation is low or moderate: physics, economics, biology, and psychology.
Structural equation modeling will quantify differences in the effect of
inclusive climate on career outcomes of scholars at three different career
stages, in departments with different institutional prestige, and in disciplines
with different norms and cultures. An important contribution of this research
will be the development of the inclusive authorship climate concept and the
development of metrics and survey instruments to measure
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.