* 1954308
* EAGER: Exploratory Measurements of Large Winds and Shears in the Lower Thermosphere and Their Variability Using an Enhanced Sodium Lidar
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Tao Yuan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/2022
* USD 287,545.00

The upper atmosphere near 120 km in altitude is an important transitional region
where the dominant mixing processes change from interaction of small swirls or
eddies (eddy diffusion) to interaction of individual molecules (molecular
diffusion). This is also the part of the upper atmosphere that is notoriously
difficult to observe since traditional ground-based techniques such as lidar
generally cannot measure above 100 km due to low signal power and since
satellites orbit at higher altitudes to reduce atmospheric drag. Occasional
rocket measurements revealed unexpected large vertical and horizontal neutral
wind and shears in this region. These winds are believed to be critically
important in formation of intense and thin layers of metallic ions as well as in
formation of critical layers that control dissipation and vertical propagation
of atmospheric waves connecting different atmospheric layers. This project will
provide first comprehensive measurements of large horizontal and vertical wind
by using a state-of-the-art sodium lidar system operated by the Utah State
University (USU). The project will improve public literacy by the USU lidar
observatory participating in public outreach events in the Utah Cache Valley
rural community. This project will also provide training for one graduate
student and one undergraduate student at USU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will involve (1) replacement of interference filters which will improve the
quality of the wind measurement by reducing the associated uncertainties by a
factor of 2, (2) exploratory measurements with the enhanced USU sodium lidar
equipped with large aperture (~5 m^2 receiving area), and (3) analysis of
temporal variations and duration of strong winds and shears in the lower
thermospheric region between 100 and 120 km in
altitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.