* 1954707
* Asymptotic Dynamics of Nonlinear Wave and Dispersive Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jonas Luhrmann, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 167,659.00

Many wave propagation phenomena in the natural sciences and in engineering can
be modeled by nonlinear wave and dispersive equations. While the theory of
linear wave equations predicts that waves spread out and decay as time goes by,
once nonlinear effects are taken into account, this changes drastically. In
particular, linear and nonlinear effects may balance out to create so-called
soliton solutions, whose shapes persist and refuse to disperse. It is widely
believed that solutions to most nonlinear wave and dispersive equations with
"generic" initial data should eventually decompose into a finite number of
solitons plus a radiative term that goes to zero. This project concentrates on
two themes that play an important role in the quest to understand this grand
picture how waves propagate overtime. The principal investigator (PI) will
develop new methods and techniques for the study of the asymptotic stability of
solitons in the presence of strong nonlinear interactions. Asymptotic stability
refers to the phenomenon that if a soliton gets pushed a little bit, it may
wiggle for a while, but ultimately return to a form similar to the one it began
with. Further, the PI will investigate the long-time dynamics of solutions to
nonlinear wave equations with generic randomized initial data in several novel
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the PI will use harmonic
analysis and vector field techniques together with tools from spectral theory
and probability theory to work toward the following goals: (1) carry out a
program to obtain precise asymptotics of small solutions to one-dimensional
Klein-Gordon equations with variable coefficient nonlinearities, which are
related to asymptotic stability questions for "kink" solitons in numerous field
theories in physics; (2) develop a modulational approach for proving the (co-
dimensional) stability of certain solitons arising in some quasilinear geometric
wave equations; and (3) initiate the study of the long-time dynamics of
solutions to geometric wave equations and to wave equations with long-range
nonlinearities for random initial data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.