* 1954959
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Exploiting Fine-grained WiFi Signals for Wellbeing Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Jerry Cheng, New York Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 95,402.00

While proliferating WiFi networks are usually used for wireless Internet
connections, they have great potential to capture environment changes and
identify human motions of various scales. Examples of such motions range from
performing daily activities to breathing and heartbeat during sleep. These
various scales of motions can be captured by fine-grained WiFi signals to
perform continuous wellbeing monitoring. Wellbeing monitoring leveraging
existing WiFi infrastructure is particularly attractive as it requires neither
wearing body instrumentation nor active monitorng by the user. Such an approach
would facilitate a broad range of healthcare related applications at home
environments without frequent hospital visits, such as real-time prediction and
prevention of certain health problems (e.g., cardiovascular diseases and sleep
apnea). Using existing WiFi infrastructure for wellbeing monitoring not only
advances and extends the applications that could be supported by WiFi networks
but also enables easy and large-scale deployment in non-clinical settings due to
the proliferation of WiFi networks. Additionally, the educational efforts
include curriculum development, outreaching to high school students, and
engaging both undergraduate and graduate students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on building a WiFi enabled
continuous wellbeing monitoring framework for fine-grained sleep monitoring and
vital signs tracking at home environments. Users do not need to wear any sensors
or actively participate in the monitoring process. The proposed framework
targets to advance techniques in device-free fine-grained sleep events
identification and vital signs tracking during sleep by utilizing existing WiFi
signals. The proposed framework develops device-free localization strategies,
vital signs tracking methods and statistical learning techniques to depict a
comprehensive picture of users' wellbeing. Such wellbeing information is further
utilized to assist in real-time disease prediction by leveraging today's ever-
growing mobile environments. A hierarchical multivariate logistic regression
model is developed to effectively mine through health conditions and identify
risk factors of certain diseases. Chances of developing certain health problems,
such as cardiovascular diseases, is promptly predicted. The project also
provides user-centric access control of archived wellbeing monitoring
information to ensure data privacy and coping with distrusted servers.