* 1954985
* CAS: Organometallic Chemistry of Catalytically Relevant High Valent Nickel and Copper
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Melanie Sanford, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Melanie Sanford of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Michigan to study the fundamental reactivity of
nickel and copper catalysts for making organic molecules. Transition metal
catalysts are used to manufacture many important products, including life-saving
pharmaceuticals, crop-protecting agrochemicals, and electronic materials. The
cost and sustainability of these products are directly impacted by the
development of new catalysts that are less expensive, generate less waste, and
operate under milder reaction conditions. A particularly important goal is to
replace catalysts that require rare and expensive precious metals (e.g.
palladium) with catalysts derived from inexpensive and more readily available
metals (e.g. nickel and copper). Many exciting advances have recently been made
in this direction, but the performance of these less expensive catalysts still
lags behind precious metal catalysts. To fix his problem, the fundamental
reactivity of the inexpensive catalysts needs to be better understood. Professor
Sanford and her research group are studying the reactivity of nickel and copper
catalysts to determine how to make these compounds perform as well or better
than precious metal analogues in speeding up the synthesis of desired organic
molecules. Outreach activities are directed towards encouraging women to engage
in STEM fields at a variety of levels through the participation of Professor
Sanford and her research group in mentoring workshops, panel discussions, and
the University of Michigan Females Excelling More in Mathematics, Engineering,
and Science (FEMMES) program, which introduces middle school girls to hands-on
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of first row transition metal
catalyzed processes for the synthesis of organic molecules has recently had an
upsurge in activity. Excitement surrounding these transformations stems from the
sustainability advantage of designing earth abundant and inexpensive catalyst
scaffolds, as well as the unique reactivity patterns accessible to first row
transition metal complexes. Despite the number of important nickel- and copper-
catalyzed crossing coupling and C-H functionalization reactions that have been
reported, the synthesis and fundamental reactivity of the organometallic
nickel(III), nickel(IV), and Cu(III) compounds implicated in these
transformations have not been systematically explored. Professor Sanford and her
research group are working to establish the feasibility and mechanisms of a
variety of transformations at nickel(III), nickel(IV), and copper(III) centers
using directing group coordinated substrates, as well as undirected processes
supported by aminoquinoline ligands. The reactivity and selectivity profiles
that are being established herein are expected to have a transformative impact
on the design and optimization of new high valent nickel- and copper-catalyzed
transformations. This project is also training a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students in the interdisciplinary areas of inorganic and organic
synthesis, inorganic reaction mechanisms, and catalysis. A well-trained and
diverse scientific workforce is essential for continued advances in advanced
manufacturing innovation and technology in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.