* 1954311
* QCIS-FF: Quantum Computing &amp; Information Science Faculty Fellow at Stony Brook University
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Samir Das, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Quantum Computing, enabled by the convergence of physical sciences, computer
science, engineering, and mathematics, has an enormous potential to
revolutionize computing and communications and thus make a huge impact on a
variety of applied sectors critical for economic growth and national security.
However, the development of practical quantum computing is still in its infancy,
with a number of open engineering and research challenges in the areas of
computation, communication, simulation, and sensing. Unlocking the full
potential of quantum computing will need a concerted effort in building a large-
capacity quantum computing workforce. At present, very few Computer Science,
Information Science or Computer Engineering departments in US universities have
significant expertise in quantum computing that will enable the creation of such
a workforce. This award aims at hiring a junior-level tenure-track faculty as an
NSF Faculty Fellow in the Computer Science (CS) Department at Stony Brook
University. The university already has a strong research group in quantum-
related areas including quantum information science, quantum communications and
quantum simulation in its Physics and Astronomy Department. This group will
provide the necessary interdisciplinary connections. The CS department also has
notable strengths in the areas of computer architecture, networks, cryptography,
security, theory, distributed systems, programming languages, and machine
learning. These areas will be bolstered by this hiring opportunity via radical
reformulation of traditional approaches using quantum computing and
communications principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The university will hire a
Faculty Fellow in the areas of quantum algorithms and networking, to maximize
the potential for collaboration with existing areas of strength in the
department. The department, the university, and its external partners have an
environment for collaborative research and education, and structures to support
professional growth, to enable the Fellow thrive and progress towards a
leadership role the area of quantum computing. Successful accomplishment of the
proposal objective will also have a broad impact of educating future computer
science students on topic of quantum computing, thus facilitating a quantum-
ready workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.