* 1954838
* CAS: Understanding the Contributions from Both Thermal and Non-Thermal Factors in Plasmonic Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Jie Liu, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 530,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Dr. Jie Liu of Duke University to develop a comprehensive fundamental
understanding of plasmonic photocatalysis. Renewable energy such as sunlight for
chemical manufacturing will impact the future of the chemical industry
significantly. When nanoparticles interact with light an electronic phenomenon
known as a surface plasmon is created. These surface plasmons can significantly
affect the way the surfaces chemically react. Plasmonic catalysis, a recent
direction in catalysis, captures light energy from the sun and uses it to
accelerate important chemical reactions. However, the mechanism of plasmonic
catalysis is complicated because light also heats the nanoparticle surface.
Separating the thermal (simple heating) and surface plasmon contributions to the
observed chemical reactions is important to fundamental understanding. Only with
such understanding will researchers be able to design systems to use sunlight at
maximum efficiency. Dr. Liu and his team are developing experimental methods to
distinguish these thermal and electronic effects. The results from the proposed
research is providing deeper understanding of the mechanism behind plasmonic
catalysis. In addition, Dr. Liu is focusing on converting CO2 to value-added
chemicals such as methane and methanol using plasmonic catalysis. This approach
could serve to close the carbon cycle, ideally resulting net zero carbon
emission from the use and reductive capture of such one carbon fuels. In this
project, Dr. Liu is fostering the engagement of female researchers as well as
researchers from underrepresented minority groups. Dr. Liu is actively
participating in the North Carolina American Chemical Society (ACS) Project SEED
Program by hosting high school students from underrepresented groups during
summers and the school yearencouraging them to become future research
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jie Liu of Duke University is developing a
comprehensive fundamental understanding of plasmonic photocatalysis through an
integrated macroscopic kinetic study of the CO2 reduction reaction with targeted
spectroscopic investigations of the reaction dynamics on the surface of
nanostructured rhodium, guided and interpreted by theoretical analyses. Once
understood, the potential for plasmonic rate enhancement and selectivity control
in photocatalytic reactions may be ascertained for a large variety of plasmonic
materials. In addition, understanding the contributions from photo-thermal as
well as non-thermal effect (e.g. hot electrons mediated catalytic process) is
not only clarifying the mechanism but also enabling researchers to consider
designing processes for more efficient use of energy from sunlight. Dr. Liu
participates in the North Carolina American Chemical Society (ACS) Project SEED
Program by hosting high school students from underrepresented groups during
summers and the school year. Students in the program work with graduate students
and Dr. Liu to design and perform scientific experiments. This program is
supporting high school students to explore their interest in STEM fields thereby
encouraging them to become future researchers in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.