* 1954929
* Sulfated peptides serve as molecular mimics that facilitate pathogen virulence
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Pamela Ronald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 675,000.00

This work will advance understanding of how bacteria and nematodes infect
plants. Specifically, the researchers will study a group of molecules that are
predicted to play important roles in plant growth, development, and defense,
which are critical to crop quality and yield. Because bacteria and nematodes
infect a wide range of plants and these molecules are present in virtually all
crop plants, successful completion of the proposed objectives will have broad
significance to U.S. agriculture. This work will provide interdisciplinary
training of postdoctoral researchers and mentoring of undergraduate and high
school students on cutting-edge technologies of genetics, proteomics, and
molecular biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diverse species of plant pathogens
secrete molecules that mimic those produced by the host as a strategy to
manipulate host cellular function. For example, the rice pathogen Xanthomonas
oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) secretes a microbial peptide called RaxX, which is
required for activation of rice XA21-mediated immunity. RaxX shares sequence
similarity to the plant peptide containing sulfated tyrosine (PSY) family, which
is critical for plant growth and development. RaxX is conserved in multiple
Xanthomonas species and can promote root growth to the same extent as the host
PSY peptide. Null mutation of raxX compromises the virulence of Xoo on rice
plants that lack the XA21 immune receptor. Together, these results suggest that
RaxX functions as a bacterial virulence factor. The researchers discovered that
the genomes of the root-knot nematode, of the Meloidogyne incognita group, are
also predicted to contain genes for PSY-like peptides (named MigPSY). In
Arabidopsis, PSY promotes cellular proliferation and expansion. Considering that
formation of the nematode feeding site requires extensive host cell expansion
and cell wall modifications, we hypothesize that root-knot nematodes utilize
MigPSY to commandeer host PSY signaling to manipulate cellular proliferation and
remodeling during feeding site formation. This proposal aims to test this
hypohtesis. This project will (1) analyze the expression and bioactivity of PSY-
like peptides, (2) investigate how PSY-like signaling contributes to successful
bacterial and nematode infection, and (3) identify plant receptors involved in
this signaling response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.