* 1954808
* CAS: Transition Metal-Main Group Element Cooperative Interactions to Enable New Chemical Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* T. Don Tilley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 562,000.00

The research program of Professor T. Don Tilley at the University of California,
Berkeley, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry
within the National Science Foundation, focuses on the synthesis of chemical
compounds that contain both metals and silicon. These substances play key roles
in the production of useful silicon-based materials, such as silicone plastics,
adhesives, lubricants, and semiconductors. New metal-silicon compounds promise
to enhance current applications and underpin the invention of new silicon-based
products. In one project, Tilley is studying a new class of compounds that
feature silicon atoms sandwiched between a pair of metal ions. Another project
is exploring the possible replacement of platinum with iron for making
silicones. Overall, this program is preparing graduate and undergraduate
students for technical careers by training them in cutting edge chemical
techniques as well as in communication skills. This grant is also supporting
outreach to students in high school and elementary schools with the goal of
enhancing their technical knowledge and stimulating their interests in science.
This outreach involves oral presentations, demonstrations, and hands-on
interactive lessons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program of Professor T.
Don Tilley at the University of California, Berkeley, funded by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry within the National Science
Foundation, explores the synthesis, bonding properties, and reaction chemistry
of transition-metal complexes featuring multiple bonds to silicon. Of these
multiply bonded species, silylene (LnM=SiRRâ€™) and silicide ([LnM]xSi; x = 2,3,4)
complexes are of particular interest due to their roles in (for example)
hydrosilations and silicon materials synthesis, respectively. The extensive
metal-silicon bonding featured by these species is expected to impart unusual
properties upon the coordinated silicon fragments, and these are being exploited
to design reactive catalysts of strong interest to the research and industrial
catalysis communities. A novel theme within this program is the development of
synthetic routes leading to molecular silicide complexes, as well as the
exploration of chemical properties for the new silicides. These rare species
represent an underexplored area of transition metal-main group research.
Fundamental questions regarding molecular silicide chemistry have important
implications for the development of advanced silicon materials and processes.
More broadly, this research provides a foundation for new strategies relating to
chemical transformations that produce silicon materials, polymers, drugs, and
silylated feedstock and specialty chemicals. In particular, the study of
molecular silicides provides insights into the structure and reactivity of
chemical intermediates in silicones production (e.g., alkylchlorosilanes in the
Direct Process) and in the synthesis of silicon nanostructures. This research
may contribute to the knowledge base that chemists use to design reactions that
are fundamentally and industrially relevant. Because this research uses a broad
array of synthetic and spectroscopic techniques, the scientists trained through
this program emerge as highly effective researchers. Notably, a collaborative
effort within the research group involves planning and presenting science
lessons to grade school students. Group members travel to nearby elementary
schools and teach basic scientific principles, hoping to improve early STEM
education and encourage budding scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.