* 1954836
* IGE: Increasing Academic Success for Underrepresented Minority PhD Graduate STEM Students Through Self-Advocacy Education
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Carmen Lilley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 497,799.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) will create a new educational
program of self-advocacy to help students from underrepresented minority (URM)
groups increase doctoral program completion in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields. URM students enroll in and complete PhD degrees
in STEM at a much lower rate than majority groups; they also often face what
educational researchers refer to as “climates of intimidation” within higher
education and STEM. This project’s goals are to support students’ empowerment,
agency and authenticity for academic success and social integration into STEM.
This will be accomplished with a training program that translates the evidence-
based findings of the learning disabilities communities to promote self-advocacy
and positively impact the retention and academic success of URM PhD students.
This IGE will address whether teaching self-advocacy increases the academic
success, social integration and general well-being of URM PhD STEM students, and
thereby lead to improvements in doctoral degree attainment.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive review of evidence-based practices for teaching self-
advocacy within the learning disability communities found that there are three
critical factors that, when combined, result in increased academic success:
empowerment, self-awareness, and social justice. Self-advocacy has been shown to
increase students’ retention during critical transitions to post-secondary
education or increase participation in learning STEM disciplines, while also
increasing academic success. Thus, the research hypothesis is that teaching
self-advocacy will result in improved academic success, improved social
integration, and improved health and well-being for URM STEM graduate students
at UIC, many of whom are first generation or low-income. The societal impact of
this grant will be a successful graduate education program that is inclusive of
URM students and that will inform on a broader scale how to increase
participation of URM graduate students in STEM disciplines. It is anticipated
that the translation of evidence-based educational practices from the learning
disabilities communities will serve as a foundation for teaching self-advocacy
to URM STEM graduate students, and further the translation of these practices to
other student populations and fields at UIC and other institutions of higher
learning that want to increase the academic success of their URM graduate
students. This work will also add to the needed scholarship on the factors that
impact resilience of URM STEM PhD graduate students and how self-advocacy
affects their academic success and health/well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.