* 1954803
* Single Molecule Imaging for the Study of Heterogeneous Materials:  Supercooled Liquids, Polymer Nanocomposites, and Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Laura Kaufman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

We may think of a container of a pure liquid as uniform, the same properties
(for example, density, refractive index and viscosity) throughout the sample
container. At the molecular level however, the liquid is not uniform, but highly
varied in how the molecules are arranged with respect to one another. At most
temperatures, molecules are in motion. At any given moment, some regions of the
liquid might be denser, or more viscous than other regions. This condition is
called “dynamic heterogeneity,” and it is an important consideration in
discussing the mechanical properties of polymers, how proteins move through
water, etc. Dynamic heterogeneity is difficult to measure precisely - most
measurements look at averages within a sample. In this project, funded by the
Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Laura Kaufman of Columbia University and her students are
using an advanced molecular imaging technique that can track the motion of a
single (molecule probe) through a liquid or polymer material. The probe molecule
is strongly fluorescent, meaning that when exposed to light of one wavelength,
it emits light of another specific wavelength. The emitted light allows the
molecule to be tracked as it moves through different regions of the material.
The probe reveals dynamic heterogeneity as its motions are altered by changes in
the structure of its environment. Professor Kaufman and her students are
investigating dynamic heterogeneity in supercooled liquids (liquids colder than
their freezing temperature but somehow still liquid), polymer nanocomposites
(used in gas separations and electronic components), and ionic liquids. Most
familiar ionic systems are solid, like table salt. Ionic liquids are composed of
positive and negative ions but are liquid at room temperature. Ionic liquids may
have potential for “green” industrial processes. The students engaged in this
research are learning a broad range of experimental techniques and analysis
approaches relevant to the specific project, These approaches are also
applicable to many areas of science and emerging technologies. In addition to
providing training for graduate students, this project also includes outreach to
K-8 students. The outreach events feature topics that provide an entry point to
chemistry concepts such as phase diagrams and the concept of chemical
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Kaufman and her students are refining
and extending single molecule imaging approaches to detail aspects of dynamic
heterogeneity in small molecule supercooled liquids and polymeric glass formers,
with advances coming in the form of new probe molecules and new techniques to
distinguish spatial and temporal heterogeneity. At the same time, the scope of
this work is being extended to polymer nanocomposites and ionic liquids. Newly
designed tethered probe molecules are prepared and used to complement free probe
measurements and discriminate changes in dynamics that occur due to
environmental rearrangement from those related to probe translocation. The
tethered probes provide a new approach to characterizing spatial extent of
regions of distinct dynamics in these complex systems. The project also employs
super-resolution experiments that allow simultaneous tracking of rotations and
translations; this study seeks to resolve questions regarding the poorly
understood phenomenon of rotational-translational decoupling, clarifying if it
emerges from experimental biasing. The study of polymer nanocomposites focuses
on the dynamics of the interfacial layer, and how interfacial layer properties
vary with changes in the host matrix. Molecular probes are being developed to
clarify how the interaction between structural and dynamic heterogeneity
influences the properties of ionic liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.