* 1954467
* CAS: Glyonic Liquids: Sugar-Based Ionic Liquids and Deep Eutectic Solvents from Sustainable Sources for Electrochemical Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jeanne Pemberton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2024
* USD 569,999.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Jeanne E. Pemberton and Steve D.
Schwartz of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of
Arizona are developing a new class of conductive liquids to be used in
batteries. These new materials, glyonic liquids, are made from biomass (e.g.,
sugars) and are biodegradable and nontoxic. The goal of this research is to
optimize the conductive properties of these materials by molecular design and tp
explore their applications as green, renewable conductive electrolytes in
devices used for sensing and energy conversion and storage. The project lies at
the interface of organic, physical and materials chemistry. This effort will
also support the development of new intellectual property and educational
initiatives at the graduate, undergraduate and K-12 science levels, with a
particular emphasis on impacting members of underrepresented groups who are a
large demographic base in southern Arizona. Outreach activities include the
development of a workshop for in-service secondary science teachers on green
chemistry and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glyonic liquids are a new
type of protic ionic liquid structurally based on a rhamnolipid platform as the
anion can be paired with a variety of cations. These materials have demonstrated
intriguing conductive properties that might make them excellent choices for use
in electrochemical devices. Toward that end, this effort involves three specific
objectives: 1) synthesis and property tuning of glyonic liquids based on the
rhamnolipid structural motif through exploitation of synthetic handles that
facilitate retention of these materials in the liquid state at or near room
temperature; 2) exploration of electrochemical applications of these glyonic
liquids; and 3) computational studies on glyonic liquids to define
inter/intramolecular interactions and structure at the nano- and meso-scales as
a function of temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.