* 1954703
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Production and Consumption of Beef on Communities Along Beef Supply Chains
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Joshua Newell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 17,955.00

This project will examine how the production and consumption of beef affects the
environmental impacts of air pollution on communities that contribute to the
production of beef. The research will measure and analyze the impacts of beef
production at multiple locations in the supply chain, and assess how
stakeholders including corporations, governments, and non-government
organizations contribute to the decision-making and process in the production of
beef. The knowledge gained from this research will provide these stakeholders
knowledge that will enable decision-making about beef production that reduces
environmental burdens on affected communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research asks two interrelated questions: (1) how is air pollution and related
health impacts of the beef supply chains distributed among local communities?
and (2) how do different types of governance processes lead to different
environmental outcomes? This study will use a novel methodology that integrates
location-based life cycle assessment methods with socio-economic data and social
network analysis to quantify air quality impacts and mitigation interventions in
each phase of the beef supply chain. The results of this research will provide
potentially transformative methods to sustainability science that can be used
broadly to study environmental and social impacts of other product supply
chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.