* 1954743
* 2020 International Congress for Neuroethology in Lisbon, Portugal from July 26-31, 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Cynthia Moss, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2023
* USD 21,600.00

This award will provide support to US-based students and post-doctoral fellows
and junior scientists to attend the 2020 International Congress on
Neuroethology. This five-day conference is recognized as the major, mid-size
meeting in Neuroethology, a fertile multidisciplinary field of neuroscience,
focused on the neural mechanisms underlying natural behavior. This meeting will
bring together outstanding senior and junior scientists for discussions of the
recent advances in the field. Invited speakers across many areas of
neuroethology, will present their findings on how the activity of animal brains
give rise to natural behaviors. The comparative approach that is at the heart of
neuroethology, will facilitate the identification of common principles of brain
organization as well as detecting mechanisms that enhance behavioral
performance, which can then be implemented computationally or technologically.
The meeting will feature sessions that showcase how biological solutions inform
new conceptual and technological advances in bio-inspired robotics, smart
machines and neural modeling. The results presented at the meeting will have the
potential to guide future developments in multiple areas, including neurally
inspired design of engineered systems that will have considerable societal
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this meeting derives
from its small size, which promotes interactions between participants, and the
assembly of many top scientists whose research spans neurobiology, engineering
and animal behavior. It spans a wide variety of experimental systems and focuses
on areas of exceptional activity or promise. This combination leads to fruitful
comparative analyses, raises new questions about underlying mechanisms and often
leads to new collaborations. By maximizing both formal discussion and informal
interactions, the International Conference on Neuroethology will highlight
exciting new developments in neuroethology and engineering approaches in
neurobiology. With respect to broader impacts, this meeting will benefit the
larger community in multiple ways. First, it will help train and inspire the
next generation of scientists, by exposing students and postdoctoral fellows to
exciting science and scientists. Second, mentoring sessions, both formal and
informal, as well as professional development sessions for junior researchers,
will be organized for the benefit of junior researchers to help them make
informed choices about scientific careers in academia and beyond. Finally, a
concerted effort will be made to recruit scientists from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.