* 1954648
* CDS&amp;E: Development of Methods for Molecular Simulation of Enantiomeric Separation and Metal-oxide Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* J. Daniel Gezelter, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 486,433.00

Professor J. Daniel Gezelter of the University of Notre Dame is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop novel computer algorithms that model or predict
molecular motion. These new methods will predict how molecules that are left- or
right-handed versions of each other can be separated with relatively simple and
inexpensive liquid flow devices. Gezelter’s lab also models the behavior of
metallic surfaces in contact with reactant gases and solvents, particularly when
there is a heat or energy imbalance between the two sides of the surface. These
topics are of interest in the areas of energy efficiency (involving systems like
catalytic converters), materials science (involving metallic nanoparticles), and
specifically in the pharmaceutical industry, where important drug molecules
often must be separated from their left- or right-handed forms to isolate the
useful molecular component from one that is either ineffective or dangerous. In
addition, Professor Gezelter is developing a new program for first-year science
and engineering students who are either first generation college students or
come to college from under-served populations. Some of these students are now
conducting research on Notre Dame’s campus (including in Professor Gezelter's
research group).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Gezelter and his group are developing
theoretical and computational methods for investigating enantiomeric separation,
coupled charge and energy transport properties (e.g. thermoelectric properties
and electron-phonon effects) and oxide-layer growth at interfaces. Three
complementary areas of research are under investigation: methods for predicting
and simulating enantiomeric separation in vortex flows, utilizing an overlapping
bead model to predict rotation-translation coupling tensors for molecules in
fluid flows, methods to include electrical current densities in molecular
simulations using reverse non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (RNEMD), and a
density readjusting embedded atom method (DR-EAM) for modeling oxide-layer
growth on metal surfaces. The applications of these methods include separations
of racemic mixtures of pharmaceutical molecules in shear-flow and vortex-flow
devices, the growth of metal-oxide layers on functional catalysts at operating
conditions, and the thermal conductance measurements on metallic particles that
have been ligated and solvated in water solvent after excitation at the plasmon
resonance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.