* 1954453
* Terahertz Spectroelectrochemical Methods to Study Semiconductors, 2D Materials, and Metal Organic Frameworks (MOFs)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Gary Brudvig, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) Program and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program. Under
this award, Professor Charles Schmuttenmaer’s laboratory at Yale University
utilizes a laser technique known as Terahertz Spectroelectrochemistry, to study
chemical structure and reactions at the surfaces of materials that have
potential applications in catalysis and electronics. Terahertz light has
frequencies roughly from three hundred billion to thirty trillion cycles per
second. Its frequency range is higher than microwave radiation (used in wireless
communications and microwave ovens), but lower in frequency than infrared light
(used in night vision goggles and what we feel as heat). Terahertz light can be
used measure the electrical conductivity of materials like semiconductors.
Professor Schmuttenmaer and his research group apply different voltages to
semiconductor materials and use terahertz light to explore how the conductivity
of the material affects the chemical reactions that occur on the semiconductor
surfaces. The combined use of terahertz light and electrically-driven chemical
reactions gives the new technique, “Terahertz Spectroelectrochemistry” its name.
Undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates are being
trained in state-of-the-art experimental and computational techniques to provide
critical information toward understanding and improving the fundamental science
of molecular and semiconductor materials. This provides insight into effectively
utilizing the new semiconductor materials in industrially-relevant devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops and applies Terahertz (THz)
Spectroelectrochemistry to several classes of materials relevant to electrodes,
including semiconductors, 2D materials, and metal-organic frameworks (MOFs).
Spectroelectrochemistry in the THz range is challenging because THz radiation is
absorbed and reflected by conductive materials such as electrodes. The
Schmuttenmaer group showed that photolithographically patterning optically
transparent electrodes in a wire-grid configuration allows strong transmission
of THz light. The patterned electrodes can then be used in three-electrode thin
layer electrochemical cells to perform THz measurements under applied voltage.
The technique is utilized to perform steady-state THz experiments to investigate
the density of mobile states in semiconducting materials, among other things.
The method is also used in conjunction with ultrafast laser excitation to
perform time-resolved measurements to obtain the sub-picosecond dynamic response
of materials under applied potential, thereby investigating photoelectrode
materials under operating conditions. This time-resolved technique is utilized
to investigate heterogeneous electron transfer in molecule-semiconductor donor-
acceptor dyads, but is also applicable across the scope of materials discussed
in this project. These attributes uniquely position THz spectroelectrochemistry
to study operando charge transport in emerging classes of materials, such as
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), which are 2D materials, and conductive
MOFs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.