* 1954591
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Fabric-Embedded Dynamic Sensing for Adaptive Exoskeleton Assistance
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Rebecca Kramer-Bottiglio, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 779,287.00

Exoskeletons can provide people with movement assistance when they become
fatigued during long periods of exertion. While the focus of this award is on
the use of adaptive exoskeletons by people who are able-bodied, the results
could be applied to help people who have diseases such as multiple sclerosis,
where people need increased assistance throughout the day as they become more
tired. The interdisciplinary team will develop new human-robot interaction
methods through adaptive exoskeleton control by using novel fabric-embedded
sensors to measure how a person is moving and to develop a model to understand
how these movements indicate when a person is becoming tired. Commercially-
available exoskeletons do not explicitly address fatigue issues for enhancing
endurance. Additionally, commercially-available sensors for sensing the wearer's
body movement and muscle activation are rigid and can be uncomfortable when worn
between the body and an exoskeleton system, which often also has rigid parts.
The comfortable and breathable fabric-embedded sensors combined with an adaptive
exoskeleton controller that can measure a person's fatigue in real time will
allow endurance enhancement for human and exoskeleton performance. The project
includes a soft-robotics design curriculum for broadening participation in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and quantifying fatigue in human
body is a complex research problem. This project will utilize a soft, breathable
sensor garment between the wearer's body and the exoskeleton to sense fatigue
and come up with a fatigue index. Such a fabric embedded sensing will allow for
the development of exoskeletons that are more power efficient, provide
assistance only when needed (at the power level that is needed based upon the
wearer's fatigue level), and reduce metabolic costs for the wearer while
preventing potential muscle atrophy that could arise from always-on exoskeleton
assistance. An interdisciplinary approach, combining controls and robotics,
human performance measurement, materials and soft robotics, and human-robot
interaction, will be used to accomplish this goal. This research will establish
a fatigue index that can 1) reliably and quantitatively indicate the level of
physical fatigue, and 2) be easily obtained based on kinematic and kinetic data.
The strain-field and fabric-embedded sensors will provide the kinematic data,
which will then be used to estimate the kinetic data. Exploiting these data, the
research will draw upon feedback control theory and human biomechanical modeling
to create a systematic method for monitoring fatigue with provable estimation
accuracy. An adaptive exoskeleton control framework will be systematically
derived to explicitly address fatigue issues through three synergistically
connected layers: activator, optimizer, and real-time controller. The resulting
exoskeleton controller will enable adaptive assistance for endurance enhancement
by delaying the onset of wearers' fatigue and allowing better usage of
exoskeleton power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.