* 1954259
* SaTC: EDU: Improving Student Learning through Competitive Embedded System Security Challenges
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Robert Karam, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 499,145.00

Computers touch on nearly every aspect of modern life, from automotive and
healthcare, to infrastructure and defense. The recent uptick in cybercrime
highlights the increased demand for cybersecurity professionals for all aspects
of computing - from software, to networking, and even the hardware itself. New
courses are needed to improve existing computer science and engineering programs
and provide both theoretical and practical, hands-on security experiences for
students in these fields. In addition, new techniques for effective
cybersecurity education are needed to improve student learning in this crucial
area. This project will develop a hardware security lab course leveraging low-
cost, open-source hardware and software, to enable more universities to
integrate a hands-on hardware security course into their advanced undergraduate
and graduate programs. The course will be used to test the effect of integrating
game-based learning into hardware security education through an advanced
curriculum of team-based, hands-on laboratory experiments and security
challenges. Course materials will be made freely available, and results of this
research will be shared widely by establishing new workshops and training
seminars, and an annual competition to encourage continuous improvement in this
critical area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
investigate a game-based approach to hardware security education through an
advanced curriculum of hands-on laboratory course modules and a final team-based
“Hardware Capture the Flag” competition. The curriculum will be suitable for
senior undergraduate and graduate students in computer engineering. The planned
course modules cover a wide-range of topics related to hardware security,
including physical and cross-layer security. Topics will be chosen to ensure
that the largest possible number of students can benefit from the course by
requiring only “accessible” equipment (i.e., relatively inexpensive, open-
source, and easy to use) and providing an opportunity to learn practical skills
that are transferable to any hardware-focused career. The impact of gamification
on student learning will be tested by integrating game mechanics and
competitions into selected labs, including race-against-the-clock, point scoring
/ leaderboard systems, red team / blue team, and collaborative analysis and
learning. By integrating game-based learning in the proposed course, the project
will investigate novel approaches to hardware education with a focus on security
that can be replicated in other computer science and engineering departments to
bolster student engagement and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds
proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically
cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity
Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research
Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of
cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.