* 1954712
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Hardening Off-the-Shelf Software Against Side Channel Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Daniel Genkin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 11/30/2021
* USD 325,773.00

Side channel attacks study leakage due to timing variation in software
execution, resulting from contention for hardware resources. By analyzing these
variations, an attacker can obtain additional information and use it to deduce
the victim’s secrets. As proven by Spectre and Meltdown, these side channel
attacks pose a severe threat to the security of nearly all computing devices.
Given that side channel protection often requires hardware redesign, something
must be done in the interim to secure existing software on currently deployed
hardware. This project studies transformations on existing software in an
attempt to harden it against side channel attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project consists of three main tasks. In Task 1, the project will attempt to
reverse engineer various hardware structures in the processor so as to determine
where attacks might occur. Next, in Task 2, the project will use the data from
Task 1 to design transformations that will protect leaky software against side
channels. Finally, Task 3 will develop methods to confirm that the outputs of
Task 2 are indeed side channel free. While typical analysis of side channel
leakage requires manual effort, Task 3 aims to develop automated tools for
leakage detection, avoiding the need for manual
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hardware is the ultimate root of trust, the
correctness of which is the foundation to the security of all software. However,
unlike software, hardware security has received much less attention, from both
academic and industry. Until new and secure hardware becomes available, the
proposed project aims to protect existing software deployed on leaky hardware.
While the project cannot hope to eliminate all leakage, it does aim to harden
existing software, making leakage harder to exploit. Tools and methodologies
developed by this project will be used to design safer hardware, as well as help
mitigate leakage in existing software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
retain all data, simulators, and code produced in a central GIT repository which
will be publicly available at github.com.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.