* 1954608
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Fine-Grained Spectrum Access for Carrier-Aggregation Based Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/24/2018,07/31/2020
* Xinyu Zhang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 153,846.00

Dynamic spectrum access brings great benefits for users in overcrowded radio
spectrum to opportunistically harvest spectrum resources, which is especially
useful for high date rate applications such as video conferencing and multimedia
streaming. Since available spectrum may be fragmented, carrier aggregation
becomes a critical enabling technique. Many recent and emerging protocols (e.g.,
802.11ac WiFi, 802.11af TV whitespace networks, 3GPP LTE unlicensed, and
802.11ay millimeter-wave networks) have been incorporating carrier aggregation
mechanisms. However, these mechanisms are still preliminary and heavily rely on
conventional MAC/PHY which is designed for nodes sharing the same contiguous
channel. As carrier aggregation networks evolve to new generations, three
inherent problems will become the fundamental barrier to their efficiency,
fairness, and scalability: (i) a transmitter is unable to sense medium state
during transmission, (ii) more users and high spectrum dynamics worsen the
medium access contention, and (iii) the need of fast spectrum agreement to
aggregate multiple fragmented spectrum chunks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to explore general primitives to effectively
realize carrier aggregation with three research components: (i) Migrate the
spectrum sensing paradigm from "detect and then transmit" to "simultaneously
transmit and detect". The end goal is to overcome the efficiency and fairness
problems in standard spectrum sensing mechanisms to enable asynchronous, out-of-
band OFDM spectrum sensing and multi-antenna based full-duplex sensing. (ii)
Address the contention issue in wideband fragmented spectrum sharing with low
collision probabilities and low overhead. A spectrum arbitration mechanism is
proposed, enabled by a parallel bitwise signaling scheme and a novel compound
packet preamble design. (iii) Design a light-weight in-band mechanism that
achieves fast synchronization and spectrum agreement, so as to overcome the
substantial control channel overhead for spectrum agreement under high spectrum
dynamics. The success of the proposed research will enhance radio spectrum
sharing, and inspire standardization bodies to incorporate the proposed new
protocol primitives for much higher performance. A continuous effort will be
made to integrate the proposed research to education program, to mentor
undergraduate researchers, and recruit women and minority students.