* 1954571
* Understanding Electronic and Spin Structure at Organic / Metal Interfaces: Surfaces and Symmetry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Oliver Monti, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,532.00

As electronics technology is driven to produce greater memory and processing
power in smaller devices, research increasingly focuses on molecules as the
building blocks for electronics circuitry. Larger traditional circuit elements
made of metal and semiconductor materials must conduct and store not only
electrical charge, but also magnetic information. Electrons hold a negative
charge, which allows them to conduct electricity when they move. Electrons also
act like magnets because they possess a property called “spin”. If revolutionary
molecule-based electronics are to become a reality, we must be able to
understand and control how charge and spin flow not only through individual
molecules, but between molecules and other materials (other parts of the
circuit). In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanism-A (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Oliver Monti
and his students at the University of Arizona are investigating how charge and
spin flow at contact points with other materials. They are studying molecules on
metal surfaces, as well as molecules on metal surfaces that have been modified
with other molecules, to modify the contact condition. The Monti research group
uses a combination of laser-based techniques and scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM) which can image individual atoms and molecules. The research seeks to
discover the important molecular structural factors that determine charge- and
spin-flow in molecule based electronic elements. The graduate students receive
training and experience in advanced chemistry, optical physics and atomic
microscopy. This training is expected to prepare them well for the quantum
information science revolution. In addition to the formal training of doctoral
students, Professor Monti is developing a program for undergraduate student
veterans at Arizona to gain research experience and personalized mentoring
toward a successful career in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on tailoring the interfacial electronic structure and charge-
transfer dynamics at organic semiconductor / metal interfaces. The research
entails tailoring the surface electronic structure using epitaxial layers of Ag
on Cu(111) to change the surface electron wavelength, the surface electron
density, and the surface symmetry. The effects of these systematic changes on
surface processes are examined using a combination of low-temperature scanning
tunneling microscopy and steady-state and time-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy. Processes such as molecular self-assembly, interfacial electronic
structure and charge-transfer dynamics are thus characterized over a wide range
of surface electronic properties without varying the chemical nature of the
interface. Surface modifications are also being developed to facilitate Rashba
splitting without the need for an external magnetic field. This study involves
the adsorption of organic semiconductors that support large electric dipoles or
can induce orbital mixing at the interface. If this type of Rashba splitting is
achieved, it could have significant implications for the control and
manipulation of spin states at organic/metal interfaces. The broader impacts of
this research include the advancement of technologies to develop novel highly
efficient electronic devices that may also harness the spin degrees of freedom,
which in turn are important in quantum processing. This project is providing a
vehicle for training both graduate and undergraduate students as well as
mentoring and research opportunities for veterans enrolled in science and
engineering degree programs at the University of
Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.