* 1954063
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Studying the Impact of IPv6 on Information Controls and Censorship Circumvention
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Eric Wustrow, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,923.00

Deployment of the IPv6 standard has seen a rapid increase in the past decade
with Google currently measuring 25-30% of their traffic being served over native
IPv6 connections, 25% of all Internet-connected networks advertising IPv6
connectivity, and major mobile networks such as T-Mobile embracing the standard.
Accordingly, there is an urgent need for censorship circumvention tool
developers and researchers to measure how IPv6 deployments are impacting online
information control systems, and how the emergence of IPv6 could enable novel
circumvention techniques to augment existing tools. The overall objective in
this project is to develop measurement methodologies to track IPv6-specific
information control deployments and develop new circumvention strategies which
leverage features of the IPv6 deployment and protocol. The research can have
wide reaching near and long term impact in terms of facilitating free and open
communication over the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes the
following technical contributions. First, the project measures how information
controls deployments are modified to handle IPv6 traffic. The project seeks to
understand how IPv6 is handled by information controls deployments. To this end,
the investigators explore two directions: updating existing IPv4-specific
measurement techniques and platforms to make them IPv6-capable and developing
new measurement techniques utilizing the IPv6 protocol to improve information
controls measurement capabilities. Second, the project designs schemes that
leverage the IPv6 protocol to bypass online censors in the short- and long-term.
The goal is to understand how the IPv6 protocol can aid censorship
circumvention. To this end, the researchers explore three directions: (1) making
short-term gains against censors by leveraging IPv6 transition technologies, (2)
advancing the state of Refraction Networking technologies by using IPv6, and (3)
developing clean slate IPv6 based circumvention tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.