* 1954835
* CAS: Complexity-Building Reactions from Feedstock Chemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Jeffrey S. Johnson of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Professor Johnson
and his research team are creating new chemical processes that provide high-
value molecules from abundant feedstock chemicals (even “waste” chemicals).
Sustainability is a critical challenge facing society and the field of
chemistry. The focus on using abundant chemicals to access complex molecules
through the creative use of catalytic processes is addressing the societal need
for new pharmaceuticals and materials with sustainable sources. These studies
are being paired with efforts by Professor Johnson and his research group to
enhance public outreach in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) and to support the inclusion of students from underrepresented
groups in chemistry. The Johnson group has a notable track record in
successfully mentoring diverse students through the doctoral program and on to
leadership positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High abundance and inexpensive
starting materials such as carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, ammonia, and
aromatic compounds are often viewed as ‘dead-end’ molecules because of their
stability and relative inertness. Professor Johnson and his research group are
developing new reactions that will take these abundant, poorly-reactive
molecules and convert them into useful synthetic building blocks. The Johnson
research team is transforming achiral aromatic compounds into chiral carbocycles
through catalyzed dearomatization reactions that result in cyclohexadienoid
systems bearing strained fused rings, such as norcaradienes. These systems can
then be used to incorporate feedstock compounds of the sort described. In this
way, the Johnson group is pursuing the streamlined and stereoselective
assemblies of useful advanced chiral and densely functionalized heterocyclic
structures while incorporating abundant inexpensive gaseous feedstock at the
same time. These activities provide an excellent training ground in synthetic
chemistry for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.