* 1955940
* CDS&amp;E: Theoretical Models for Potential Energy Landscapes of Challenging Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Charles Sherrill, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,879.00

C. David Sherrill of Georgia Tech is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to
create improved models of the intermolecular interactions. Professor Sherrill
studies how the interactions between molecules determine the way that molecules
pack into solids, how proteins fold, and how liquids and solutions behave.
Theoretical models of these intermolecular interactions have provided important
insight into how to predict chemical behavior and how to design better
materials. However, the most accurate models also require very long
computational simulations, making them hard to use. Sherrill’s group is
investigating how to make these computations run faster, while maintaining a
high level of accuracy and dependability. Software making these improved
computations possible is being made publicly available to the research
community. Professor Sherrill is also actively engaged in educational outreach,
through organizing workshops on computational chemistry and creating YouTube
videos on computational chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sherrill group’s
research begins with symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT), which is a way
to compute directly and accurately the different types of interactions between
molecules: electrostatics, induction/polarization, exchange (steric) repulsion,
and London dispersion forces. The most complete SAPT models are comparable in
accuracy to the “gold standard” of quantum chemistry, coupled-cluster theory
through approximate triple excitations [CCSD(T)]. The current project seeks to
obtain SAPT-quality results for each energy component, but with faster
computational models. Several approaches are being considered, from light
modifications of SAPT to remove only the rate-determining steps, to force-field
and machine-learning models. The goal of the research is to provide a spectrum
of methods of various speeds and accuracies for applications to a broad array of
different types of molecules and intermolecular
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.