* 1955343
* Understanding and Predicting Reactivity and Selectivity of Single Atom Catalyst
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Talat Rahman, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 885,091.00

Professors Talat S Rahman and Fudong Liu of the University of Central Florida
(UCF) and Professor Sampyo Hong of Brewton Parker College are supported by an
award from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry to
understand and predict the properties of single atom catalysts. Catalyst are
used in academic and industrial chemical laboratories to speed up chemical
reactions while selecting for specific products over others. Single atom
catalysts are often made of nanoparticles - a billionth of a meter.
Nanoparticles have unique properties which distinguish them from their bulk
counterparts because of their reduced size and confinement. For example, bulk
gold is an inert material, but in nanoparticle form it be very reactive with
gases in the air (like carbon monoxide). The miniscule size of the nanoparticles
also means reduced cost of the precious metal. The last decade has seen much
research on nanocatalysts whose local environment can be controlled down to the
single atom (usually on a supportive surface). The factors that control
reactivity and product selectivity are of particular interest in nanocatalysts.
In this project, Professors Rahman, Hong and Liu carry out joint computational
and experimental studies of oxidizing (burning in a controlled way) methanol to
form carbon dioxide and molecular hydrogen on singly-dispersed platinum, copper,
and cobalt nanoparticle catalysts. The systematic coupling between theory and
experiment helps set guidelines for the rational design of single atom catalysts
with desired reactivity and selectivity properties. Professor Rahman leverages
her position as the UCF site leader for the American Physical Society Bridge
Program to mentor the graduate students from underrepresented minority groups
that work on the project. Existing international collaborations help extend the
outcomes globally. Undergraduate students at Brewton-Parker College are actively
engaged in chemistry research, gaining useful experience for careers in
academics or industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to result
in strategies for predicting and controlling the reactivity of atomically
dispersed nanocatalysts, as a function of their local atomic environment.
Research components include: thermodynamics-assisted, density functional theory
(DFT)-based calculations of electronic and geometric structure, vibrational
dynamics and entropy, reaction pathways and energetics; and kinetic Monte Carlo
simulations of reaction rates and turn over frequencies, as a function of
ambient temperature and pressure; synthesis of the single atom catalysts. The
research team will use scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) to
confirm the single site status of targeted systems. Postdocs and graduate
students will conduct an experimental determination of methanol partial
oxidation reaction rates and turnover frequencies as well as studies of in situ
diffuse reflectance infra-red Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) to verify
surface reactive intermediates and track reaction mechanisms. Theory and
experiment working in tandem provide an understanding of reaction mechanisms and
insights into factors such as charge transfer, strain, etc. that control site
activity. More importantly, competing reaction pathways (and reaction
intermediates) responsible for product selectivity are exposed, thereby
providing a design control. A direct feedback between calculated and observed
surface structure, reaction rates and turnover frequencies validates the
theoretical approach and refines experimental
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.