* 1955472
* New Approaches to Stereospecific Alkyl Transfer in Metal-Catalyzed Reactions: Synthetic and Mechanistic Investigations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Mark Biscoe, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 04/30/2023
* USD 470,000.00

With the award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Biscoe, whose laboratory develops new
synthetic strategies for use in organic and medicinal chemistry. Two molecules
that have the same composition and structure but are mirror images of each other
can elicit drastically different biological responses. Consequently, synthetic
methods that enable precise control of three-dimensional molecular structure are
essential. Metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions are routinely employed by
medicinal chemists in efforts to produce biologically active compounds. However,
these reactions are most reliable for the preparation of flat molecular units,
and not for the preparation of three-dimensionally branched molecular
structures. Professor Biscoe’s research investigates new strategies towards the
preparation of individual mirror images of a branched molecule. From these
studies, new chemical reactions are developed that expedite the synthesis of
chiral molecules and contribute to the improved safety and efficacy of
pharmaceutical and other biologically-relevant compounds emerging from the
discovery process. Dr. Biscoe is active in projects that are designed to
increase the diversity of students participating in the STEM fields. As part of
these outreach activities, Dr. Biscoe is initiating a joint research program
between CCNY and the High School for Math, Science, and Engineering (HSMSE) of
City College. The goal of this program is to create a mechanism through which
high school students can gain exposure to cutting-edge academic research,
thereby facilitating a career path in scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this NSF award, Professor Biscoe is investigating the
transfer of stereodefined alkyl units in palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling
reactions. This research focuses on the use of enantioenriched
alkylcarbastannatranes in cross-coupling reactions. The factors that influence
stereochemical transfer from the alkyl unit of the carbastannatrane backbone are
explored in these studies. As alkyl transfer can occur with retention or
inversion of three-dimensional geometry, a variety of mechanistic probes are
employed to elucidate the underlying chemical factors most influential in
determining the pathway of alkyl transfer. Because alkyl transfer to palladium
is a fundamental step in the catalytic cycle of cross-coupling reactions, these
studies facilitate the development of new stereospecific cross-coupling
reactions, which can be used to generate non-racemic molecules enantio- or
diastereoselectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.