* 1955532
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: A Rigorous, General Framework for Tractable Learning of Large-Scale DAGs from Data
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Eric Xing, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 05/31/2024
* USD 799,933.00

Recent advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence owe much of
their success to the development of algorithms that learn complicated
relationships and understanding complex phenomena from massive datasets. These
algorithms have been successfully applied on a diverse array of applications,
including medicine, genetics, robotics, marketing, finance, and, increasingly,
in societal applications. Despite their many successes, however, these
applications continue to suffer from security, transparency, fairness, and
interpretability problems. Many of these practical challenges can be traced back
to well-known limitations with respect to interpretability, causality, and false
discoveries. At the same time, substantial progress has been made in recent
years in our understanding of these practical challenges in relatively simple
settings with only a few factors and comparatively simple models. This research
seeks to integrate these efforts, in order to provide a flexible framework for
flexible, interpretable, causal modeling from high-dimensional, complex
datasets. The investigated approach specifically seeks to avoid spurious
correlations that commonly appear in complex datasets, while retaining the
flexibility of modern machine learning algorithms with an eye towards
applications in medicine, biology, and finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many
applications of machine learning have been driven by impressive advances in
complex predictive models, at the same time a need has emerged for models that
can extract causal information from massive, unlabeled datasets. Graphical
models provide a principled and effective way to uncover this type knowledge
from unlabeled data. Although the problem of learning undirected graphs has
witnessed a series of remarkable advances over the past decade, directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) that encode directed, potentially causal information, have not
benefited from these advances. As a result, there is a pressing need for novel
and theoretically sound methods for learning DAGs that can capture complex,
asymmetric relationships, reduce model complexity, and most importantly, learn
causal relationships for human decision-makers and stakeholders. This project
explores a new approach for learning DAGs from data that provides the basis for
a general statistical and computational framework, which has been lacking thus
far. The technical aims can be divided along three major axes: 1) Developing
novel continuous relaxations of the combinatorial optimization problems that
arise in structure learning problems, 2) Developing new tools for analyzing the
behavior of optimization schemes in highly nonconvex settings, and 3)
Theoretical advances in nonparametric causal modeling and its statistical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.