* 1955000
* CAS: Repurposing Polyethylene Waste Using Ring-Chain Equilibria
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Anne McNeil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Plastics have transformed our lives, largely for the better by providing light-
weight, durable materials that can be shaped and stretched. This said, plastics
have generated a significant waste problem, with most plastics sent to the
landfill after only one use. These end-of-life outcomes negatively impact our
planet and are unsustainable. As such, there is an urgent need to develop new
methods to reuse plastic waste. With funding from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Anne J. McNeil of University of Michigan Ann Arbor is utilizing ring-chain
equilibria to recycle polyethylene, which is one of the most widely produced
plastics in the world. Ring-chain equilibria is a method for polymer recycling
in which, under dilute conditions, linear polymers are quantitatively
transformed into macrocyclic compounds. When the concentration is increased,
linear polymers are regenerated via the reverse process. In this research, a
series of chemical reactions are developed to depolymerize different
polyethylene scaffolds into cyclic compounds. The developed methodology is
utilized to convert post-consumer polyethylene waste into virgin-quality
polyethylene. Polyethylene is also repurposed into value-added block copolymers
containing important functional chemical groups. The primary goal of the team's
outreach efforts is to increase the local community's understanding of the
lifecycle of plastics, ranging from petroleum-derived and bio-sourced monomers
through their different post-disposal fates. To accomplish this goal, the
research team is developing and implementing hands-on activities for children on
the plastics lifecycle. In addition, an interactive display for a local
childrenâ€™s museum is being created. Venues such as NerdNite and online
publishing are implemented to reach adults. This project enables the
participating graduate and undergraduate researchers to gain highly
interdisciplinary training in organic and inorganic chemistry, as well as
polymer synthesis and characterization. The training also prepares them for
careers in teaching and in the chemical industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team is developing alkane metathesis for reversible
cyclodepolymerization of polyethylene (PE). Research activities include the
evaluating of alkane metathesis conditions in the cyclodepolymerization of PE,
and the elucidation of the impact of unsaturation levels on
cyclodepolymerization rates. The research group identifies optimized
dehydrogenation catalysts for each PE scaffold and generates new PE macrocycles
that may exhibit unique properties. Finally, the group convert post-consumer PE
waste into virgin-quality PE, and repurposes PE into value-added block
copolymers containing halogen, polar, or alkyl functional groups. This work
tackles the grand challenge of polyolefin recyclability and has the potential to
have a significant impact on society, both within the scientific community and
in the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.