* 1955474
* CAS: Functional Nanoglues for Robust and Efficient Single-Atom Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Jingyue Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 489,999.00

New catalytic conversion processes may significantly impact global energy
security and lead to a cleaner environment. Many chemical manufacturing and
emission control processes use precious metals as catalysts to speed up the
chemical reactions. The use of precious metals in industrial catalysts is not
sustainable because of the low abundance and high cost of these metals. The use
of supported single metal atoms for catalytic transformation may address these
problems. The critical challenge for broad applications of single-atom catalysts
is their stability during use. In this project, Dr. Jingyue (Jimmy) Liu of
Arizona State University is developing "nanoglues" to both stabilize the
supported single metal atoms and enhance their catalytic performance. This
project is addressing fundamental understanding of catalysis by supported metal
atoms and is providing design tools for developing single atom catalysts with
practical applications important to the environment and the economy. Professor
Liu impacts education through the ASU Winter School on High Resolution Electron
Microscopy, attended primarily by graduate students. In addition, the SCience
and ENgineering Experience (SCENE) program is providing cutting-edge science
research experiences to high school students in grades 10-12.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Jingyue (Jimmy) Liu of Arizona State University is
developing a fundamental understanding of how to localize, and simultaneously
enhance the catalytic properties of, single metal atoms (e.g., Pt, Pd, Rh, Ru,
Ir or Au) by confining them to isolated, ultra-small functional oxide
nanoclusters (e.g., CeOx, TiOx, and CoOx). These nanoglues are uniformly grafted
onto a high-surface-area robust support (e.g., silica or alumina). With such a
catalyst design, it is expected that single metal atoms or small metal clusters
do not sinter during the catalyst activation process (e.g., by H2 at 250 C - 500
C) and/or during catalytic reactions at elevated temperatures under reducing
environment. The use of supported, isolated metal atoms as catalytically-active
centers not only maximizes the metal usage efficiency but also makes it possible
to have uniform distribution of active sites. These factors are important for
tuning the selectivity of a targeted catalytic reaction. The catalyst design
allows metal atoms to move within their corresponding isolated nanoglue islands
but not across the nanoglues to form larger particles. The nanoglue not only
acts as a “double-sided tape” to strongly hold both the metal atoms and the
high-surface-area support but also provides the desired function for the
targeted catalytic activity and/or selectivity. The sizes of the nanoglue
islands range 0.5-2.0 nm to accommodate high levels of metal loading. The
nanoglue-based single-atom catalysts are being tested for CO oxidation,
preferential oxidation of CO, water-gas shift, reforming, and
hydrogenation/dehydrogenation reactions. Broader impacts include incorporating
research results in an annual Winter Workshop of High Resolution Electron
Microscopy (attended primarily by graduate students from across the US),
training of graduate and undergraduate research students, and mentoring of high
school students through the SCience and ENgineering Experience (SCENE) program
dedicated to providing cutting-edge science research experiences to high school
students in grades 10-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.