* 1955262
* Excitation-Dependent Multi-State Organic Fluorophores
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Lei Zhu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2024
* USD 460,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Lei Zhu of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Florida State University is developing new organic
fluorescent molecules that are capable of emitting light of more than one hue
(i.e., multiple emission) to produce composite colors. The project could lead to
energy-efficient light-emitting materials. The research is unique as dialing up
or down the electrical energy input to the device could lead to the production
of different colors. This project lies at the interface of chemistry, materials,
and physics and is therefore well suited to the education of well-informed
scientists. Outreach activities include developing a course on the chemistry and
physics of light that targets upper-class undergraduate students and early
graduate students in STEM disciplines. The new course aims to enhance the
students' understanding of light-involved science and technologies, which is and
will be at the forefront of the efforts to improve the well-being, and
satisfying the curiosity, of society with contributions to a vast range of areas
from energy sectors to space exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical
terms, this project aims to provide structural models to produce excitation-
dependent dual-emitting fluorophores, including one class that has the potential
to undergo thermally-activated delayed fluorescence (TADF). Beside fundamental
molecular photophysics, the research program also includes technical innovation
in characterizing the stability of organic emitters in an operating organic
light-emitting diode (OLED). In the first objective, the structural factors that
would provide a pathway of excitation-dependent dual emission will be
identified. In the second objective, a new class of organic dyes that are easy
to prepare will be studied with the focus on their potential for TADF. The
ability of TADF may increase the electricity to photon conversion efficiency in
an OLED, and is of intense commercial interests. The compounds that are both
TADF-capable and bright will be evaluated as emitters in OLEDs. In the third
objective, the excitation-dependent properties that are described in the first
objective will be included in the TADF scaffolds from the second objective to
offer bright, stable, and excitation-dependent TADF dyes capable of dual
emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.