* 1955132
* RUI: Asymmetric Synthesis of Atropisomeric beta-Carbolines
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Seann Mulcahy, Providence College
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 239,935.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Seann Mulcahy. Professor Mulcahy is a
faculty member in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Providence
College, a primarily undergraduate liberal arts college in Providence, Rhode
Island. Together with a team of undergraduate students, Professor Mulcahy is
developing new chemical tools for making organic molecules known as
atropisomers. These molecules are unique because they cannot fully rotate around
one of their carbon-carbon single bonds. This limitation locks the atropisomers
in two distinct propeller-like forms that are non-identical mirror images of one
another. Preparing one or the other of these forms is a challenge in the field
of chemical synthesis but access to these distinct molecules is important for
pharmaceutical and material applications. Professor Mulcahy is researching ways
to selectively make new atropisomers using a transition metal catalyst to stitch
together the key components. A diverse team of undergraduate students are
receiving training by working to optimize this catalytic reaction and study the
properties of these molecules. Computational studies both at Providence College
and in collaboration with Professor Jeffrey Gustafson at San Diego State
University are being used to help guide these investigations. Professor Mulcahy
is also organizing workshops in chemical synthesis for underrepresented high
school students in the greater Providence region, creating a summer immersion
program for high school juniors interested in research, and developing new
resources for college students to cope with failure and be more resilient in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition metal catalysis is a powerful method for
the construction of asymmetric carbon stereocenters; however, the use of
transition metal catalysis to install other types of chirality is less well-
developed. The Mulcahy group at Providence College is developing catalytic
asymmetric methods to synthesize atropisomeric heterocyclic 1-aryl-beta-
carbolines. The goal of this project is to develop a cationic
rhodium(I)-catalyzed [2+2+2] cycloaddition strategy for the selective formation
of one of the two mirror-image atropisomers using a combination of catalyst
optimization, substrate engineering, and computational methods. The effects of
chiral bidentate phosphine ligands and the substitution patterns of the reagents
are being explored as key determinants of atroposelectivity. In addition,
computational and physicochemical studies are being performed to determine the
absolute configuration and establish the rates of racemization of the
atropisomeric beta-carbolines. These activities are also serving as a platform
for the education and training of a diverse set of undergraduate students in
synthetic chemistry, as well as the recruitment and retention of students from
underrepresented groups. The creation of new video resources to help students
manage challenges that they might encounter in a research setting are being
developed as a new resource to further support inclusion and expansion in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.