* 1955180
* CNS Core: Medium: Communication and Networking with Diffused Laser Light
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Eric Fossum, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 03/31/2023
* USD 943,461.00

Technological advances have driven an unprecedented acceleration of mobile
bandwidth demand, with examples including 4K video streaming, virtual/augmented
reality, and autonomous vehicles. It exacerbates the pressure on the rapidly-
dwindling radio frequency (RF) spectrum. Visible light communication (VLC)
emerges as a promising wireless technology to mitigate the pressure on the RF
spectrum. It turns ubiquitous sources of artificial light into wireless access
points, promising unparalleled communication bandwidth. Existing VLC research,
however, is fundamentally shackled by the limits of light-emitting diodes
(LEDs). Their slow response time and low spectral efficiency have resulted in
either moderate data rates or centimeter-level transmission distances. The
project aims to overcome this limit. It studies the use of diffused laser light
as the next-generation transmission medium while qualitatively boosting
practical VLC performance to the next level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
envisions that future indoor (e.g., offices, homes) and outdoor (e.g., car
headlights, street lamps) illumination will gradually take advantage of laser
diodes because of their superior illumination efficiency. Multiple collocated
laser diodes emit light at different wavelengths that are mixed and diffused to
generate diffuse white light. The same diffused white light is reused to
transmit data at ultra-high speeds, thanks to laser diode's unique properties of
high modulation bandwidth and spectrum efficiency. Diffusing laser light not
only makes laser light safe for illumination but also mitigates the alignment
issues faced by conventional free-space laser communication. Proposed research
tackles networking, systems, and optics issues in jointly utilizing diffused
laser light for both normal illumination and high-speed, reliable communication,
which sets a key departure from prior works that study laser light communication
and illumination in isolation. It addresses key research questions including how
to build efficient and robust communication link with diffused laser light, how
to reconcile the illumination and communication functionality of laser light,
and how to leverage links with diffuse laser light for expanded coverage and
support of user mobility. The proposed work, if successful, will represent a
major paradigm shift in VLC and establish crucial systems pieces to overcome key
barriers in systems, networking, and optics to bring VLC links in gigabit data
rate range to practical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.