* 1955619
* CAS: Radialene Radicals: Aqueous Soluble Organics for Energy Storage
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Christopher Bejger, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2024
* USD 456,394.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Christopher Bejger of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte is
working with Professor Mitchell Anstey of Davidson College and Professor Todd
Coolbaugh of Johnson C. Smith University to examine redox flow batteries (RFBs)
for electrochemical energy storage. RFBs have emerged as capable electrochemical
energy storage devices capable of compensating for the intermittent nature of
renewable energy sources like wind and sun. Traditional RFBs rely on expensive
metal-based materials and corrosive electrolytes. RFBs that comprise of organic
molecules and operate at neutral pH are desirable from a cost and safety
perspective. The research team is developing new RFB based on organic molecules
(substituted radialene molecules) with reversible redox behavior in water. The
project lies at the interface of organic synthesis, materials chemistry, and
analytical electrochemistry, and is therefore well suited to the education of
undergraduate scientists. The three-institution team will plan and fabricate an
interactive exhibit on RFBs to expand awareness and engage the regional public
regarding grid-scale renewable energy storage. Students involved in the research
have the opportunity to work closely with faculty members at each institution
and a regional industry partner. This project will reach a broad audience of
students and adults alike during demonstrations at various outreach events and
local schools with diverse student populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radialenes
are cross-conjugated organic molecules that support multielectron transfer and
can often be isolated in various oxidation states. Several substituted
[3]radialene dianions exhibit reversible electrochemistry and undergo steady
galvanostatic cycling in neutral pH aqueous solutions. In this project,
principles of molecular design will be used to logically tailor organic
radialene-based derivatives for use in aqueous redox flow batteries (RFBs). RFB
applications require stable, soluble, and high voltage active species as
electrolytes, and the hexasubstituted [3]radialene scaffold can be assembled in
a controllable, stepwise fashion to allow systematic tailoring to meet these
specifications. A hierarchical synthetic approach will be used to tune the
[3]radialene scaffold using various active methylene building blocks and
zwitterionic radialene intermediates. Introduction of hydrophilic moieties will
be used to enhance aqueous solubility. A predictive method based on Hammett
substituent constants (σ) will be derived to adjust oxidation potentials of the
[3]radialene dianions with precision. The most promising conjugates that exhibit
stability, high solubility, and favorable redox potential will be
electrochemically characterized and used to prepare full cell RFB
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.