* 1955965
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Understanding and Detecting Memory Bugs in Rust
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Linhai Song, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 298,404.00

Rust is a young programming language designed for systems software development.
Its main design goal is to achieve runtime performance as good as its competitor
language, C, while offering better memory and thread safety using a linear type
system and strict compile-time checking. Rust has become increasingly popular
among developers of safety-critical software, such as operating systems,
browsers, and block-chain systems. However, both practitioners and researchers
know little about the status of memory bugs in real-world Rust programs. For
example, do Rust compile-time checks eliminate all memory bugs? If not, do
memory bugs in Rust exhibit certain detectable patterns? This project seeks
answers to these questions by devising techniques to identify and eliminate the
memory bugs? In particular, it aims to achieve a better understanding of common
mistakes made by Rust programmers and build novel techniques to catch memory
bugs missed by Rust compile-time checks. The outcome will influence how Rust
evolves, guide how developers program Rust safely, and improve the safety of the
Rust ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rust safety mechanisms are sound, but
sometimes they are too strict and prevent flexible control over low-level
resources. To mitigate this problem, Rust allows developers to bypass its
compiler checks using unsafe code. A function can be declared as unsafe. A piece
of code inside a safe function can be unsafe, known as interior unsafe, where
the unsafe code is encapsulated internally and treated as safe externally.
Unfortunately, unsafe code and interior unsafe code can lead to memory bugs
since they bypass Rust safety checks. This project aims to better understand
Rust memory bugs and build novel static/dynamic tools to combat Rust memory
bugs. This project contains three components: (1) a comprehensive taxonomy of
Rust memory bugs, (2) novel static techniques to identify memory bugs in
interior unsafe functions, and (3) novel fuzzing techniques enhanced by the
safe/unsafe information in Rust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.