* 1955845
* New Frontiers in Synthesis of Main Group Systems with Novel Photophysical Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* John Protasiewicz, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2024
* USD 490,000.00

The United States is in need of more economical means to manufacture highly
efficient lighting and displays. Methods that can rely upon inexpensive and
abundant elements and ones that minimize the formation of wasteful and toxic
byproducts are especially attractive. To meet this need the Synthesis Program of
the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation supports the research
of Professor John D. Protasiewicz of the Case Western Reserve University into
the preparation of low cost/lightweight/processable plastics and materials
related to light emitting technology. Examples, include polymers, molecular
electronics, light emitting diodes, photovoltaics, and flexible electronics. The
students and postdocs trained and educated as part of this research program are
needed as part of the country's highly skilled workforce in industry and
education. In addition to the technical broader impacts related to advanced
manufaturing, Professor Protasiewicz co-organizes and runs special orientation
programs directed at raising awareness of mental health issues among graduate
students and faculty.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Main group systems with novel
reactivity and bonding modes are examined to advance and create new paradigms in
photophysical chemistry. Building on recently developed multiply-bonded
organophosphorus chemistry dynamic carbene chemistry, electropolymerization, and
fluorescence turn-on chemosensors are explored. Isolable carbenes are examined
as control elements in dynamic photochemical systems. Luminescent and functional
derivatives of 1,3-benzoxaphopsholes (BOPs) and 1,3-benzazaphopsholes (BAPs) are
examined to create P,O- and P,N-chelated complexes to serve as robust functional
materials for light emitting diode applications. New routes to materials
containing photoactive BOPs and BAPs are developed, as well as new types of
electropolymerization reactions to produce materials with electrochromism. The
Professor Protasiewicz co-organizes and runs special orientation programs
directed at raising awareness of mental health issues among graduate students
and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.