* 1955688
* SHF: Medium: Formal Methods as a First-Class Citizen of a Mainstream Compiler Framework
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* John Regehr, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,114,703.00

Compilers and compiler-like tools have always been an important part of
achieving high programmer productivity. This is especially true now due to the
proliferation of new application domains, such as big data, machine learning,
and AI, that are spurring the development of new hardware and new programming
languages. This project develops an open-source compiler infrastructure, called
multi-level intermediate representation (MLIR), that promises to make compilers
and compiler-like tools easier to build by automatically generating some of the
most tedious and error-prone kinds of compiler code from a relatively simple,
high-level specification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MLIR supports the creation of
domain-specific dialects so that it can be used to solve different kinds of
problems. The project explores how to enable developers implementing a new MLIR
dialect to formally specify the meaning of operations in the dialect, in order
to support automated generation of important tools such as interpreters,
optimizers, and translation validators, which use an automated theorem prover to
show that an optimizing compiler did not make any mistakes. The project's
broader agenda is to push the mathematical foundations of compilation into
practice, in an important open-source compiler toolchain, so that the benefits
of formal-methods-driven software development can impact a large number of
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.