* 1955228
* SaTC: Frontiers: Collaborative: Security and Privacy in the Lifecycle of IoT for Consumer Environments (SPLICE)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Carl Gunter, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,134,412.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) now involves the deployment of Smart Things in
everyday residential environments -- houses, apartments, hotels, senior-living
facilities -- resulting in Smart Homes. This era of Smart Things, in which
everyday objects become imbued with computational capabilities and the ability
to communicate with each other and with services across the Internet, creates
novel security and privacy risks. Project SPLICE -- Security and Privacy in the
Lifecycle of IoT for Consumer Environments -- addresses these risks by examining
the human, social, and technological scope of the security and privacy
challenges emerging in Smart Homes across a wide range of residential
stakeholders, including owners, occupants, renters, visitors, and domestic
workers. SPLICE will also contribute to the design of manageable systems for
trustworthy Smart Homes by recommending a set of Best Practice Principles for
the entire ecosystem of residential IoT products and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPLICE research addresses issues important to
these stakeholders, including: (1) situational awareness for Smart-Home
residents through new approaches that discover, identify, and locate both
cooperative and non-cooperative devices, and discover information flows from
such devices; (2) novel interfaces and discovery techniques that enable a new
approach to privacy management, one that shifts the burden from end-users to
consumer-proxy organizations that have the capability to evaluate the privacy
posture of Smart Things; (3) a holistic conceptual framework for reasoning about
privacy, based on SPLICE study of stakeholders' perceptions and expectations of
privacy in Smart Homes. By exploring these issues across various types of multi-
stakeholder residential settings, SPLICE will deepen scientific understanding of
the human factors of privacy and security across different environments and
develop innovative technologies to support security and privacy throughout the
lifecycle of Smart Things. The project includes programs for middle-school
students, research and experiential-learning opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, professional development for postdoctoral scholars and junior
faculty, and community outreach with the aim of encouraging more women and
under-represented minorities to pursue careers in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.