* 1955754
* Spin-State Switching and Conductivity in Metal Complexes with Non-Innocent Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Stephen Hill, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2023
* USD 500,245.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, a collaborative research team led by
Professor Mykhailo Shatruk of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and
Professor Stephen O Hill of the Department of Physics at Florida State
University will study stimuli-responsive molecules. These molecules are formed
by surrounding transition metal ions by organic groups (ligands) capable of
inducing a change in the magnetic state at the metal center. Magnetic state
switching in molecular solids is largely unexplored and holds potential to
develop into stimuli-responsive materials that could be used in new sensors and
catalytic systems. The project will also explore the use of these molecules for
the preparation of solids that combine magnetic state switching with electrical
conductivity. Such multifunctional materials can be useful for the design of
next-generation electronic devices and light-activated switches. The project
will provide diverse research experiences to graduate and undergraduate
students, including students from groups underrepresented in physical sciences.
The outreach efforts include organizing nationwide undergraduate summer schools
in magnetism and magnetic resonance spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project targets the synthesis and extensive characterization of spin-state
switching materials based on the combination of Fe(II) ions with non-innocent
(redox-active) organic ligands. The mechanism of the spin-state transition
induced by a reversible electron transfer between an outer-sphere moiety and the
coordinated ligand is largely unexplored. Establishing conditions that lead to
such spin-state switching phenomena may open a new class of stimuli-responsive
molecules, capable of translating temperature-, pressure-, or light-induced
outer-sphere electron transfer into dramatic changes in the magnetic and
structural states of the system. The team will systematically explore the design
and synthesis of such complexes, followed by their detailed characterization by
X-ray structural analysis, magnetic property measurements, and various types of
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The behavior of complexes will be studied under
various external perturbations to establish the conditions that lead to spin-
state switching. These stimuli-responsive molecules will be co-crystallized with
anionic organic radicals to obtain hybrid multifunctional materials that combine
spin-state switching with electrical conductivity. Changes in the spin
configuration at the metal center typically lead to significant atomic
displacements that propagate through the entire structure. The possibility to
translate such structural perturbations at the magnetically active metal center
to the organic substructure and modulate conductivity via spin-state switching
is especially appealing if it can be stimulated by light irradiation. Beyond the
discovery of a new class of stimuli-responsive complexes and materials, the
findings expected from this project will be also of value to the areas of
catalysis and bioinorganic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.