* 1955069
* Design, Development and Exploration of New Chiral Spirocyclic Ligands and Catalysts for Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Pavel Nagorny, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 380,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Dr. Pavel Nagorny of the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Michigan. Dr. Nagorny and his research team are developing
catalyst scaffolds that can control how molecules interact to produce favored
enantiomeric products. Enantiomers are molecules that have similar structures
but are mirror images of each other (i.e. a right hand and a left hand).
Different enantiomers can have distinct characteristics including therapeutic
potency and properties, which is why there is a critical need for catalysts that
can selectively form these molecules. The Nagorny research group has previously
identified a new type of catalyst that is highly active towards controlling
enantioselectivity and is easily tunable towards new types of reactions.
Professor Nagorny and his students are currently investigating how these
catalysts work and optimizing them for the synthesis of compound fragments that
are currently found in bioactive molecules. In addition, the Nagorny group is
developing heterogeneous analogues of these catalysts to improve recyclability
and sustainability. These studies are being used to train a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students. Professor Nagorny and his students are also
developing instructional safety videos to improve the learning experience of
students at the University of Michigan and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in asymmetric catalysis are critically
important for the synthesis of bioactive molecules. To address this need, Dr.
Pavel Nagorny and his research group are expanding the repertoire of existing
spirocyclic ligands for iridium-catalyzed hydrogenations by exploring a new
C2-symmetric chiral scaffold (SPIROL). These ancillary groups possess the key
structural features found in the most popular and best-performing chiral
spirocyclic ligands and catalysts, but are also easy to synthesize and tune.
Simultaneously, the Nagorny group is also working to improve the process
efficiency and sustainability associated with the use of spirocyclic catalysts
by developing immobilized variants. Immobilized chiral spirocyclic phosphoric
acids are being optimized for asymmetric transformations in continuous flow.
These studies are advancing tools and processes needed to accelerate asymmetric
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.