* 1955032
* QCIS-FF: Quantum Computing &amp; Information Science Faculty Fellow at the University of Illinois Urbana Champaign
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Nancy Amato, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum Computing and Information Science (QCIS) is a priority area for growth
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for the computer science
department (Illinois CS), the Grainger College of Engineering, and the
University. While other departments in engineering, including Electrical and
Computer Engineering (ECE) and Physics, have faculty in this area, the CS
department currently does not have any faculty actively pursuing quantum
computing as their primary research area. This NSF QCIS Faculty Fellow award
will enable Illinois CS to recruit a faculty member who will focus on QCIS
research and who can lead the development and teaching of a quantum-focused
curriculum for computer science students. In addition to having strong support
in the Computer Science Department, the QCIS Faculty Fellow will benefit from
major investments in QCIS by the Grainger College of Engineering and the State
of Illinois. The Illinois Quantum Information Science and Technology center
(IQUIST) in the Grainger College of Engineering is a multi-disciplinary
enterprise that brings together researchers from Physics, Computer Science,
Electrical Engineering, Mathematics, and other departments, to collaborate on a
variety of quantum information related problems. One of the key thrusts of
IQUIST is to build a distributed quantum processor network testbed which will
provide a unique opportunity for faculty in computer science to leverage. The
Discovery Partners Institute (DPI), recently established by the University of
Illinois and the State of Illinois in the city of Chicago, will provide
opportunities for future Illinois faculty members in QCIS to interact closely
with students and researchers at the University of Chicago, Fermilab,
Northwestern University, Argonne National Laboratory, and the University of
Illinois at Chicago though the Chicago Quantum
Exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical computer science has provided a
significant impetus for quantum computing research soon after the inception of
the field and plays a central role in its development. Computational complexity,
cryptography and algorithms are fertile and natural areas of research
collaboration for a QCIS Faculty Fellow and the theory faculty in the CS
department have strong presence in all these areas and some have touched upon
quantum topics in their research. Illinois has long been a preeminent leader in
the fields of scientific computing and high-performance computing (HPC). Within
the scientific computing group at Illinois, departmental faculty are pursuing
work that is cohesive to research in quantum computation and quantum
information. There is, in particular, interesting work to be done in signal
processing with quantum algorithms. There have been some very interesting
applications of quantum algorithms to tasks such as signal denoising, and
finding concrete applications in various ML tasks is of much interest. Practical
quantum computing requires not only algorithmic development but substantial
innovations in programming, systems and architecture and here also Illinois CS
has a large set of faculty working on a diverse set of topics that will be
excellent collaborators for a QCIS Faculty Fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.