* 1955664
* Excellence in Research: Optical Studies of Nanoparticles and Biomacromolecules in Complex Biopolymeric Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Cleon Barnett, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 771,228.00

Advances in the synthesis of diverse engineered nanoparticles continue to open
new applications in various fields, including fabrication of novel functional
nanocomposites for energetic materials, drug delivery, and biomedicine. Entry of
nanoparticles into the environment has raised concerns about adverse effects on
ecosystems. This project will investigate the interactions and transport
properties of nanoparticles and biomacromolecules within complex biopolymeric
matrices. The results of this project will provide insight into the requirements
for designing practical solutions to eliminate the adverse effects of
nanoparticles on the ecosystem. Students trained in this project will learn and
address challenging questions concerning the impact of nano-biotechnology on the
environment and health. These students will be well equipped to integrate with
the next generation of scientists in nanoscience and diversify the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine diverse
optical-based techniques, analytical tools, and machine learning approaches to
determine and enhance the detection limit, to assess the accuracy of
characterization, and to elucidate the complex behaviors of the nanoscopic
structures under various conditions, including the nanoparticles, the
biomacromolecules, and the host biopolymeric matrices. Using alginate as a model
system, complementary laser-based spectra from diverse spectroscopy techniques
(e.g. fluorescence, laser-induced absorption spectroscopy, UV-to-Mid-infrared
absorption spectroscopy, and Raman spectroscopy) and high-resolution 4-D images
(e.g. confocal microscopy) will be generated and analyzed with a combination of
fitting routines and a convolutional neural networks approach. This will not
only characterize changes in the structural and diffusional properties of the
nanoscopic structures but also delineate the various competitive interactions of
these structures, especially due to macromolecular crowding, nanoparticle
binding, and osmolarity of the matrix. In these endeavors and consistent with
the missions of both institutions, students will be trained in diverse areas of
biological physics and in advanced techniques in spectroscopy, imaging, and
computational simulations. More significantly, they will learn and address
challenging questions of the impact of nano-biotechnology on our ecosystem and
health by, for example, elucidating the mechanistic processes of interactions of
nanoparticles and biomacromolecules at the nanoscale. These students will be
well equipped to integrate with the next generation of scientists in nanoscience
and diversify the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.