* 1955299
* Catalyst Project: Quantum-Mechanical Investigation of Structure-Property Relationships in Organic Emitters for Efficient Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence (TADF)
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Seyhan Salman, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2023
* USD 348,759.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Clark Atlanta University has potential to broaden impacts in several
areas. The use of computational methods to study light emitting diodes will
result in an ability to predict the properties of these systems and increase
performance through efficient design. The research will present an opportunity
for undergraduate students to develop skills of scientific research and
computational modeling. These skills will allow students to explore career
opportunities in fields such as chemistry, materials, molecular modeling,
computation and data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
theoretical characterization of purely organic electronic materials for
efficient Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence (TADF). The goal is to
develop novel organic materials for TADF-based Organic Light Emitting Diodes
(OLEDs). By using state-of-the-art theoretical and computational methodologies
based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) applied with range-separated hybrid
functionals, the research team will study the electronic and optical properties
of carbazole-based donor-acceptor compounds as TADF organic emitters. The
research team will develop: (1) a comprehensive description, at the molecular
level, of the fundamental photophysical processes of TADF emitters; (2) a
modeling protocol that can accurately describe the electronic structure of such
emitters; (3) structure-property relationships; and provide theoretical
guidelines for the design of new materials and/or selection of existing
materials with well-defined properties leading to devices with improved
performances. Thus, this project will contribute to the new materials
development effort for displays in particular TADF-based
OLEDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.