* 1955249
* Calculus of Variations and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Fang-Hua Lin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 353,206.00

Motivated by applications, the PI will study problems concerning the uniform and
quantitative controllability for various dynamical systems described by partial
differential equations in highly oscillatory or random media. The methods
currently available to investigate such problems for the case of homogeneous or
slowly varing medium may not be applicable to many real-world problems that
often possess heterogeneity, noise, and randomness. Thus, a new set of ideas and
techniques are needed to strike a delicate balance between the known theory for
the homogeneous situation and the one related to the oscillating phenomena. The
dynamics of liquid crystals that are widely used in display devices will also be
studied. This involves fascinating and diffcult theoretical questions that deal
with the nonlinear coupling of fluid dynamical equations and flows of certain
geometric objects that may lead to a new direction of research. The project is
an important and integral part of the PI's training program for graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers. The results obtained will be disseminated
through publications and through lectures, seminars, conferences, and summer
schools that are designed for educational purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
intends to study three sets of problems from calculus of variations and partial
differential equations. The first set of problems is concerned with analysis of
partial differential equations with highly oscillatory coefficients. A
tremendous amount of knowledge has been accumulated on this topic under the
general theory of (periodic and stochastic) homogenization. However, there are
many interesting and deep open problems such as those related to quantitative
(for both large and small scales) unique continuations, uniform and exact
controllability of evolution problems, and stability estimates on the related
inverse problems in such highly oscillatory medium. The second set of problems
are a continuation of the PI's earlier studies on the hydrodynamics of liquid
crystals with an emphasis on the exploration of the underlying nonlinear
coupling structure. Of particular interest are global existence of suitable weak
solutions in 3D and the existence of finite time blow ups in 2D for the
Ericksen-Leslie system. The last part of the project is to investigate some
extremum problems of elliptic eigenvalues and the associated free boundaries.
These problems are motivated by studies in optimal designs, pattern formation,
and other applications in condense matter physics. This is a three year research
program that should yield new ideas, methods, and important consequences on the
subjects, and it builds upon the PI's previous research
accomplishments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.