* 1955663
* Novel Synthetic Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Vladimir Gevorgyan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2023
* USD 440,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Gevorgyan. His research team is
developing novel methods for converting abundant and cheap feedstock materials
into value-added products. Carbon-hydrogen bonds plentifully present in organic
molecules are targeted for useful elaboration. However, the high strength of the
carbon-hydrogen bond prevents its easy breakage and thus may require forcing
conditions such as high reaction temperatures, or the use of precious and rare
transition metals. Such chemistry may also require the use of highly unstable
reagents, which then raise safety concerns. Professor Gevorgyan’s team is
investigating very mild and safe transition metal-free methods for generation
and manipulation of various reactive species from simple and stable precursors
under visible light irradiation. Engagement of this approach allows for mild,
efficient, and selective functionalization of organic molecules. The broader
impacts of this project include providing new and effective routes into building
block molecules of importance in chemical biology and materials science.
Moreover, this research has the potential to significantly reduce the cost of
chemical reagents needed, and thus have a favorable impact on process efficiency
and economy. In addition, Dr. Gevorgyan is actively engaging in outreach
activities for recruiting undergraduate students into research, including
members of groups that are currently underrepresented in science. Student
involvement in research at UT-Dallas is projected to provide a forum for the
expression and cultivation of student talent and creativity and enhance their
career possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor
Gevorgyan’s team is developing new mild transition metal-free methods for
generation of aryl-, vinyl-, alkyl- and heteroatom-centered radicals to unlock
their potential in modern organic synthesis. The approach under development
relies on single electron transfer (SET) reduction of electrophilic
intermediates with nucleophilic reagents. This can be accomplished under mildly
thermal or visible light-induced conditions. The initially forming radicals may
undergo atom transfer (AT) or hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) to generate a
transposed radical, which then is involved in further synthetic transformations,
including aliphatic C(sp3)−H bond functionalization, desaturation, or cascade
cyclization reactions. The factors favoring efficient SET, AT, and HAT processes
are under investigation. These methods, if fully developed, would not only
deepen our understanding of electron-transfer chemistry for generation of
reactive intermediates, but would also substantially broaden the arsenal of
tools available for synthetic and medicinal chemists for synthesis and late
stage modification of complex molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.