* 1955026
* Cavity-Controlled Vibrational Dynamics and Chemical Reactivity with Quantum Strong Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kevin Kubarych, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 421,590.00

A central goal of chemistry is to discover new ways to control the outcome of
chemical reactions. The environment in which a molecule exists can determine how
or even if the molecule will undergo a chemical reaction. Hydrochloric acid
(HCl) dissolved in water readily dissociates into H+ and Cl- ions but remains
largely intact when dissolved in an organic solvent like acetonitrile (C2H3N).
Some reactions occur only in the complete absence of solvent molecules; chemists
thus routinely create vacuum environments that are more “empty” than outer
space. In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms-A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kevin Kubarych and
his students at the University of Michigan are exploring a new type of
environment that does not exist in nature, but which is also capable of
dramatically altering the course of a chemical reaction. Researchers have
discovered that by placing reacting molecules within a space formed by two
parallel mirrors (their separation is very small, the width of roughly one human
hair!) the forces that govern the chemical reaction are different than those
outside of the device. The device is called an optical resonator and it can be
tuned in a manner similar to how one tunes a radio to the right frequency to
pick up a given radio station. The graduate student researchers working on this
project are externally controlling the cavity to change the behavior of
molecules between the mirrors, with the ultimate goal of controlling the
reactions that occur in the cavity. The students are gaining valuable experience
in experimental science and quantum mechanical theory, which provides the
framework for understanding the interactions between molecules and optical
resonator cavities. In addition to the formal training of doctoral students, the
project also entails the development of educational modules in quantum mechanics
for high school students. Professor Kubarych and his students are developing a
two-week course module for the Michigan Math and Science Scholars, a program to
expose high school students to exciting new and fundamental concepts in math and
science. The modules allow students to learn about lasers and basic concepts in
quantum mechanics via hands-on experiments and computer
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs ultrafast, two-
dimensional infrared spectroscopy to track the equilibrium kinetics of one of
the most fundamental chemical transformations, rotation about a C-C single bond
while the target molecule (1-fluoro-2-isocyanato-ethane) is confined within a
specially designed scanning Fabry-Perot sample cavity. The central hypothesis is
that the target molecule and cavity form a hybrid of light and matter
(polaritons), and that the cavity conditions may provide an external means for
controlling chemical reactions. By comparing the reaction kinetics as well as
the equilibrium between the isomers inside and outside of the cavity, it is
possible to determine the influence of strong coupling in the reaction energy
surface. Varying the molecule concentration allows direct control over the
coupling to the cavity and tuning the cavity length using piezoelectric
transducers enables systematic variation of the cavity resonance. In addition to
direct investigations of polariton-controlled ground state chemical reactivity,
this project also aims to test basic concepts in chemical dynamics under strong
coupling. Specifically, the project addresses new concepts in multi-mode
coupling, inhomogeneous broadening, and the ability of strong coupling to alter
anharmonic coupling manifested as Fermi resonances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.