* 1955196
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Exploiting Synergies Between Machine-Learning Algorithms and Hardware Heterogeneity for High-Performance and Reliable Manycore Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Advanced computing systems have long been enablers for breakthroughs in science,
engineering, and new technologies. However, with the slowing down of Moore’s law
and the relentless needs of Big-Data applications, e.g., deep learning, graph
analytics, and scientific simulations, current solutions are not adequate. There
is a need for innovative computer architectures and computationally efficient
methods to design application-specific hardware systems to optimize performance,
power consumption, and reliability. The main focus of this work is design and
demonstration of a heterogeneous single-chip manycore platform, integrating CPU,
GPU, accelerator, and memory cores, via a network-on-chip to avoid expensive
off-chip data transfers. The goal of this project is to address the design of
application-specific heterogeneous manycore systems that are poised to achieve
unprecedented levels of performance and energy-efficiency for Big-Data
applications. The PIs will disseminate research outcomes via publications,
seminars, tutorials, and workshops. The project is also leading to the
development of an interdisciplinary research-based curriculum integrating
computer architectures, machine learning, and data-driven design optimization.
Undergraduate and graduate students involved in this research will be trained to
apply classroom knowledge to research problems that require next-generation
hardware, software, and theoretical expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will lay the foundations for a novel computing paradigm for Big-Data
applications that allows us to quickly design and autonomously self-manage
heterogeneous manycore computing systems to improve performance, reduce power
consumption, and enhance reliability. In-memory processing can overcome the
memory wall, but it introduces new challenges in overall application-specific
system optimization. The specific research tasks include: 1) Data-driven multi-
objective design space exploration and optimization algorithms for heterogeneous
manycore architectures; 2) Reliability assessment and system design for
reliability; 3) Structured learning framework for autonomous resource
management; and 4) Performance, power, and reliability evaluation using emerging
Big-Data application workloads. This framework will combine the benefits of
multi-objective design space exploration and optimization, heterogeneity in
computation and communication, and data-driven algorithms to improve
performance, energy-efficiency, and reliability of manycore
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.