* 1955461
* EAGER: Understanding the mechanisms of action of two diverse antifungal plant defensins
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Dilip Shah, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 11/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Crop diseases caused by fungal pathogens lead to tremendous economic losses and
threaten food security worldwide. Chemical fungicides, crop rotation and natural
genetic resistance don't provide adequate control of these diseases. At present,
fungal diseases remain a key battlefront for reducing pre-and post-harvest
losses of crop yield. Plants produce a large number of antifungal peptides as
part of a complex set of multi-tiered defense strategies. Small cysteine-rich
antifungal peptides called defensins exhibit potent broad-spectrum antifungal
activity. This project seeks insight into the mechanisms that govern antifungal
activity of two very different antifungal defensins from a model legume. This
knowledge will facilitate use of these peptides as effective and sustainable
biological fungicides in agriculture. Importantly, this project provides the
opportunity to train the postdoctoral fellow and under-represented minority
undergraduate students. Students and the postdoctoral fellow will be broadly
trained in protein biochemistry, molecular biology and fungal cell biology so as
to better prepare them for future careers in science. Research experiences will
also be provided to K-5 teachers from low performing public schools in the St
Louis area so that they can make connections between knowledge acquired in the
classroom and research conducted in the laboratory. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to elucidate molecular mechanisms governing the potent
antifungal activity of two plant defensins from a model legume Medicago
truncatula. These defensins kill economically important fungal pathogens at low
concentrations. These peptides bind to bioactive phospholipids in the plasma
membrane of a fungal pathogen and antifungal activity of each defensin is a
function of which phospholipid(s) it targets. This project will uncover sequence
motifs governing phospholipid specificity and recognition for these peptides.
Molecular mechanisms by which these peptides gain access to the cytoplasm of a
wheat fungal pathogen Fusarium graminearum will be identified. In addition,
systematic biochemical and proteomics approaches will be undertaken to identify
intracellular protein targets of these peptides in this pathogen. The fully
completed and annotated genome sequence of this fungus and its functional
genomics database will provide essential resources for the research. Detailed
mechanistic understanding of the antifungal action of these peptides will enable
a more realistic prediction of their antifungal activity in a complex
environment of the host plant and design of more effective peptides for disease
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.