* 1955811
* D3SC: Identification of Products and Pathways in Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Pierre Baldi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors David Van Vranken of the
Department of Chemistry and Pierre Baldi of the Department of Computer Science
at the University of California, Irvine are training a computer system called
Reaction Predictor using deep learning to identify plausible stepwise reaction
pathways based on the structure of the reactants. The goal of this research is
to develop a computational tool that rapidly searches highly branched reaction
pathways to identify the chemical structures of the products of organic
reactions. Identifying the products of organic reactions would accelerate
pharmaceutical synthesis, drug stability studies, and other advanced
manufacturing requiring synthetic organic chemistry. The project lies at the
interface of mechanistic organic chemistry, chemoinformatics, and machine
learning. The training data is based on common depictions of organic reactions
understandable by everyone from high school chemistry students to academic
researchers. The team is well-positioned to provide education and training for
students underrepresented in science. Sophomore organic chemistry students will
be engaged in benchmarking the progress in the ongoing evolution of machine vs.
human prediction as applied to organic chemistry reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first stage in predicting polar chemical reactivity is
the identification of nucleophilic electron source atoms and electrophilic
electron sink atoms. Chemists currently lack a database of nucleophilicity and
electrophilicity parameters that covers the full span of nucleophilic functional
groups, from carbon-carbon bonds to alkyl anions, and the full span of
electrophilic functional groups, from carbon-carbon sigma antibonding orbitals
to the empty orbitals of a cyanide cation. To fill this void in knowledge,
methyl ion affinities are being calculated in a way that correlates them with
solution phase reactivity parameters and those correlation values will be used
to train Reaction Predictor in source and sink scoring. Dynamically adjusted
thresholds will be evaluated to accommodate highly reactive or unreactive source
or sinks. The current training set of tens of thousands of elementary reaction
steps will be greatly expanded. In addition, Reaction Predictor will be trained
to rank source-sink pairs occurring in any given set of reactants. Reaction
Predictor will use these rankings to identify products and multistep reaction
pathways for reactions carried out in the laboratory. In addition, the Reaction
Predictor will be made available on-line, enabling a robust user community to
participate in artificial intelligence as applied to organic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.