* 1955874
* RUI: An Experimental and Theoretical Study of Stannylcarbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Dasan Thamattoor, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 360,000.00

In this RUI project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism
B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Thamattoor of the Department of
Chemistry at Colby College, and his team of undergraduate students, are
investigating tin-substituted carbenes by experimental and theoretical methods.
Carbenes are highly reactive chemical species which feature a carbon that has
only two bonds instead of the usual four. Carbenes that are coordinated with a
variety of metals have played important roles in the production of commercially
valuable materials. However, much less is known about carbenes in which one or
both bonds of the carbon are attached to a metal. This research aims to address
this gap in knowledge. This project also includes efforts to persuade high
school students to consider STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) disciplines in college. Professor Thamattoor provides research
opportunities to high school students in the laboratory. The group also works
with teachers in the local grade schools to deliver quality instruction in STEM
subjects. In recognition of the importance of global scientific cooperation,
undergraduate students are provided with research opportunities in international
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-coordinated carbene complexes are well
known compounds that have had a transformative impact on synthesis and
catalysis. In contrast, very little is known about uncomplexed metal-substituted
carbenes, where the metal is one (or both) of the substituents on the divalent
carbon. Through this RUI (Research at Undergraduate Institutions) grant, a
comprehensive set of projects is being undertaken to study stannylcarbenes.
These intermediates are generated photochemically from new precursors based on
cyclopropanated phenanthrene and indan systems. The structure and reactivity of
these tin-substitued carbenes are investigated experimentally by steady state
photolysis, electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, matrix isolation
spectroscopy, and time-resolved laser flash photolysis, as well as by modern
computational methods. In addition, several initiatives to create international
research opportunities for undergraduates, and to promote high-quality STEM
education for grade K -12 students in area schools are being pursued. The
integrated research and outreach activities enrich the undergraduate research
experience at Colby College, and also serve the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.