* 1955358
* Collaborative Research: Photocatalytic Ketyl and Amino Radicals-Initiated C-C Bond Formation via Semiconductor-Based Photocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yujie Sun, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 355,001.00

The development of economic and efficient methods to form carbon-carbon bonds is
an important role in the chemical industry. Many traditional strategies have
been invented based on sophisticated molecules known as catalysts. A common and
persisting limitation of known catalysts is that they are expensive,
inefficient, and generate unwanted byproducts as waste. Following the principles
of green chemistry Dr. Yujie Sun from University of Cincinnati and Dr. Peilin
Liao from Purdue University, with funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program,
are collaborating to design and develop improved catalysts for these important
transformations. Their synergistic experimental and computational project is
addressing the fundamental science needed to use light as the energy source to
drive carbon-carbon bond forming reactions using photocatalysts. Dr. Sun is
developing a new course in Green Chemistry to undergraduates a broad background
of sustainability in the context of chemistry. The Sun group is also actively
involved in many outreach programs at University of Cincinnati, including UC
Community Day Open House, UC-Chem Summer Camp at Cincinnati Museum Center,
Science Day at the UC Center for Field Studies for K-12 grade students and the
general public. Dr. Liao’s group is involved in outreach programs at Purdue
University, such as Purdue NanoDays and the Purdue Summer Undergraduate Research
Fellowship Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Yujie Sun of the University
of Cincinnati and Dr. Peilin Liao of Purdue University are developing a novel
synthetic approach to C-C coupling reactions on semiconductor-based
photocatalysts. Ultrathin semiconductor-based photocatalytic systems, including
CdS, ZnIn2S4, and CNx nanosheets, are synthesized, characterized, and
systematically investigated for the C-C coupling reactions of carbonyls,
alcohols, amines, and imines under visible light irradiation. By modulating the
morphology and band structures of targeted semiconductors and matching the redox
potentials of organic substrates, ketyl and amino radicals are produced in
proximity on the semiconductor surface, which readily couple to accomplish the
desired C-C bond formation. It should be emphasized that this strategy utilizes
both excited electrons and holes, maximizing the energy efficiency of
photocatalysis and circumventing the necessity of sacrificial reagents. Assisted
by DFT computations, this project encompasses solid-state synthesis, materials
characterization, photolysis investigation, isotope and electronic effects
study, and kinetic analysis, starting from model systems for homo-coupling to
complex cross-coupling of a broad scope of substrates. Both Dr. Sun and Dr. Liao
are actively engaged in STEM outreach programs focused on underrepresented
students and the general public, in support of the broader impacts of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.