* 1955337
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: Bolstering UAV Cybersecurity Education through Curriculum Development with Hands-on Laboratory Framework
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2020,11/30/2020
* Xiaolin Xu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 11/30/2020
* USD 179,999.00

The striking development of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), or drones, is
unleashing the increasing application in civilian and military scenarios. At the
same time, serious cybersecurity concerns have been raised about UAVs, wherein
they are identified as targets of cyber-attacks or potential attack vectors for
malicious actors. This project seeks to improve UAV and cybersecurity education
through the development of curriculum materials and hands-on laboratory
platform. Specifically, this will include the development of 1) a set of
cohesive course modules that systematically cover UAV cybersecurity topics; 2) a
UAV cybersecurity laboratory platform that provides a series of exercise modules
and can be easily deployed; 3) an open and collaborative UAV cybersecurity
repository for educators, students, and researchers to discuss, collaborate,
contribute, and share; and 4) faculty development summer workshops for UAV
cybersecurity education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first to
provide education materials, including hands-on labs on UAV cybersecurity
systematically. The intellectual merit of the proposed project lies in its
development of the novel, effective, and engaging course modules on UAV
cybersecurity. The deliverables include a low-cost hardware-in-the-loop (HIL)
UAV experimental kit; the integrated development environment (IDE) to use the
tool kits; multiple hands-on labs covering the hardware security, communication
security, network security, and data security. The investigators will build
awareness and competence to respond to a dynamic and rapidly developing array of
cyber threats, especially those in the emerging UAV
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.