* 1955907
* Near Term Applications of Quantum Machine Learning Techniques to Quantum Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sabre Kais, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,950.00

Sabre Kais of Purdue University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry
for a project that combines quantum computation and machine learning to develop
quantum machine learning techniques. These techniques are aimed at grand
challenge problems in chemistry such as electronic structure calculations.
Quantum computation has received enormous attention and extensive investigation
in recent years due to its potential to outperform the best classical
computation techniques by exploiting the unique advantages provided by quantum
phenomena such as superposition and entanglement. In the meanwhile, machine
learning has demonstrated remarkable success as one of the most important
subfields of artificial intelligence, with numerous current and prospective
applications in science and engineering. The project is expected to generate
both fundamental knowledge and practical applications in quantum algorithm
designs, machine learning methods, molecular models, reaction simulations, and
material designs. Professor Kais is active in educational activities focused on
quantum computing and quantum information aimed at undergraduate and graduate
chemistry students. The project helps to train the workforce of the future in
this critically important area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
develop quantum machine learning – a hybridization of classical machine learning
and quantum computation – to solve three major chemistry problems: 1. A hybrid
quantum algorithm employing a restricted Boltzmann machine to obtain accurate
molecular potential energy surfaces. 2. A way to realize non-linear activation
functions in a quantum neural network model applied to finding the ground state
energy for molecules. 3. A quantum machine learning algorithm to classify
quantum states based on entanglement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.