* 1955587
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: Learning and Inference in High-Dimensional Models: Rigorous Analysis and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Philip Schniter, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 449,883.00

A key feature of contemporary signal processing and machine learning problems is
their massive scale. Signal processing tasks routinely involve images and videos
with millions of pixels, and modern deep-learning methods often involve millions
of tunable parameters. Although recent methods, particularly deep learning, have
had tremendous practical success in the high-dimensional setting, they are
difficult to explain from a theoretical perspective. This project seeks to
develop mathematical tools to better understand such estimation and learning
problems along the following directions: How does one tractably formulate
precise, high-dimensional analyses of contemporary problems; what do those
analyses say about the information-theoretic limits of estimation and learning;
and how can these limits be approached by practical algorithms? To achieve
broader impacts, the project includes dissemination in workshops, coordination
with the growing machine learning industry and the development of a new module
on data science to be provided to high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project builds on the powerful approximate message passing (AMP) framework, an
estimation methodology that offers the potential for a rigorous analytic
understanding of modern, high-dimensional problems. Since its origin as a method
for understanding linear inverse problems in compressed sensing, AMP has had
tremendous success in a wide range of estimation and learning tasks. This
project aims to extend the AMP framework to contemporary, large-scale learning
tasks. The project is organized into three main thrusts: 1) inference with
structured bilinear models, 2) learning of multi-layer neural networks, and 3)
analysis with Fourier and convolutional operators. In each thrust, the project
will develop fundamental mathematical theory and validate the theory on key
applications, particular in image processing and statistical
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.