* 1955482
* CAS: Diastereoselective Polymerization Catalysis for Stereo-Sequenced Polymers with Biodegradability and Chemical Circularity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Eugene Chen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Eugene Chen in the Department of
Chemistry at Colorado State University. Professor Chen is designing catalyst
systems for the synthesis of advanced polymeric materials that are biodegradable
and chemically circular (can be deconstructed back into their component parts).
The central goal of this program is to develop polymerization catalysts that can
directly convert mixtures of monomer diastereomers (molecules that have the same
bond connections but different three-dimensional structure) into new high-
performance biodegradable materials with defined three-dimensional structure.
Deconstruction of the polymers into fragments that can be joined back together
into monomers is also being studied. This work is developing new catalytic
processes for the atom- and energy-efficient synthesis of polymeric materials.
The proposed research encompasses diverse areas of the chemical sciences,
materials engineering, and sustainability, thereby providing an excellent
opportunity for the training and teaching of students, including
underrepresented and undergraduate students. This project also addresses the
critical need to improve polymer recyclability and Professor Chen is emphasizing
the importance of this sustainability issue in workshops, lectures, and
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New catalysts that can polymerize
diastereomeric mixtures of monomers at any rac/meso ratio into stereo-sequenced
polymers have the potential to transform the synthesis of high-performance
crystalline materials. Diastereoselective polymerization not only avoids the
material loss and added energy costs associated with diastereomeric pre-
separation and purification required by traditional stereoselective
polymerization methods, but also utilizes all of the diastereomers in a mixture
to modulate material properties. This study is advancing diastereoselective
polymerization catalysis to achieve direct polymerization of diastereomeric
monomer mixtures into isotactic/syndiotactic stereo-sequenced biodegradable
crystalline polymers. The approach involves designing diastereomer-selective and
earth-abundant catalysts as well as examining catalyst structureâ€“selectivity
relationships via a combined experimental and theoretical approach. Furthermore,
catalysis-enabled chemical circularity of the synthesized polymers is being
developed to transform these materials back to their monomers, thus closing the
loop of their life cycles. This program uses a rational catalyst/monomer design
approach to advance polymeric materials and methodologies by emphasizing
fundamental concepts related to ditacticity and diastereoselectivity. These
studies serve as an excellent training ground for aspiring undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral chemists of diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.