* 1955055
* CAS: Catalytic Stereoselective Fragment Coupling Reactions of Feedstock Chemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Simon Meek, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2024
* USD 465,000.00

The development of new transformations that convert abundant chemical feedstocks
efficiently into chiral molecules of biological importance is essential to the
future advances in biology and medicine. In this project, Dr. Meek is developing
catalytic, multicomponent carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions that link
hydrocarbons with common molecular fragments. Such transformations provide an
innovative strategy for synthesizing new complex molecules, in addition to
providing economic and manufactural advantages over current methods. By using
earth abundant transition metal catalysts, Dr. Meek and his team are
demonstrating that readily available starting materials can be converted into
synthetically-versatile, reactive intermediates to deliver very specific product
structures with medical-relevance. Dr. Meek is actively engaged in outreach
activities that build upon his research and focus on topics that demonstrate the
enabling impact chemical synthesis and catalysis have on society. These
activities, which include increasing participation of undergraduate students of
all backgrounds and incorporating broad educational components into courses at
various levels, are aimed towards enhancing all students’ STEM education and
creating supportive environments for fostering next-generation scientists. This
team also plans to integrate and expand their established outreach activities
(e.g., AM-WISE, University of North Carolina (UNC) Science Expo, National
Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical
Engineers (NOBCChE), and their NSF-funded UNC Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU)program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Meek and
his team of graduate and undergraduate students at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, develop stereoselective nickel-catalyzed fragment
coupling reactions of olefins. These transformations exhibit high levels of
enantio- and diastereoselectivity essential for rendering the syntheses of
difficult-to-access molecular entities substantially more time and cost
effective – properties that are of importance to both academic and industrial
synthetic chemistry. In general, these multicomponent processes involve the
catalytic stereoselective generation of chiral nickel–alkyl species through an
oxidative process, followed by coupling with a variety of carbon nucleophiles to
afford a range of products. Reactions result in the formation of two new bonds
and up to three new stereocenters, and allow for the generation of tertiary and
quaternary stereocenters in addition to alcohol, amine, and carbonyl
functionality. This research impacts areas of chiral ligand design and will
stimulate areas of catalysis and method development with earth abundant
transition metals. Dr. Meek is actively engaged in outreach activities that
focus on enhancing students’ exposure to STEM education, increasing the
participation of underrepresented groups in science, and broadening the
dissemination of scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.