* 1955670
* CNS Core: Medium: The Synchronous Data Center
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Andreas Haeberlen, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 931,029.00

Most major web services - such as Amazon, Google, or Facebook - employ massive
data centers that can each contain hundreds of thousands of computers. Today,
these data centers are almost always built using an asynchronous design, with
few or no assumptions about how long it might take for two computers to
communicate, or when exactly a computer might be able to complete a given task.
The 'asynchronous design' has been the standard since the very beginning of
distributed computing; it is the one that is taught in textbooks, and it is
rarely questioned. However, the design is not as simple as it may at first
appear: in practice it often leads to low efficiency, unpredictable timing, and
many other serious problems. This project proposes a radical new solution--
synchronous networks-- that intrinsically eliminate these problems. At a high
level, this approach involves creating a detailed choreography that describes
what each computer should do and when. While synchronous designs can be more
complex, they also come with considerable potential benefits, including higher
efficiency, better predictability, and support for new kinds of services. In
addition, they can potentially sidestep some of the most difficult problems with
asynchronous designs. This project will develop the management architecture and
necessary algorithms and other components for this new model and explore its
performance in a network testbed and through simulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is leveraging insights from cyber-physical
systems, which have been using synchronous designs for decades, albeit at much
smaller scales and in a very different environment. It is developing 1) a
prototype of a new, fully synchronous computing platform; 2) new, scalable
coordination mechanisms and scheduling techniques; and 3) a set of synchronous
building blocks for applications. The project is using web search as a case
study to demonstrate the end-to-end benefits of the synchronous
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.