* 1955792
* Research Initiation Award: De/Reconstructing African-American Preservice Teachers' Mathematics Identities and Visions of Mathematics Teaching for Equity
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jared Webb, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,997.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State University has
potential broader impacts in a number of areas. The goal of this project is to
examine the entering and evolving mathematics identities and visions of
mathematics teaching of African American preservice elementary teachers as they
engage in mathematics and mathematics education coursework informed by and co-
designed with undergraduate elementary education students and research
assistants. The project is a collaborative effort between the mathematics and
the mathematics education departments at the
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project is to conduct
a set of research studies in undergraduate mathematics-oriented spaces using
qualitative longitudinal interview studies and mixed-methods studies
incorporating longitudinal measures of student achievement in mathematics and
mathematics education. The research team will develop a framework for
trajectories of African American preservice elementary teachers entering and
evolving mathematics identities and visions of mathematics teaching and design
principles to guide the development of mathematics and mathematics education
courses that attend to these trajectories. Contributions include the development
of theoretical and conceptual tools related to African American preservice
teachers that might improve the mathematics education communities’ efforts to
both diversify the teaching workforce and promote practices, pedagogies, and
epistemologies that meet the needs of African American students. Moreover,
impacts of this study aim to inform and shape the practices and pedagogies of
K-16 mathematics and mathematics education courses by offering an empirically-
supported set of design principles and generalized recommendations to support
local adaptations of resources for mathematics and mathematics education
coursework that “allows Black learners to flourish in their humanity and
brilliance” (Martin, 2018).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.