* 1955981
* CIF: Medium: Discovering Changes in Networks: Fundamental Limits, Efficient Algorithms, and Large-Scale Neuroscience
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Venkatesh Saligrama, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,231,999.00

Modern technological advances have made it possible to collect extremely large
datasets across a wide range of disciplines, spanning from social science to
neuroscience. These datasets often consist of the activity patterns of many
nodes that together form a network. For instance, in a social network, each node
can represent a person while a connection between two nodes can represent a
friendship. In the brain, each node can represent a neuron and a connection
between two nodes can represent a link between the neurons. An emerging
challenge is to design algorithms that can reliably and efficiently infer the
hidden structure of these networks (namely the set of connections between
nodes), given only recordings of the nodes' activity patterns. A related problem
seeks to identify hidden clusters or communities in a network based only on the
knowledge of some of the nodes' connections. This project seeks to examine these
problems from the perspective of network change discovery: Rather than attempt
to recover the full network structure, the goal is to determine whether a
network structure has changed significantly over a certain time scale, and where
these structural changes have occurred. Preliminary findings show that, in some
settings, change discovery can be substantially easier than structure recovery.
This cross-disciplinary project will examine network change discovery problems
from theoretical and algorithmic perspectives; the resulting tools will be
applied to large neural datasets, on the way to understand how learning a task
changes the connectivity of neurons in a particular region of the brain. In
addition, this project will also attempt to forge new connections between the
information sciences and neuroscience through a combination of focused
workshops, course development, and co-supervision of undergraduate and graduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, the goals of the
project are grouped into three thrusts. The first thrust employs modern tools
from information theory and high-dimensional statistics to determine the
fundamental limits for testing and recovering network changes. This effort will
begin with simple canonical models, such as stochastic block models and Markov
random fields, where direct comparisons are possible with prior work on
structure learning. It will then move towards richer models that include
dynamics, partial observations, and overlapping communities. The second thrust
examines these problems from an algorithmic perspective, and seeks to design
computationally-efficient algorithms that can provably approach the fundamental
limits established in the first thrust. These algorithms will be validated on
synthetic datasets, and then adapted to handle the complexities present in real
datasets. The third thrust will apply these algorithms to large-scale calcium
imaging neural datasets collected from the hippocampus of mice during
association and extinction learning experiments. The goal is to determine how
the connectivity between neurons changes as mice learn the
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.