* 1955370
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Learning to Cache and Caching to Learn in High Performance Caching Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mohammad Alizadeh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Caching is fundamental to cloud computing and content distribution, and is
important to the vast number of applications and services they support. Crucial
performance metrics of a caching algorithm are its ability to quickly and
accurately learn a changing popularity distribution. However, there is a serious
disconnect between empirical studies using real-world traces that account for
popularity changes, and analytical performance analysis results that assume a
fixed popularity. A basic goal of this project is to develop a methodology based
on online learning and reinforcement learning for caching algorithm design with
provable performance guarantees. This enables the systematic design of caching
algorithms that can be tailored to a variety of application contexts. The use-
case of these algorithms is in high performance caching networks that support
large-scale cloud applications and services. Emulation of high-performance
caching systems to leverage and to empirically evaluate the online learning
algorithms developed supports this goal, and provides a real-world context for
the methodology developed. The results will also enhance the performance of
content distribution platforms. At the same time the project develops
fundamental theories that pertain to the area of machine learning, specifically
to online learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at optimally
utilizing locally available memory and computing resources of caches, while
ensuring provably good performance via fast and accurate learning of content
popularity. This requires the conjunction of several mathematical tools to
analyze online learning algorithms, as well as strong systems development skills
to make the algorithms a reality. The project addresses these key challenges in
two main themes. The first theme focuses on systematic design of distributed
online learning in networks of caches using collaborative filtering for
distributed identification of popular content, and multi-agent reinforcement
learning for joint learning and content placement. The second theme focuses on
building high performing caching systems using the algorithms developed in the
first theme, and quantifying the impacts of the algorithms on real-world
applications such as Hipster Shop, an open-source e-commerce website, and Spark
data-analytics job pipelines. The immediate impact of this project is in
creating high performance caching schemes that apply to cloud computing and
content distribution networks. This project also advances the fundamental theory
of online learning. The project includes an education plan focusing on machine
learning and caching, and outreach in the form of summer camps and seminars for
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.