* 1955887
* CAS: Metal-Mediated Nitrate Deoxygenation by Rationally-Designed Organic Reductants and Subsequent Nitrogen-Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kenneth Caulton, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division of the
National Science Foundation is supporting Professor Kenneth Caulton in the
Department of Chemistry at Indiana University for research directed at the
activation of nitrogen oxides. This project is developing new ways to
incorporate nitrogen from agricultural waste into useful organic compounds. This
nitrogen recycling requires chemical promoters that interact with the nitrate,
rendering it reactive. The chemical promotors are chosen from among inexpensive
and abundant precursors often containing silicon. The discovery strategy begins
with laboratory experiments combining these silicon promotors with the nitrate.
The results of these experiments are simulated mathematically, which leads to
improved promotors, which are then tested experimentally. The overall process is
leading to insights for the recycling of other waste products containing
phosphorus, carbon, and chlorine. The project also entails a major training
component; student coworkers obtain hands-on experience in both chemical
synthesis and computer simulations. Professor Caulton also leads diverse
outreach activities aimed toward familiarizing the public with the benefits of
chemical technology. Finally, the project is preparing a group of undergraduate
and graduate students with expertise in
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets nitrate reduction by
devising new reaction methods using mechanistically-guided organic reductants
and transition-metal catalysts. For the latter, redox-active ligands are being
used due to their ability to promote the requires multi-electron conversions.
Preliminary results reveal that nitrate reduction can be coupled to Câ”€N bond
formation. As one form of reduced nitrogen, transition metal nitrides are being
combined with unsaturated organic substrates to give new concepts of reactivity,
i.e., beyond electrophilicity and nucleophilicity. Value-added compounds are
sought by devising methods to create new bonds between nitrosyl groups and
carbon. New nitride functionalization also impacts the research areas of
nitrogen fixation and N-C bond formation generally. The new synthetic
methodology accomplishing efficient nitrogen transfer can potentially provide a
blueprint to reduce N, P, and S containing oxyanions, providing a new entry into
the field of oxygen atom transfer. Methods employ quantum calculations for
predicting metal choice, species charge and substituent effects for performance
optimization. This program provides effective training for coworkers in
organometallic chemistry, methods development and mechanistic and computational
chemistry and thus will contribute to building a highly skilled technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.