* 1955682
* RUI: Chemical dynamics of methanol decomposition on platinum
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jerry LaRue, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 303,770.00

Catalysts are substances that accelerate chemical reactions without themselves
being consumed. Catalysts reduce energy consumption, minimize pollution, enable
the manufacture of valuable chemicals, and increase food production. Despite
these successes, there is an increasing need to make catalysts more efficient to
further reduce energy and waste. To accomplish this, better fundamental
understanding of the chemical reactions that occur on catalysts is required.
With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. LaRue’s research group at Chapman University is studying the fundamental
processes of how chemical bonds are formed and broken by metal catalysts. This
research team investigates how methanol, an important industrial chemical,
reacts on pure platinum catalysts. The fundamental knowledge gained from these
studies leads to better catalyst designs, designs that meet today's
environmental challenges. Dr. LaRue is integrating his research activities into
the classroom and community outreach. These activities include research
internships for undergraduate and community college students, national lab and
international research experiences, and revamped upper level chemistry courses
using discovery-based research techniques. STEM outreach in the local community
is also carried out in collaboration with the Chapman chapter of the American
Chemical Society, of which Dr. LaRue is the faculty mentor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the fundamental chemical processes on the
surfaces of catalysts is critical to developing new, highly selective and
efficient catalysts that meet today’s global challenges. With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. LaRue’s research
group at Chapman University is studying how catalytic sites and neighboring
molecules can preferentially induce different types of bond scissions during
methanol dissociation on platinum surfaces. The different reaction pathways, C-O
versus C-H bond cleavage, depend strongly on surface structure and coverage. To
reveal the fundamental properties that govern the reaction dynamics of selective
bond making and breaking, Dr. LaRue’s research group is using a unique
combination of techniques available at Chapman: temperature programmed
decomposition (TPD), low-energy electron diffraction (LEED), and Auger electron
spectroscopy (AES). The team also works at the SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory using the x-ray spectroscopy and at Stockholm University using sum-
frequency generation (SFG) spectroscopy, ultrafast spectroscopy, and molecular
beams. Dr. LaRue actively integrates his research activities into the classroom
and community outreach. These activities include research internships for
undergraduate and community college students, national lab and international
research experiences, the development of discovery-based research upper level
chemistry courses, and STEM outreach in the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.