* 1955705
* The Second Transatlantic Transchromatic Homotopy Theory Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Nathaniel Stapleton, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

This National Science Foundation award provides travel funds for US based junior
researchers to travel to "The Second Transatlantic Transchromatic Homotopy
Theory Conference" that will take place at the University of Regensburg, Germany
from August 2-7, 2020. This five day event will include talks by world experts
as well as talks by junior researchers. The aim of this conference is to bring
experts in transchromatic homotopy theory together with both junior researchers
and graduate students working in the area as well as experts in closely
associated fields including arithmetic geometry and differential geometry. A
second aim is to give very early career researchers (i,e,. graduate students and
postdocs) a chance to describe their research in the form of shorter talks. In
doing this, not only will graduate students receive personal mentoring, but
mathematicians outside of the field will be exposed to what is going on in
transchromatic homotopy theory. We hope that this will significantly raise
awareness of both the techniques that have been developed and also the problems
that are faced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transchromatic homotopy theory is a rapidly
emerging subarea of chromatic homotopy theory. Chromatic homotopy theory
organizes the stable homotopy category by decomposing it into "chromatic
layers". In studying these layers, algebraic topologists have found deep
relationships between homotopy theory and algebraic geometry, number theory,
higher category theory, and supersymmetric field theories. To assemble results
at each chromatic layer into global results about the stable homotopy category,
the relationship between the chromatic layers must be understood. This is the
primary goal of transchromatic homotopy theory. Since the first Transatlantic
Transchromatic Homotopy Theory conference, which occurred at the University of
Regensburg in June, 2017, real applications of transchromatic homotopy theory to
other areas have begun to appear. In particular, fundamental calculations in
transchromatic homotopy theory have been applied very successfully to better
understand the equivariant stable homotopy category. The primary scientific aim
of this conference is to describe work on the forefront of this area, explain
applications to other mathematical areas, and also to get input from experts in
related areas. Our speakers consist of established world experts in chromatic
homotopy theory, arithmetic geometry, differential geometry, and group theory,
all of whose work is related in some way to transchromatic homotopy theory, as
well as early career mathematicians who are rapidly pushing the field forward.
More information is available at https://www-app.uni-
regensburg.de/Fakultaeten/MAT/sfb-higher-
invariants/index.php/SFB_transchromatic_2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.