* 1955403
* Collaborative Research:CDS&amp;E:D3SC:Topology, Rare-event Simulation, and Machine Learning as Routes to Predicting Molecular Crystal Structures and Understanding Their Phase Behav
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Jerome Delhommelle, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 193,872.00

Mark Tuckerman of New York University and Jerome Delhommelle of the University
of North Dakota are supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to develop
computational methods and software to study molecular crystals. Ordered arrays
of molecules forming structures known as molecular crystals play an essential
role in the pharmaceutical, agrochemical, electronics, and defense industries.
In many instances, a given chemical compound may have more than one crystal
structure, a phenomenon known as polymorphism. A crystal may also contain
impurities, the most important among these being water. Such structures are
referred to as crystal hydrates. The ability of these materials to function in a
desired manner may depend on which structure, pure or impure, they form. If a
well-engineered molecular crystal converts to another form or if it absorbs
impurities over time., its performance may be seriously degraded. Such
transformations can, for example, cause drugs to fail or insecticides to lose
their potency. On the other hand, polymorphism and hydrate formation in
molecular crystals are features that can be exploited to enhance the performance
of these material. Utilizing advances in high-performance computing and
artificial intelligence, the theoretical molecular sciences are currently poised
to drive new directions in molecular crystal engineering. Computational
approaches have the potential to highlight potential pitfalls associated with
structural and compositional variability before expensive experiments are
performed or large investments in manufacturing a particular material are made.
With the aim of realizing this potential, Professors Tuckerman and Delhommelle
propose to create new computational approaches and software components for
rapidly predicting polymorphic structures in molecular crystals and
understanding the transitions between structures. Broad dissemination of these
tools and their incorporation into the materials design and engineering
processes will affect a reduction in time between concept and realization of
crystal systems with desired optimal properties and will catalyze the creation
of new course materials for enhancing STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic properties of organic molecular
materials in the solid state are often strongly influenced by the details of
their crystal structures and the existence of polymorphs and/or impurities such
as water. Experimental determination of these structures is costly and time-
consuming, which places increased importance on the role of theory and
computation and the leveraging of advances in high-performance computing machine
learning methods. The aim of this project is to develop a suite of new methods
and software tools for the prediction of organic molecular crystal structures,
including multiple polymorphs, elucidation of the mechanisms and thermodynamics
of polymorphic and solid-liquid phase transitions, and the mapping of favored
locations for water molecules in stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric crystal
hydrates. The proposed developments bring together techniques of topological
analysis, machine learning, enhanced molecular dynamics, thermodynamics, and
solvation theories. The main goals of the project are (1) to create a
topological theory for crystal structure generation based on solely on molecular
order parameters, thus bypassing the need to parameterize an intermolecular
interaction model, (2) to develop new entropy- and path-based collective
variables, aided by machine learning , for studying polymorphic transitions via
state-of-the-art enhanced sampling techniques, and (3) to devise new theoretical
and computational techniques for mapping the locations of water molecules in
non-stoichiometric crystal hydrates. Broad dissemination of these tools and
methods and their incorporation into crystal engineering pipelines could
indicate fruitful directions in materials design, thus effecting a reduction in
time between concept and realization of systems with desired properties and lead
to the creation of new learning modules for graduate level courses in topics
such as statistical mechanics, science of materials, and machine learning in the
molecular sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.