* 1955758
* Palladium-Catalyzed Tsuji-Trost Reaction in Complex Mixtures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Kazunori Koide, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Kazunori Koide of the Department of
Chemistry at University of Pittsburgh will investigate new classes of chemical
reagents for trace metal analysis and for developing a chemical technology that
can make non-cell-permeable molecules cell permeable. Both objectives are
important in human health, as they can lead to the development of new
pharmaceuticals. The project lies at the interface of organic, inorganic, and
biological chemistry, and is therefore well suited to the education of
scientists at all levels. This group is also well-positioned to provide the
highest level of education and training for undergraduate and graduate students
and post-doctoral researchers. The research group is active in outreach
activities that involve recruiting under-representative minority students for
summer research and participation in undergraduate research symposium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Palladium catalyzed deallylation (Tsuji-Trost reaction), a
widely used reaction in organic synthesis, had been attempted for chemosensing
and chemical biology. Although promising results were obtained, further
improvements are essential. As a platform for Pd quantification using a
fluorogenic Tsuji-Trost reaction, the dynamic range is not yet sufficiently
broad. As a means in chemical biology, although the reaction is efficient in
neutral phosphate buffer, it is more than one order of magnitude slower in cell
culture media. In this project, two specific aims will be pursued: (1) to
develop a fluorometric or colorimetric method to quantify palladium in a high
throughput manner, and (2) to develop a biocompatible Tsuji-Trost reaction to
uncage bioactive molecules in cultured human cells. For specific aim 1, the
research group will use Eyring plots and measure the activation energy of
enthalpy to rationally adjust the kinetic profile. For specific aim 2, the
research group will leverage their recent finding that hydroxymethylated analogs
of tris(2-furyl)phosphine are superior to commercial phosphines in cell culture
media. These two aims will expand the applications of Palladium catalysis into
research areas in which it has not been used
extensively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.