* 1955498
* CNS Core: Medium: Operating System Modularity for Safety and Performance on Existing Commodity Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Michael Scott, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 840,472.00

The operating systems that control most modern computers are built around a
monolithic kernel -- a single program comprising hundreds of thousands or
millions of lines of code, typically written in the C programming language. A
bug or security breach anywhere in that code jeopardizes the integrity of the
entire system. This project is developing mechanisms that can be used to
modularize the kernel incrementally, allowing pieces to be safely and
efficiently isolated from the rest in order to enhance security, reduce the
impact of bugs, and allow developers to install updates more easily, safely, and
frequently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project makes two key
technical contributions. First, it uses newly available hardware features
(memory protection keys) on commodity processors to implement protected
libraries. These allow a user application to execute operating system functions
safely without actually entering the kernel, and to share state safely with
library instances in other applications. Second, the project uses hardware,
language, and compiler technology to implement protection boundaries between
modules of the kernel itself, allowing those modules to be incrementally
rewritten in a type-safe language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research performed as
part of the project promises to significantly increase the safety and modularity
of both commodity and specialty operating systems -- making them more dependable
and easier to modify, upgrade, and customize -- while preserving or enhancing
performance for a wide range of applications, in government, industry, science,
the arts, and entertainment. Research and training activities will target a
diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students. Technology transfer will
be facilitated through contacts with multiple commercial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental results, raw data, and source code
will be freely and publicly available, the latter via open-source license.
Technical reports and data sets will be hosted in the University of Rochester's
archival repository (http://urresearch.rochester.edu/). Code will be hosted at
GitHub or similar sites. Pointers to all resources will be maintained at
http://www.cs.rochester.edu/research/os/modularity/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.