* 1955584
* CAS: Superelectrophiles in the Synthesis of Materials for Organic-based Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Douglas Klumpp, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Douglas Klumpp of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Northern Illinois University. Professor Klumpp and
his team of students are developing new ways to make twisted and three-
dimensionally constrained molecules with extended systems of electrons to be
used in organic-based electronic devices such as organic light-emitting diodes
(OLEDs). Compounds called super-electrophiles that trigger difficult carbon-
carbon bond construction are being generated and used to access these complex
targets. This program promises to explore alternative ways to make new compounds
for study as components of organic-based semi-conductors, solid-state solar
cells, and photo-responsive materials. This project will also serve to train a
diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in synthetic
organic chemistry particularly toward materials-related target structures.
Professor Klumpp is also leading outreach activities to third-graders and
creating science-related artwork to broaden the impact of the program to a
larger audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New synthetic routes to aryl-substituted
fluorenes and related spirocyclic compounds are valuable as they open up new
avenues into organic-based electronic devices. The Klumpp research group has
previously demonstrated that super-electrophilic chemistry can be used to
efficiently prepared functionalized heterocycles and hydrocarbon-based arenes.
With the current award, Professor Klumpp and his students are using
superelectrophilic reactions to develop new synthetic approaches to aryl-
substituted fluorenes and related spirocycles, to modify known OLED-type
materials with Diels-Alder, Friedel-Crafts, and cyclization reactions, and to
synthesize elongated, orthogonal, conjugated arene systems. These
transformations provide potential advantages over alternative synthetic routes
by reducing dependence on transition metal catalysts and organic solvents. Most
importantly, the routes proposed provide for convergent entry into value-added
cyclic systems with potentially useful physical organic properties. Overall, the
research conducted under this award provides orthogonal approaches to important
materials-related targets and will help to elucidate how the fundamental
reactivity of super-electrophiles can be exploited in an array of C-C bond-
forming reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.