* 1955407
* Simulation methods and models for state preparation, excitation energy transport, and relaxation in pigment-protein systems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* David Coker, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 503,583.00

David Coker of Boston University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry.
Coker and his research group develop methods to study how energy moves in
molecular materials that are under strong light (photo-excited). Understanding
how to manipulate where the energy goes in these materials as well as how
quickly it gets there is central to designing new technologies that can harvest
sunlight, using the sun's energy to conduct chemical reactions that produce
fuels, to promote physical processes used in sensing and imaging applications,
or to select and monitor the evolution of specific quantum states used in
quantum computing. There are two components to these studies. The first
objective is to understand how to manipulate chemical structures and
compositions to enable process design and control. The second objective is to
understand how light can be manipulated to select specific excited state
processes and control their pathways. This research is resulting in new
fundamental understanding for sustainable energy and information science
applications, providing new computation methods and simulation tools to be used
to design new materials and processes for these applications, and contributing
significantly to highly skilled workforce development by training graduate
student and post-docs and inspiring undergraduate and high school student
through research experience programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
developing a general first principles based simulation framework for exploring
mechanisms of excitation energy transport (EET) and relaxation in light
harvesting systems. The focus is on pigment-protein complexes that dissipate
electronic excitation to down convert the energy of blue light absorbing antenna
chromophores to the red for energy transport and transduction in harvesting
networks and reaction centers. Ultrafast, nonlinear spectroscopy is the
workhorse for experimental studies of these processes and theoretical modeling
plays a critical role in disentangling mechanistic understanding from these
experiments. The methods being developed go beyond the existing highly averaged
empirical approaches that can give ambiguous mechanistic predictions. The new
approach incorporates detailed statistical sampling of local inherent structures
and fluctuations and parameterizes ensembles of model Hamiltonians using
accurate first principles excited state calculations. These models are used in
dissipative quantum dynamics calculations to directly compute nonlinear
spectroscopy signals. These non-adiabatic dynamics methods are extended to
incorporate high frequency quantum vibrational motions critical for dissipating
large amounts of electronic energy quickly, promoting efficiency. Time dependent
driving fields are also incorporated into these methods so they can treat the
radiation â€“ matter interaction beyond perturbation theory enabling the
description of strong fields and complex sequences of overlapping light pulses
that can be used to control excited state dynamics. Predictions are being
benchmarked against detailed experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.