* 1955159
* Umpolung Methods with Electron Rich Aromatic Systems:  Aza-ortho-Xylylenes, and N,N-Dialkylaniline N-Oxides in Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* William Chain, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Dr. William J. Chain of the Department of Chemistry
and Biochemistry at the University of Delaware. Dr. Chain and his team of
students are developing new reactions of aromatic compounds that reverse the
normal behavior of these molecules. The Chain group is manipulating normally
electron-rich aromatic compounds chemically such that they behave as species
with low electron density. This strategy temporarily changes the reactivity of
these pi-systems and triggers the formation of new carbon-carbon, carbon-oxygen,
carbon-nitrogen, and carbon-sulfur bonds that are found in compounds used in
industrial, medicinal, and material applications. These studies are serving to
train a diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
synthetic chemistry. The Chain group is also actively engaged in outreach
activities in local elementary, middle, and high schools to promote science
education and excitement towards STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While Friedel-Crafts reactions
are well-established processes for aromatic substitution, there are still
significant limitations in electron-rich settings. Professor Chain and his
research group are addressing this gap in aromatic functionalization technology
by developing ways to temporarily invert the reactivity of electron-rich
anilines. In one approach, ortho-toluidines are being converted to aza-ortho-
xylylenes (AOXs) via an electrochemical oxidation event and used as electron-
acceptors for carbon-carbon bond formation. In a second approach, anilines are
being oxidized to the corresponding N-oxides, which facilitates a wide array of
bond formations and cyclizations that take advantage of the excision of the weak
N–O bond. By virtue of the extremely mild reaction conditions associated with
these new processes, the scope and application of umpolung reactions with
electron rich aromatic rings is expanded thereby opening up new opportunities
for organic synthesis. A better understanding of the fundamental reactivity
behind these processes is also being established through collaborative
computational studies. The educational plan is targeting outreach to local
elementary, middle, and high schools with integration of high school students
into the research program in the form of research
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.