* 1955034
* Excellence in Research: Harnessing Microbial Signals for Biofilm Control
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jeseth Delgado Vela, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 329,999.00

Urbanization increases the need to treat wastewater. In the United States, this
demand is typically met by treating water in water resource recovery facilities
(WRRFs). Many WRRFs employ attached growth biofilm reactors where beneficial
microorganisms grow in a thin layer on solid surfaces. Biofilm reactors are well
suited for crowded urban locations because they can increase WRRF treatment
efficiency without increasing space demands. Biofilm reactors operate most
efficiently under a narrow set of conditions. If the biofilm is too thick,
microorganisms will grow slower, thus decreasing process efficiency. The goal of
this research is to develop ways to control biofilms by measuring signaling
molecules produced by the microorganisms. This information will be used to
develop a biofilm control strategy for treatment optimization. The results of
this research will shed light on microbial signaling systems in wastewater
treatment. This knowledge will also help understand how to control other biofilm
systems in medical devices, on our teeth, and in other systems. Benefits to
society resulting from this project include education and outreach on wastewater
treatment to local K-12 schools and the education of underrepresented students
at Howard University, thus increasing the diversity and scientific literacy of
the Nation’s STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attached growth biofilm
reactors are ideally suited for the urban water resource recovery facilities
(WRRFs) because the rate of treatment can increase without a corresponding
expansion in reactor size. Additional potential benefits of biofilms reactors
include improved process stability and retention of slow growing organisms in
the system. Efficient operation of biofilm reactors requires control of biofilm
thickness and function. Microbial communities in biofilms use chemical signaling
molecules to coordinate community function. While microbial signaling molecules
were discovered decades ago, the ability to control expression of these
molecules in the environment is still poorly understood. The goal of this
research is to harness various forms of microbial communication signals to
control biofilm systems. This will be achieved by: (1) determining the type and
abundance of signaling molecules in full-scale WRRFs; (2) establishing a
signaling molecule biofilm control strategy in pure culture biofilms; and (3)
implementing this signaling molecule based control strategy in environmentally
relevant mixed biofilm cultures. High throughput sequencing analysis of WRRF
microbial communities will be used to determine the genetic potential for
different signaling systems. Signaling molecules will also be measured in
existing WRRFs in the Washington, DC region operating distinct process
configurations. Studies of full-scale WRRFs will inform strategies for using
signaling molecules for biofilm control in pure culture biofilms and in a lab-
scale mixed culture nitrifying biofilm. The implications of this research will
extend beyond WRRFs and offer potential benefits to drinking water distribution
systems and hospital environments, where biofilm management is necessary to
protect public health. Research results will be integrated into existing K-12
outreach activities. This research will support female and underrepresented
graduate and undergraduate students from Howard University and will benefit an
early career PI that is committed to creating opportunities for underrepresented
groups to learn about microbiology and environmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.