* 1955793
* Environmental Materials Beyond and Below Nanoscale: Palladium Single Atom
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jaehong Kim, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2024
* USD 389,768.00

Nanotechnology has been the main driver of scientific advances in catalytic
materials and processes over the past few decades. Unique physicochemical and
electronic properties emerge as materials are engineered at the nanoscale. This
project explores what would happen if the same material were engineered to be
even smaller at the sub-nanoscale, even down to the ‘single atom'. Single-atom
catalysts are the theoretical limit of material downsizing and represent a
frontier of materials research today. Single-atom catalysts are synthesized by
tightly anchoring individual noble metal or transition metal atoms onto a
support material. This configuration allows every atom to be available for
catalytic reaction, unlike nanoparticles in which atoms are inevitably buried
inside a cluster of atoms. Single-atom catalysts are is particularly attractive
for costly noble metal catalysts, such as palladium, that are often sought in
reductive pollutant degradation processes for environmental remediation. This
research project seeks to examine how palladium can be controlled at the atomic
scale to best exploit the material’s catalytic properties in an application
relevant to water treatment. Successful completion of this project will enable
more cost-effective and more sustainable environmental remediation solutions.
The project will leverage an outreach program that the investigator has
established to engage local high school students in STEM research. The
investigator will also offer classes to high school teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to evaluate how
palladium catalysts behave differently when downsized from nanoparticles to the
single atom limit. Palladium single-atom catalyst material properties will be
correlated with synthetic parameters by employing various advanced
characterization techniques such as high energy X-ray absorption and scanning
transmission electron microscopy. Other properties, including atomic dispersion,
local coordination environment, and oxidation state of the active metal site,
will be further correlated to catalytic performance for the reductive removal of
toxic halogenated organic compounds and nitrate (and potentially other
oxyanions, such as nitrite, bromate, chromate, and perchlorate) that pose
significant environmental and human health concerns. In addition, the PI will
investigate how palladium single-atom catalysts behave differently from their
nanoparticle counterparts over long-term use and under a complex water matrix to
evaluate their environmental fate. Graduate and undergraduate students
participating in this project will gain interdisciplinary knowledge,
particularly at the interface of materials science, advanced spectroscopy, and
environmental engineering. The project will leverage an outreach program that
the PI has established to engage local high school students in STEM research.
The PI will also offer classes to high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.