* 1955837
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Bug Report Management 2.0
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Andrian Marcus, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 408,677.00

Software systems often suffer from defects that lead to unexpected results. End
users report these unexpected results via issue-reporting systems so that
software engineers can identify and fix the related defects to improve the
quality of the system. When reporting, users can describe the software problems
using natural language or graphical information such as screenshots and videos.
Unfortunately, everyday end users are rarely, if ever, trained in reporting
software issues. In consequence, they often submit reports that are incomplete
or hard to understand, resulting in excessive effort spent addressing the
problems, or even the inability for the underlying defects to be identified and
fixed. In addition, existing issue-reporting systems are unable to enforce
quality standards for reports and fail to provide feedback to the reporters when
they submit substandard information. This project will develop a novel-issue
reporting system that will allow users to describe software problems
interactively, through a dialogue with an automated software agent, rather than
writing reports passively, with no feedback and quality assessment. The software
agent will automatically convert the conversations into high-quality issue
reports, which will be transmitted to the software engineers. The proposed
system will allow software engineers to manage and fix defects faster, leading
to higher-quality software systems. The project will also produce and
disseminate educational material on best practices in reporting software
problems. These materials are intended to be integrated into existing computer-
literacy courses at all levels of education. In addition, the project will focus
on recruiting and retaining computer science students from traditionally
underrepresented categories.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is centered on
three specific goals. First, it will develop novel techniques for the automated
analysis and quality assessment of defect reports. This component will adapt and
build upon techniques for automated discourse analysis, dynamic program
analysis, and computer vision. Second, it will improve the quality of issue
reports through interactive mechanisms. This proactive reporting solution will
be developed through cross-cutting research on empirical software engineering,
human-computer interaction, automated text analysis, and advanced machine
learning. This new dialogue-based reporting is expected to become the standard
method by which many kinds of software issues will be reported. Finally, the
project will develop more efficient and effective techniques for automated
defect reproduction and duplicate detection, leveraging the high-quality reports
created via the interactive reporting system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.