* 1955306
* Collaborative Research: CNS core: Medium: True-Time-Delay based MIMO System and Testbed for Low-Latency Wideband  Beam and Interference Management in Millimeter Wave Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Deukhyoun Heo, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 649,998.00

Given the shortage of spectrum below 6GHz, millimeter wave (mmW) frequencies
have played an important role in the emerging 5G networks and this trend is
expected to continue in the next generations. Due to unfavorable propagation
conditions and attenuation at high frequencies, mmW networks require the
densification of base stations and radios equipped with a large number of
antennas to compensate path loss via directional gain using narrow beams. The
cost and power consumption of radios with antenna arrays present a significant
challenge, and their architecture is of fundamental importance and influence on
the entire networking stack. State-of-the-art approaches based on phased antenna
array architecture are faced with several fundamental problems when radio
bandwidth and the number of antennas increases including prohibitive latency in
initial connectivity and link management, distortion in the directionality of
the beams, reduced beamforming gain, and ability to suppress the interference in
dense deployments. This project aims to develop and demonstrate a novel adaptive
true-time-delay (TTD) based array for wideband mmW networks and overcome
challenges of phased antenna arrays. The approach involves co-design and
optimization of tunable radio frequency (RF) circuits, antenna array system,
signal processing, and network protocols for low latency access, wideband
beamforming gain, and interference management. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research work will pursue four key thrusts: Thrust 1 will develop TTD array-
based fast beam training and spatial interference detection and estimation for
mmW networks with large modulated bandwidth. The objective is to reduce the
overhead in initial access due to beam training by exploiting frequency-
dependent antenna weight vectors in TTD arrays through signal processing and
develop a low latency protocol design for simultaneous beam training and
interference estimation in dense mmW networks. Thrust 2 will focus on the data
communication design using TTD arrays to facilitate multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) multiplexing and suppress interference from co-channel base
stations and users. The main challenge is to achieve high beamforming gain over
a wide modulated bandwidth together with effective nulling of wideband
interferers. Thrust 3 will develop an experimental testbed for the evaluation of
signal processing algorithms and protocols from Thrusts 1 and 2. It will involve
the integration of widely reconfigurable delay compensating circuits and custom
mmW front-end at 28GHz into a 16-element TTD antenna array. Thrust 4 will
experimentally validate TTD array-based beam training, squint-free wideband
beamforming and interference nulling, and wideband MIMO communications using the
testbed developed in Thrust 3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.