* 1955456
* CAS: Rational Design of Earth-Abundant Phosphide Hydrogen Evolution Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Duane Johnson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 788,065.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Drs. Kovnir and Johnson from Iowa State University are addressing a key
socioeconomic problem: the strong dependence on fossil fuels. To that end, their
research groups are studying the production of hydrogen from water via
electrolysis. To produce hydrogen efficiently and economically by electrolysis
improved electrode materials, known as electrocatalysts, are needed. This joint
experimental and computational project is providing a fundamental understanding
of how electrocatalysts with well-defined properties and structures can be
modified to enhance their performance. Their collaborative and integrative
synthetic, structural, and surface studies of electrocatalysts are providing a
unique training and educational experience for student researchers. Students
involved in the project include undergraduate and high-school students. Drs.
Kovnir and Johnson are also engaged in broadening participation of
underrepresented minorities in their research, including for example the ACS
Summer Research Internship Program for Economically Disadvantaged High School
Students. Dr. Kovnir is developing summer research projects to for undergraduate
on sustainable materials and the undergraduate and graduate students are
learning how to communicate science to the public through the Chemistry Learning
Community outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen is a sustainable fuel that is
currently produced by catalyzed steam reforming (and burning of methane), which
compromises all environmental benefits. Releasing hydrogen via catalytic
electrolysis of water, if coupled with renewable energy sources, is a future
solution to this issue. Although heterogeneous catalysts accounts for 20% of the
Gross World Product, to be sustainable and cheap, electrocatalysts based on
earth-abundant elements are required. Recently, nanoparticle phosphides formed
with abundant first-row transition-metals (Iron or Nickel) have been shown to be
promising electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). The
surface of these electrocatalytic nanoparticles is difficult to control
precisely and characterize, because each crystal facet on a nanoparticle has
different atomic bonding and reactivity. Unsurprising then, with many facets
participating in reactions, there is lack of fundamental understanding as to why
some catalysts are better than others, and, more often than not, serendipity
discovers new catalysts. Given that the structure of each surface facet is
defined by the crystal structure of the bulk phase, Drs. Kovnir and Johnson of
Iowa State University are studying the electronic behavior of the surface-active
sites by the alternation of chemical bonding patterns in the bulk transition-
metal phosphides. Fundamental relationships are being established between bulk
structure, in-situ surface (crystal facet-dependent) structure, and
electrocatalytic performance of model transition-metalâ€“phosphide catalysts with
tunable reactivities. With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the
Division of Chemistry these studies will aid progress toward the discovery of
improved, cheaper, and environmentally sustainable HER electrocatalysts. Drs.
Kovnir and Johnson are actively engaged in student participation in their
research, including high school and undergraduate students, and students from
underrepresented groups. Summer research and science communication opportunities
are also being provided for these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.