* 1955355
* Research Data Centers: Florida Research Data Center
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christopher McCarty, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 305,000.00

This award will support the establishment of the Florida Research Data Center
(FRDC) at the University of Florida in Gainesville, FL. The FRDC is supported by
a partnership between UF and Florida State University (FSU). The FRDC will
provide medical and social science researchers access to restricted-use data
collected by federal agencies. In addition to researchers at UF, FSU and their
teaching hospitals, scientists from University of Central Florida, University of
South Florida, Moffitt Cancer Center, and state agencies in Florida will be able
to use the FRDC to advance research in numerous fields. The FRDC will serve
multiple research communities, including health, medical, social, behavioral,
demographic, and economic. Residents in Florida and across the country will
benefit when practitioners apply the results of this research to translational
science and broader issues shaping public policy. Although the research profile
of the FRDC will address topics of national and international interest, many
researchers will address current problems in Florida that may serve as a bell-
weather for problems in other states. The FRDC also will be used across the
region as a training resource for undergraduate and graduate students as well as
postdoctoral associates. These researchers-in-training will benefit from working
on research projects using the data available from the FRDC, giving them a more
robust experience in their scientific education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FRDC
will join the community of Federal Statistical Research Data Centers (FSRDCs) as
an important asset to regional researchers. Because long-distance travel to
other FSRDCs will be unnecessary, researchers previously not able to purse their
research because of the time and expense of this travel will find new
opportunities to expand their scientific portfolio. Researchers who have used
other FSRDCs will be able to accomplish their projects more efficiently and
cost-effectively. A focus point for this FRDC will be the integration of
population and health data with U.S. Census microdata. With this new resource
available more locally, interdisciplinary and interinstitutional collaborations
among researchers in the area will be enhanced. Investigator access to
restricted-use data will expand research thereby contributing to scientific
fields. Society at large will benefit from advances in medical and health
outcome research made possible by this new resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.