* 1955487
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Cross-Layer Design of Video Analytics for the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yinzhi Cao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2024
* USD 375,000.00

The emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT) enables many new applications
ranging from augmented reality and self-driving cars, to surveillance and
cashier-less retail stores. These applications continuously collect video
streams from IoT devices, such as sensors, cameras, and radars. They aim to
understand the video content to make intelligent decisions, by running
sophisticated video analytics tasks, such as counting people and recognizing
license plates in the video streams. These video analytics tasks often run a
collection of computing resources including IoT devices, edge clusters near the
devices and the remote cloud, connected through networks with dynamic bandwidth
and latency. This project will enable a high-performance video analytics
framework that can support a variety of IoT applications in real-time, with high
accuracy, and at scale.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The key idea of this project is to
enable video analytics for IoT devices by joint optimizations across
application, computing, and networking. Todayâ€™s solutions often focus on
separated optimization, which leads to inaccurate answers to analytical queries,
inefficient use of computing resources, and performance degrades when network
condition changes. This project's video analytics framework will (1) leverage
both network layer information and physical information to tune the parameters
in video analytics, in order to optimize task accuracy, instead of network
bandwidth, latency or quality of experience, (2) allocate computing resources
for analytics tasks to meet multi-dimensional task-level service-level
objectives with distributed time tracking and runtime scheduling, and (3)
redesign video analytics and encoding algorithms by considering the network and
computing constraints. This project will build and test representative video
analytics applications on top of the system to demonstrate its capability. The
project will facilitate the interactions between the machine learning research
community and the systems/networking research community, and result in novel
algorithms and efficient networked systems for video analytics. The project will
also engage underrepresented groups and undergraduates in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.