* 1955190
* RUI: CAS: Diphosphite Scaffolds for the Synthesis of Bimetallic Complexes Containing Earth Abundant Metals and Strained Rings
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Robert Stockland, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 185,000.00

In this project, with support from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the
Division of Chemistry of the National Science Foundation, Professor Robert
Stockland of Bucknell University is testing new approaches for the preparation
of chemical compounds containing iron, cobalt, and nickel. Ultimately, these
compounds may be developed into catalysts that are used to speed up chemical
reactions and often to selectively produce specifically desired products over
others. The project aims to use these abundant metals to ultimately replace rare
and precious metals. The main challenge is to enhance the properties of abundant
metal-based compounds to match those of the rarer metals. To this end, Professor
Stockland is examining the hypothesis that pairs of abundant metals will exhibit
enhanced properties. He is designing organic compounds that stabilize such pairs
of metals. The research provides undergraduate researchers with hands-on
training. Their laboratory training entails experience the handling many
different kinds of chemical compounds, the apparatus used for chemical
synthesis, and the tools used to characterize the new materials. This research
is expected to improve the retention and success rates of the participating
students and prepare them for technical careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of chemical transformations that employ earth abundant metals (EAMs)
such as iron, cobalt, or nickel as reagents or catalysts is an area of current
interest in the synthetic community. While a number of ligand frameworks bind
multiple metal centers and promote cooperative interactions, few ligands are
known to minimize cooperative activity and promote synergistic interactions. In
this project, with support from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Robert Stockland of Bucknell University and his
students are using rigid spirocyclic diphosphites to prepare bimetallic
compounds through protodemetalation, transmetalation, and base assisted
phosphonylation. Furthermore, the selective substitution of one metal for
another affords heterobimetallic compounds. Building on these results, the
incorporation of oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur donors into the parent
diphosphite core is accomplished through cross-coupling chemistry. These
functionalized diphosphites provide unique architectures for binding EAMs.
Additionally, the diphosphites are entry points for the construction of a series
of cyclic phosphonates containing conjugated fragments. Alkynes and
functionalized aryl groups comprise the unsaturated components of the cyclic
phosphonates. Undergraduate research is often a pivotal experience that
stimulates student curiosity and promoted careers in science, technology, math
and engineering. Students in the Stockland group at Bucknell University are
gaining hands-on experience and are well prepared to enter the chemical
profession or graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.