* 1955106
* GOALI: CAS: Oxygen Evolution Catalysts for Membrane Electrolysis: From Fundamentals to Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Kathy Ayers, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,282.00

The development of clean and sustainable energy sources is critical for the
economic and environmental vitality of human civilization. Renewables, such as
sun and wind power, are intermittent and thus expensive to integrate with fossil
fuels at the capacity needed to power the planet. Scalable, inexpensive energy-
storage technologies are needed. In this project, Dr. Boettcher (University of
Oregon) is collaborating with Dr. Ayers at Proton OnSite / Nel Hydrogen
(Wallingford, Connecticut) to study the conversion of water (H2O) into hydrogen
(H2) and oxygen (O2) gas using renewable electricity as the input. Hydrogen gas
is a sustainable, carbon-free, renewable fuel to replace fossil fuels. It can be
used in fuel cells to re-generate electricity on demand or burned like natural
gas, without carbon dioxide emission. This research is addressing the
inefficiency of the oxygen production part of the overall reaction. The team
combines fundamental studies to understand how this reaction occurs and how to
improve it. The industry-academic collaboration is testing the findings in
commercially-relevant systems. In one example, the team is studying how chemical
species containing iron, when placed in different environments, speed up the
generation of oxygen and save energy in making hydrogen. The team is working to
understand how these iron species change under long-term practical operating
conditions. The team is also designing new materials that work well with
existing technology but are less expensive to manufacture. The graduate students
working on the project complete industry internships at Proton OnSite. The team
conducts outreach activities with local middle school students that engages them
in hands-on energy storage and sustainability laboratory activities on the
University of Oregon campus, and introduces first year university students to
scientific research through research-immersion courses. Funding for this award
is provided by the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry and
the Catalysis Program in Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Professor Shannon Boettcher from the University
of Oregon (UO) is collaborating with Dr. Kathy Ayers at Proton OnSite / Nel
Hydrogen (Wallingford, CT) and her team to use well-controlled electrochemical
synthesis to create Fe in different local environments in transition-metal
oxyhydroxide and oxide phases and probe OER mechanism and activity/durability
relationships using a host of advanced operando techniques. They uncover the
compositional, structural, and morphological dynamics that drive performance
degradation in (oxy)hydroxide/oxide OER catalysts under long-durations and high-
current densities. The team also creates new synthetic approaches to assemble
precious-metal OER catalysts for use in proton-exchange-membrane electrolyzers
where every precious metal atom is available to drive the OER while chemically
stabilized by appropriate oxo linkages to inactive metal cations and through
support interactions. This research has the potential to decouple the apparent
inverse relationship observed between stability and activity for OER catalysts
while connecting industry and academic researchers through graduate-student
internships at Nel Hydrogen / Proton Onsite and industry researcher visits to
Oregon. These science aims are coupled with outreach and education activities.
Graduate students lead teams of undergraduates through a “research-immersion”
course developed by Boettcher that enables first-year chemistry students to earn
credit for general chemistry laboratory by working on real, unsolved scientific
questions. Hands-on middle school outreach events in the area of energy and
electrochemistry are available to underserved students through an ongoing
program founded by Boettcher. Funding for this award is provided by the Chemical
Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Catalysis Program in
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.