* 1955925
* Topology for Data Science: An Introductory Workshop for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Brittany Fasy, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2023
* USD 30,474.00

Topology for Data Science (T4DS) is a day-long workshop designed to introduce
undergraduate students to data science and topology, to be held on March 25,
2020, in Bozeman, MT. The workshop is scheduled to coincide with the National
Conference on Undergraduate Research (NCUR)---a gathering of nearly 4,000
talented undergraduate students from across the world---hosted by Montana State
University, March 26-28. This award will support the development and
dissemination of workshop materials and will fund travel and participation of 28
undergraduates. An additional 22 students from local communities or those
already planning to attend NCUR will also have the opportunity to participate.
For a day, the participants will be immersed in the fast-growing area of data
science, through the lens of topology. This workshop is the first of its kind:
T4DS engages students in a hands-on, collaborative experience, requiring only
discrete mathematics and a desire to try something new as
prerequisites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T4DS will start with an overview of how to
"think with data" through data exploration and visualization, continuing with a
brief journey into the field of topology and how to use topological descriptors
to summarize data. In the afternoon, students will investigate how to cluster
data based on those topological descriptors, and will apply what they've learned
to a new data set. The day will conclude with a reception, where a panel of five
faculty members representing topology and data science will discuss their
experiences with including undergraduates in research and potential career
opportunities in data science. The content of T4DS will cross the disciplinary
lines of computer science, statistics, and mathematics. It will blend
topological data analysis, data mining, and broader data science content,
delivered using an active-learning pedagogy. Most of the participants will not
have any experience in topology, yet they will cluster data using topological
descriptors, which will give them a glimpse into the topological data cycle.
Moreover, this workshop will lay the foundation for developing materials on
other aspects of data science, which will allow the organizers to broaden the
offering of similar tutorials throughout Montana and surrounding states,
including tribal colleges and geographically remote rural areas. After the
workshop, tutorials will be distributed through Github and the Carpentries Lab
---a repository of high-quality, community-reviewed, discoverable lessons---
reaching a large, diverse, international community. The conference website and
workshop application can be found at
http://www.montana.edu/datascience/t4ds/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.