* 1955396
* Novel Electrophilic Carbene Architectures and Related Main Group Analogs
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Todd Hudnall, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Carbon is the building material upon which the elements of life are constructed.
A basic tenet is that carbon forms four chemical bonds. In this project, funded
by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Todd
Hudnall of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Texas State
University - San Marcos seeks to prepare substances that violate the four-bonds
per carbon principle. Specifically, compounds called carbenes that contain
carbon with only two bonds are prepared. Because of the unusually low number of
bonds, carbenes are very reactive and have important electronic properties. The
methods that are developed to prepare the carbenes are extended to the related
elements, germanium and tin. These synthetic methods potentially useful, low
temperature ways to access metastable alloys. In addition to training
undergraduate and graduate students, this project may ultimately result in the
discovery of novel materials that may benefit society in applications ranging
from quantum computing to single molecular magnets to catalysts. Professor
Hudnall has maintained a collaborative outreach program with the McKenna
Children’s Museum called “Laboratory Workstations.” This program engages
children, ages 3-10, in hands-on simple chemistry experiments in mock
gloveboxes, and is also inclusive of local chemistry students from Canyon High
School. Texas State University is an Hispanic Serving Institution. This project
provides research experiences to students from groups underrepresented in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to prepare
electrophilic carbene ligands and related main group analogs. Sets of carbenes,
whose electrophilic character and attendant pi-acidity can be systematically
increased by a lowering of their respective Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital
(LUMO) energy levels, are targeted using computations. These compounds and
related germanium and tin species with exceptionally small singlet-triplet gaps
are prepared. Among these are diamidosilylenes, germylenes, stannylenes, and
cationic heterocyclic carbenes. One question that is investigated is why
diamidocarbenes can be photolyzed to a triplet excited state where other
carbenes cannot. The photochemistry of the carbenes is explored and applications
as electrophilic carbene-supported main group catalysts and as precursors for
the low-temperature generation of main group alloys are developed. The program
serves students from underrepresented groups by their inclusion in the research
project and though outreach programs to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.