* 1955157
* RUI: CAS: Development of Iron Catalysts for Sustainable, Selective Oxidations and Reductions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Timothy Funk, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 129,656.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry supports the
research of Professor Timothy Funk at Gettysburg College. The goal of this
project is to develop safe and sustainable catalysts based on iron. Catalysts
increase the speed of chemical reactions. They are also important for
environmental reasons because they can promote the formation of the desired
products, generating less waste with unwanted by-products. Metal-based catalysts
are common, but many are derived from rare elements. Iron can be a better choice
for catalysis because of its high earth abundance. Professor Funk is designing
iron-based catalysts that work in conjunction with chemicals derived from
biomass. Biomass, a plant-based starting material is inexpensive and abundant.
Part of the project focuses on the details of the bond-making and bond-breaking
steps promoted by these new catalysts. This information enables the design of
improved catalysts, which are still more efficient. The project supports the
hands-on training of undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds. The
training emphasizes chemical catalysis in the context of the environmental
considerations. Through this training, the project is preparing students for
careers in technical fields such as advanced manufacturing, thus supporting the
economic strength of the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the National Science Foundation, Professor Timothy
Funk at Gettysburg College is developing sustainable catalytic reduction and
oxidation processes based on iron. The air and moisture-stable, bifunctional
iron compounds catalyze transfer hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions.
Plant-based compounds serve as hydrogen donors and acceptors. Replacing reactive
oxidants and reductants with relatively stable, biomass-derived compounds
increases both the safety and sustainability of these processes. In particular,
Professor Funk is exploring how subtle differences in ligand structures affect
the reactivity and selectivity of bifunctional iron catalysts. Additionally, the
Funk group is examining how substrate structures and the reduction potentials of
the hydrogen donors or acceptors modify the process. Insight into how these
factors affect catalyst reactivity and selectivity is leading to the design and
development of new catalytic processes. Overall, the goal is to develop safe,
sustainable, selective alcohol oxidation and carbonyl reduction processes.
Undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds are being trained to consider
environmental impacts when developing new chemical processes and are developing
skills that prepare them for careers in scientific research. The project also
supports hands-on training of undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds.
The training emphasizes chemical catalysis in the context of the environmental
considerations. Through this training, the project is preparing students for
careers in technical fields, thus supporting the nation's economic
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.