* 1955836
* CAS: Ambient Electrochemical Activation of Light Alkanes with Early Transition Metal-Oxo Species
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Chong Liu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The abundant, yet widely geographically distributed, natural gas and oil
resources in North America have dramatically changed the United States energy
portfolio. Conversion of natural gas to useful products relies on high
temperature and high pressure processes at centralized locations. Transportation
of natural gas from remote sources to these central locations is often not
economical. As a result, natural gas is often discarded by flaring at the well,
while the oil is recovered. Natural gas, which is mostly methane, and its
flaring product, carbon dioxide, are both potent greenhouse gases. Development
of catalytic processes that convert natural gas into economically-transportable
liquids at these well sites is very desirable. In this project, Professor Chong
Liu of the University of California, Los Angeles is developing a new approach
using electricity to convert light alkanes, including methane, into liquid
products. Dr. Liu is studying new electrochemical catalysts and investigating
the fundamental mechanisms of these reactions. Dr. Liu is actively engaged in
outreach and education activities to promote engagement of students in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities
include the introduction of chemistry topics to local gardeners and farmers in
the Los Angeles area as well as undergraduate advising for general chemistry
courses assisted by machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the funding from
the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Liu of the
University of California, Los Angeles is developing a mechanistic understanding
of how early transition metal-oxo species break the carbon-hydrogen bond in
methane during the catalysis. A variety of electrochemical techniques in
conjunction with in situ characterizations (including X-ray absorption
spectroscopy) are employed to identify important transient intermediate species
and determine reaction kinetics with the assistance of first-principle
calculations. Also under investigation is the exploration of other molecular and
materials catalysts for electrochemical conversion of light alkanes under
ambient conditions. Dr. Liu takes soil samples and analyzes their composition
for local gardeners and farmers, assisting the local community to develop
sustainable agriculture and gardening practices. Dr. Liu is also developing a
machine-learning-based platform to develop teaching strategies in general
chemistry courses, to advise students on course enrollment, and, in the long
run, to establish an online advising program for career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.