* 1955062
* IGE: R3ISE across the disciplines
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Gundula Bosch, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2023
* USD 389,619.00

Research studies do contain errors, but reproducibility problems in research
cannot always be explained as a function of innocent human errors. The reasons
likely range from mistakes in daily research practice to misconduct and fraud.
Better ethics education is one mechanism that can lead to better conduct in
science. Mandatory courses such as “Responsible Conduct of Research” (RCR) serve
to teach topics in the field of science ethics and integrity at most
institutions. Much has been published on improving the pedagogy of research
ethics education, however, many RCR courses still focus on describing flawless
ethical practice on the one hand and denouncing cases of outright misconduct or
fraud on the other. The large grey zone in between, the so-called questionable
research practices (QRPs) are rarely taught in a formal manner. Yet they play an
important role for ethical decision making in day-to-day scientific practice.
This National Science Foundation Innovation in Graduate Education (IGE) award to
the Johns Hopkins University will fill that critical gap in graduate research
ethics education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this award, the RCR course that
is currently offered at Johns Hopkins will be supplemented with an established,
online learning module on principles and applications in scientific error
analysis with a focus on QRPs, which has been tested in a low-enrollment
setting. The Rigorous, Responsible and Reproducible Practice in Science and
Engineering (R3ISE) module utilizes a novel error analysis and quality-
improvement approach. The goal of this research comprises assessing the learning
outcomes of the R3ISE module in a large and diverse student population across
the life, natural, and social sciences, as well as engineering and technology.
The study will appraise students’ critical thinking, scientific reasoning and
collaborative communication skills around analyzing and avoiding scientific
errors in general and QRPs. The R3ISE module is a collaborative, staged case
study approach enhanced by illustrative practitioner interviews, that advances
students in interdisciplinary groups from the learning level of recognizing QRPs
in retracted articles to the level of evaluatively reviewing preprints.
Sustained reasoning and communication skills are practiced and reinforced in
annual workshops including poster competitions and preprint journal clubs. Using
historic controls for comparison, researchers will test the hypothesis that the
implementation of the R3ISE online companion module on scientific error analysis
and reduction methods will influence students’ conceptual understanding,
application, and evaluation skills of QRPs. A mixed-methods design will yield
quantitative and qualitative data from concept inventories, checklists on case
study analyses, descriptive rubrics on reviewing performance and structured
observation guides on poster and preprint presentations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.