* 1955086
* The Catalyst Controlled Regioselective C-H Functionalization of Arenes and Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Jeffrey Gustafson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2023
* USD 455,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Jeffrey Gustafson of San Diego State
University (SDSU) to develop reactions that can selectively modify biologically
relevant molecules. Most biologically active molecules where occurring naturally
or developed as unnatural therapeutic agents are structurally quite complex and
have multiple positions that can be modified in a given reaction. A mixture of
several different compounds is often obtained, resulting in the need for costly
and time-consuming purification steps. The ability to develop a set of reactions
that selectively modify different positions of a molecule is highly desirable.
Such strategies have the potential to transform how complex molecules are made
in a manner that is both more economical and environmentally friendly. Professor
Gustafson and his team of students are addressing this need through the
development of a set of small molecule catalysts that can direct a reaction to a
specific location of a molecule. Educational impacts of this project include
improving the SDSU student experience in organic chemistry through the
incorporation of virtual reality experiences to aid students in the
3-dimensional visualization of organic molecules. Virtual reality is also to be
used in outreach programs aimed at SDSU’s general population, as well as local
high schools and community colleges. Additional societal benefits include the
recruitment and participation of underrepresented students (high school,
undergraduate, and graduate) in research projects and volunteer work as part of
the aforementioned outreach projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Gustafson
and his team of students develop ‘organocatalysts’ that effect the
regioselective C-H functionalization of simple and complex aromatics. They
design bifunctional catalysts that possess one moiety that interacts with the
substrate and another moiety that interacts with a reactant, directing it to a
specific C-H bond in the substrate. They study diverse transformations that
traditionally yield poor regioselectivities including electrophilic aromatic
substitution, vicarious nucleophilic substitution and the addition of radicals
into aromatics. For the addition of electrophiles into aromatics they utilize
bifunctional Lewis basic catalysts that intercept and direct the electrophile to
a specific position. For the regioselective addition of nucleophiles into
aromatics, they utilize a broad array of organocatalytic strategies such as
cation-directed catalysis, hydrogen bonding catalysis and Lewis acid catalysis.
Professor Gustafson and his lab focus on incorporating functionalities that add
value to the molecular systems being targeted. The ability to site-selectively
modify simple and complex aromatic systems can greatly simplify synthetic
strategy and lessens the need for lengthy and costly purification steps. The
site-selective modification of complex intermediates has the potential to
transform how the late-stage structural optimization process, in natural
product-inspired synthesis, the development of designed therapeutic agent and in
the development of functional molecular scaffolds, in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.