* 1955896
* Advancing Technology, Access, Diversity, and Inclusion Through Curriculum Redesign of the Power Plant Technology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Taler Adney, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

In Oklahoma, the energy sector employs a large number of people and the number
of jobs in this sector is expected to grow at least 15% by 2025. This project
intends to help fill the specific energy sector demand for skilled technicians
in Power Plant Technology. To do so, it will develop, implement, and field test
new curriculum modules for the Universityâ€™s existing Power Plant Technology
program. This new curriculum will take advantage of a donated power plant
simulator that is designed to teach operators about plant processes, monitoring,
limitations, stabilization, and recovery after equipment malfunctions. The new
curriculum will include integration of learning modules into existing courses
and creation of new courses for a hybrid format that includes in-person and
online components. These hybrid courses will provide the basis for future,
entirely online curriculum. This updated curriculum will also be used as
professional development for industry partners and to develop stackable
certificates. In addition to making curriculum improvements, the project also
intends to help improve diversity and inclusion within the energy sector and the
Power Plant Technology program. To this end, the project will develop a
strategic plan to teach future energy sector employees the core values that lead
to a diverse and inclusive workforce. In addition, it will help industry and
educators recognize their own responsibilities in supporting a diverse,
inclusive workplace. It is expected that the diversity and inclusion strategic
plan will provide a model for increasing student diversity and inclusion within
the University, as well as for adaptation by regional workforce
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
collaborate with industry and other stakeholders to educate an inclusive and
diversified Power Plant Technology workforce. This goal will be achieved by: 1)
developing a new curriculum and re-designing course offerings; and 2) developing
a strategic plan to create a more inclusive and diversified workforce. An
external evaluator will interview faculty, industry stakeholders, and students
to determine whether the new curriculum effectively addresses industry needs.
Evaluation methods will focus on determining the effectiveness of course
materials and instructional methods for different student populations. Formative
evaluation will ensure that progress is being made on the curriculum
development, course redesign, and strategic plan development. Summative
evaluation will analyze and document how well the project succeeded in meetings
its goals and objectives and how unanticipated challenges were handled. Project
dissemination plans include presentations at STEM-related showcases, advisory
board meetings, HI-TEC Conference, and at the ATE PI Conference and ATE Central.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.