* 1955186
* CAS: Organocatalysts: Acids and Bases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Steven Kass, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2023
* USD 510,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Steven R. Kass of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities is developing a new
strategy for enhancing the activity of organocatalysts. Catalysts are generally
metal-containing compounds that accelerate the seed of a chemical reaction by
lowering the activation barrier. Organocatalysts are quite novel because, unlike
the great majority of useful metal-based catalysts, they rely only on carbon,
hydrogen and a handful of other elements that are not metals. Organocatalysts
are often considered more sustainable than metal-based catalysts because they do
not require expensive, toxic, or precious metals. The ultimate goal of this
research is to develop new and useful organocatalysts that are environmentally
friendly, and to obtain a better understanding of how these species operate.
This project lies at the interface of organic, physical, and analytical
chemistry, and is particularly well suited for educating and training young
scientists. This research will be conducted alongside an NSF-funded Research
Experiences for Undergraduate site. Patents from the research will be explored
along with industrial partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charge-enhanced acids,
bases, and hydrogen bond catalysts will be prepared and characterized. Their
catalytic abilities will be examined in a variety of organic transformations,
and structural variations will be probed to increase their reactivity and
selectivity. For example, what impact does covalent incorporation of the
counterion or the use of a chiral counter-anion have on organic transformations?
Different chiral platforms will be explored and incorporated into ferrocenium
and cobaltocenium ions, in part, to obtain temporal control of the catalyst's
acidity. These species have considerable practical potential, and this research
will advance the state of chemical knowledge while also leading to developments
that may benefit the environment, human health, and chemical industry. This
research program spans from experiment to theory and from synthetic methodology
to physical and analytical measurements. It serves, consequently as an excellent
training ground for young scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.