* 1955125
* CHS: Medium: Understanding and Improving the Social Impact of High-Bandwidth Farm Networking Infrastructure
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Steven Wolf, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

The goals of this project are to (1) investigate the potential social impact of
ubiquitous, low-cost, high-bandwidth communication infrastructure on America's
farms, and (2) develop options for improving the social impact of these
technologies. New networking solutions to support high-bandwidth on-farm data
communication will enable the collection of massive amounts of sensor data, its
transmission to the cloud or other servers, and its processing and use for
agricultural decision-making. These shifts stand poised to transform
agricultural production and economic organization. This project will pursue
values in design research into next generation network solutions for
agriculture, as well as empirical research with agricultural stakeholders
currently engaging information-rich approaches to farm management. The project
will integrate concerns of agribusiness stakeholders into the early stages of
on-farm networking development; foster informed discussion among technical,
agricultural, and policy stakeholders about the potential social impact of this
technology; and develop and disseminate practical policy and design options to
improve the social impact of on-farm networking. It will support the training of
students from underrepresented groups in research through summer research
workshops in networking, design for social impact, and the futures of digital
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research adapts techniques to integrate
societal considerations in the early stages of technology design, in order to
manage the specific challenges that come up in addressing the social impact of
infrastructure. The project will (1) use ethnographic participant-observation in
the development of farm networking technology and collaboration with technical
partners to identify moments where technical decisions could be associated with
social impact challenges; (2) conduct fieldwork with agricultural stakeholders
to analyze how existing infrastructures incorporating analogous technologies are
shaping and shaped by emerging social practices to create specific impacts; (3)
develop future design scenarios that flesh out and concretize potential
relationships between technological decisions, future policies and
organizational practices, and the resulting benefits and drawbacks; and (4) use
these scenarios to collaboratively identify specific technical, organizational,
and policy options that could improve the benefits or reduce the drawbacks of
on-farm high-bandwidth communication technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.