* 1955524
* CAS: ENFORCING EXCITED STATE REACTIVITY BY ALTERING CHROMOPHORE CHARACTERISTICS
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jayaraman Sivaguru, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 464,472.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism-B program in the
Division of Chemistry supports the fundamental research of Professor Jayaraman
Sivaguru and his students at Bowling Green State University (BGSU) in Ohio. The
Sivaguru group harnesses the power of light to create sustainable strategies for
carrying out new chemical transformations. They develop new models to understand
the fundamental aspects and to control light–induced reactivity. The overarching
goal is to build complex molecular structures in an energy efficient and
sustainable fashion. This project integrates the research and academic goals of
teaching and learning to help students gain experimental and intellectual
competence. The broader impacts of the program include research by high school
students in northwest Ohio through an outreach program called PICNICS (Parents
Involvement with Children, Nurturing Intellectual Curiosity in Science). This
program provides summer internships for local high school juniors and seniors.
This enables the students to learn first-hand about recent advancements in
science, and to gain experience working in a cutting-edge research environment
in BGSU’s Center for Photochemical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
plan develops strategies for directing excited state reactivity, uncovering new
photochemical reactivity, and achieving reaction selectivity by altering the
normal characteristics of chromophores. The electronic characteristics of
reactive chromophores are modified either by internal substitution or through
external additives such as Lewis acids. This work is designed to reveal new
photochemical pathways and reactivity that are not observed in conventional
systems. The research seeks to understand the delicate balance between
reactivity, selectivity, dynamics, and lifetimes of molecular excited state and
short-lived intermediates. One goal is to create new paradigms related to
photochemical and photophysical events using altered chromophore
characteristics. The outcome of the proposed investigations provides a platform
to build complex molecules with pre-defined configurations, in an energy
efficient and sustainable fashion. The results have a significant impact on
basic concepts related to the photosciences and broadly influence the fields of
synthesis, materials science, organic optoelectronics, catalysis and
environmental science. This research provides opportunities for student training
and integration of research in public outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.