* 1955351
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Design and Analysis of Models and Algorithms for Real-life Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Konstantin Makarychev, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 724,160.00

Recent years have seen a dramatic rise in applications of computer and data
science in business, engineering, healthcare, and science. People use computers
for analyzing increasingly large amounts of data and solving progressively more
difficult problems. Processing growing amounts of data and solving increasingly
hard problems require new high-performance algorithms. This project will explore
new promising directions in algorithm design with the aim of developing
efficient algorithms that are tailored to working with real-life data. To this
end, the investigators will study the structure of real-life problems, analyze
hidden patterns in the data, and create new mathematical and statistical models
of real-world problems. They will use their findings to improve existing
algorithms and develop new, highly efficient ones. The investigators will ensure
that the new algorithms are "software developer-friendly": these algorithms will
be fast and easy to implement, and will rely on existing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on computational
problems that arise in machine learning, operations research, and discrete
optimization. It will advance understanding of the nature of real-life problem
instances, by identifying properties that distinguish them from worst-case
instances (which rarely or never appear in practice) and designing better
algorithms (with provable performance guarantees) for them. It will provide a
(partial) answer to fundamental theoretical questions: Why do many heuristics
for computationally hard problems work well in practice? And how can one design
and formally analyze algorithms for real-life problem instances? To answer these
questions, the team of investigators will create new models for real-life data,
develop new algorithms, and introduce new mathematical techniques for analyzing
these algorithms. The results will be relevant to researchers and practitioners
in machine learning, optimization, and other areas; in particular, the results
will provide them with new practical algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.