* 1955643
* Reactive and Non-Reactive Force Field Design Guided by Advances in Energy Decomposition Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Martin Head-Gordon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 699,000.00

Teresa Head-Gordon and Martin Head-Gordon of the University of California,
Berkeley, are supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to develop advanced
force-fields. In chemical research, computer-based molecular simulations are an
indispensible complement to experimental probes of chemical reactions.
Simulation is used to understand the role that solvents (usually liquids that
disperse the starting materials and products) play in chemical reactions. Such
simulations use force fields to propagate the motions of the molecules. Force
fields are empirical functions describe how the potential energy of a system
varies with the position of the atoms and molecules both accurately and
inexpensively. Molecular simulations advance by improving the accuracy of the
force field, and via better statistical sampling. The central goal of this
research is to pursue rational, next-generation force field design guided by new
advances in energy decomposition analysis (EDA). An EDA takes advanced quantum
mechanical calculations on groups of molecules, and distills the interaction
energy of the molecules into a sum of terms that captures the repulsive and
attractive physical driving forces. These terms provide valuable data to inform
the design and parameterization of the new force fields. These developments also
yield new computational tools that are useful to other chemists, and are made
available to them as software, following validation and pilot applications. The
research provides very strong training for graduate students in advanced theory,
software development, and chemical applications. A new Berkeley Professional
Master's program in Molecular Simulation and Software Engineering (MSSE) is
launching in 2020, to train post-baccalaureate students in computational
molecular science, best software engineering practices, and the leadership and
management skills needed to drive software enterprises. A special topics class
on computational quantum chemistry for non-specialists using a freely available
e-book, including the EDA methods developed under NSF support is being
developed. The Computational Chemistry for Transfer Students (CC-TS)
undergraduate research program, targeting junior-level transfer students is also
supported. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target of this research is the
completion of a protein force field with methodology that generalizes to other
complex condensed phase chemistry that involves perturbations to the electron
density without changing bonded chemistry. A new EDA capability is being
developed for key classes of intramolecular interactions enabling physical
insight into conformational equilibria and torsional potentials. The EDA
framework is being extended to include polarizable continuum solvent models to
enable study of intermolecular interactions, under different dielectric
environments. To advance modeling of reactive chemistry in the condensed phase,
the improved non-bonded interactions developed for the non-reactive models will
be utilized to yield higher accuracy than current models and to allow seamless
mixing of reactive and non-reactive force fields. Additionally, the creation of
a next generation post-SCF EDA enables analysis of changes in chemical bonding
to better characterize the bond order terms (or their equivalent) within the
reactive force field. These models and methods are deployed for selected
applications, including evaluation of condensed phase terahertz spectroscopic
observables, unraveling the driving forces of molecular torsion balance species
in solution and in gas phase, and probing the role of electrostatic solvation
versus molecular solvation in mediating physical
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.