* 1955730
* CAS: New Catalytic Processes for Polyolefin Sustainability and Waste Utilization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Lawrence Sita, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Lawrence R. Sita of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Maryland. Professor Sita and his
research team are developing new catalytic systems for polymerization that
convert abundant and inexpensive feedstock chemicals into new polyolefin
materials with defined and controllable molecular structure. The polymers
prepared with this new catalyst system are designed to be added to existing
polyolefin waste to improve conversion to second- or multi-use polymeric
products of increased commercial value. Society’s dependence on plastics comes
with a significant penalty of more than 400 million pounds of plastic waste that
is introduced into the environment each year. The Sita research group is focused
on finding solutions to this problem and designing new polyolefin materials that
can serve as replacements for plastics with more severe environmental impacts
than polyolefins. This project is providing education and training for a diverse
group of undergraduate and graduate students, as the next generation of
scientists and leaders for sustainable science policy. Outreach activities
include a one-ton plastic recycling challenge to engage elementary and high
school students in a broader understanding of the problems society faces with
plastic waste. New inventions, technologies, and products that are being
developed through this project have potentially significant long term impacts on
polymer science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Sita and his
research group are developing configurationally-stable, enantio-enriched
transition-metal complexes that function as well-defined catalysts for the
enantio- and stereoselective living coordinative chain transfer polymerization
(LCCTP), co-polymerization, and cyclopolymerization of olefins and non-
conjugated dienes. These new catalyzed processes are providing novel classes of
highly stereoregular polyolefins with technologically-relevant physical
properties. A variety of spectroscopic methods and isotopically-labeled
complexes and monomers are being used to understand the mechanism of enantio-
and stereoselective LCCTP to further optimize these systems. Stereoselective
LCCTP is guiding the design and production of new classes of well-defined
polyolefin block copolymers that undergo microphase-separation in the condensed
state and that can be used as plastic waste blend compatibilizers and property
modifiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.