* 1955202
* International Conference on Approximation and Potential Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Ionut Iacob, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 02/29/2024
* USD 35,500.00

The International Conference on Approximation and Potential Theory, to be held
March 26â€“29, 2020 at Georgia Southern University, focuses on two areas of
Mathematics: approximation and potential theory, with an additional emphasis on
the related subfields. The conference encourages and financially supports the
participation of early career researchers, especially women and minority groups.
Among the primary goals of the event is to give junior researchers the
opportunity to communicate with the world-leading experts in the subject, and to
be exposed to the recent advances in the field. The conference promotes
diversity and cutting-edge research in the mathematical community of the region.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The focus of this event is on the recent developments in
several related areas of Analysis, both classical and modern, centered around
approximation and potential theory. Some important areas of interest include: a)
approximation by polynomials, rational functions, splines; b) classical and
generalized potential theory; c) variational methods in potential theory; d)
bases and frames; e) applications to mathematical physics; f) applications to
data analysis and machine learning. The foremost goal of the event is to foster
collaboration between the participants, especially those at different stages of
their careers, and to provide a forum for exchange of ideas and exploration of
open problems. The conference features 12 plenary lectures by the participant
lecturers, as well as two sets of parallel sessions, giving junior participants
the chance to present their research to an expert audience, and to receive
feedback. The meeting schedule is structured so as to allow ample time for
discussions. The conference budget provides funding towards the travel expenses
of advanced undergraduate and graduate students, as well as recent Ph.D.
recipients. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Conference website: &lt;br/&gt;https://sites.
google.com/a/georgiasouthern.edu/apt2020/home&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.