* 1955127
* Development of an integrated Borehole Geodetic and Seismic Sensor:  Project Completion
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Jonathan Berger, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 149,512.00

Seismometers measure the shaking of the ground caused by earthquakes, ranging in
intensity from tiny tremors undetectable by humans to large damaging earthquakes
that pose a hazard to structures and people. It is the very small shaking from
nearby sources, or the ultra-low frequency vibration following large events that
cause the Earth to ring like a bell for many days afterward, that are difficult
to capture. We are constantly trying to improve seismometers to be able to
record this wide range of signals. Studying them can provide much information
about what is inside the Earth. Seismic waves are the "light" that lets us see
inside the Earth and seismometers are the "eyes" that let us create images of
the internal Earth structure. In addition to shaking, earthquakes and related
phenomena cause slow, gradual deformation of Earth's crust. To detect these
deformations, extremely precise sensors are needed. Two types of deformation are
often searched for: a very slight change in the position of the ground with
respect to local vertical, called "tilt," and elongation or compression of the
ground, called "strain." These are not unrelated, but the types of signals
caused by tectonic activity are normally extremely small – measured by parts per
billion in both tilt and strain. This Division of Erath Science Instrumentation
and Facilities Program award supports development of a highly sensitive optical
detection method and instrument to measure the motion of masses suspended by
pendulums or a spring in a housing cemented into the bottom of a borehole.
Optical fibers send laser light down to the sensor housing and return the light
after it has been reflected from mirrors attached to the masses. By analyzing
this light with electronics and a small computer located outside the borehole,
the researchers can detect motions of the masses comparable to the diameter of
individual atoms, and therefore detect both small seismic shaking and
deformation of the ground caused by earthquake-related activity. As the
investigators learn more about earthquake processes, the better are the chances
of one day making precise forecasts of where and when they might
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from this award will allow for fabrication
and installation of a borehole system that utilizes optical-fiber interferometry
to provide in one borehole: (a) a broadband vertical seismometer/gravimeter, (b)
a broadband two-component horizontal seismometer/tiltmeter, and (c) a low-noise
vertical long baseline strainmeter. The combined system will be able to measure
vertical and horizontal ground velocities, gravity, tilt, and strain with
sensitivities that compare favorably with any existing system over time scales
from 10 Hz to many days; the downhole components are entirely passive, giving a
long instrument lifetime and resistance to high downhole temperatures. The
instrument is to be installed in an existing borehole at Pinon Flat Observatory
for testing and comparison with the seismic and strain systems already operated
there. The combined instrument promises an alternative to multi-instrument
observations from independent seismometers, GPS receivers, gravimeters,
tiltmeters and strain meters. The seismic observations are anticipated to meet
the current requirements of Global Seismographic Network stations and geodetic
measurements would offer lower noise observations than GPS at periods shorter
than weeks. Target applications could include studies of the dynamics of crustal
deformation including slow slip events, continuous and episodic slip, and other
Earth movements that are known to occur but which do not generate damaging
earthquakes. A deployed instrument could help to understand the effects of
magmatic and subsurface fluid dynamics (e.g., hydrocarbon extraction and CO2
sequestration) on crustal deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.