* 1955612
* Synthesis of d- and p-Block Element Molecules, Reagents, and Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Christopher Cummins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2023
* USD 495,000.00

Funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Christopher Cummins of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology leads a project
aimed at producing new kinds of chemical compounds containing phosphorus.
Phosphorus is a required component of fertilizers, semiconductors, and
catalysts. Cummins is inventing new compounds of phosphorus that are
sufficiently stable to be handled in the laboratory but reactive enough that
they can serve as ingredients to useful products. The group is developing
"spring-loaded" compounds that deliver very reactive molecules that contain
phosphorus. These new entities are combined with organic compounds to give new
and often unexpected products. Some of the new reactive phosphorus compounds are
short-lived, being stable only for seconds at low temperatures. It is speculated
that these short-lived compounds occur in the outer space, where even highly
reactive molecules are stable. Thus Professor Cummins aims to correlate data
from his laboratory with astronomical measurements. Overall, the research is
highly collaborative, involving scientists in academia, national laboratories,
and industry. The project provides hands-on training for graduate and
undergraduate students who are exposed to multiple tools and ways of thinking
about chemistry. Furthermore, the research connects and cross fertilizes
multiple areas, including radioastronomy, microelectronics, and chemistry. In
addition to traditional publishing venues, the Cummins group produces videos of
synthetic procedures. These videos are posted on YouTube to facilitate adoption
of protocols by other researchers and to provide the public with a window into
the practice of synthetic chemistry. In this way, this research reaches well
beyond the laboratory, inspiring young aspiring scientists to develop technical
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Christopher Cummins of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology leads a project aimed at producing new kinds of organophosphorus
compounds. This project focuses on the development of molecular precursors
resulting from the expulsion of a neutral leaving group, such as anthracene,
upon irradiation or thermal activation. This strategies provide access to
reactive intermediates such as phosphinidenes or phosphacyclobutadienes. The
reactive intermediate can be transferred to a suitable acceptor molecule for
reactions carried out in solution, or released into the gas phase to enable
studies by molecular beam mass spectrometry, microwave spectroscopy, and laser-
induced fluorescence. Isolated reaction products are characterized by
multinuclear NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. The experimental work
is complemented by quantum chemical calculations designed to reveal details of
bonding and to elucidate reaction mechanisms by potential energy surface
explorations. The work is broadly impactful because of the centrality of
phosphorus in everyday life, e.g. in fertilizers, microelectronics, and
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.