* 1955289
* CAS: Valorizing Carbon Dioxide via Metal Catalyzed Reductive C-C Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Wesley Bernskoetter, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis (CAT) program in the Division of Chemistry supports work
on homogeneous catalysis in the laboratory of Professor Wesley Bernskoetter of
the University of Missouri. The project examines new uses for carbon dioxide,
which is an abundant and renewable resource. Currently, most consumer goods are
produced from petrochemical. This project envisions that chemicals can be
produced by combining petrochemicals and carbon dioxide. The project aims to
discover catalysts that combine carbon dioxide with petrochemicals, a process
called carboxylation. Many technologies could be enabled if carboxylations could
be more efficient, the goal of this research. This project also aims to spread
awareness of chemistry’s role in society. Hands-on training is provided to the
next generation of scientists including underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT)
program in the Division of Chemistry, the laboratory of Professor Wesley
Bernskoetter of the University of Missouri is developing new catalysts to
utilize carbon dioxide as a renewable, alternative carbon source for commercial
chemicals. The research targets reactions that form carbon-carbon bonds between
carbon dioxide and other reactive small molecules, such as ethylene or
acetylene. These processes reduce carbon dioxide while also creating valuable
carboxylated products including acrylates, oxalates, and acetylene carboxylates
in nearly thermoneutral reactions. Through mechanistic studies of the elementary
reaction steps and structure-reactivity relationships, the project identifies
the pathways for these rare transformations of the stable carbon dioxide
molecule. These findings build a foundation for further design of catalysts and
processes enabling efficient, scalable conversion of carbon dioxide into a wide
array of more complex, higher value molecules. The Bernskoetter laboratory uses
this research trains future leaders in the science and to broaden participation
of underrepresented groups in chemistry as a partner of the University of
Missouri McNair Scholars program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.