* 1955098
* Collaborative Research: Dinuclear Heterogeneous Catalysts (DHCs) as a new Platform for Selective Oxidation of Carbon Monoxide (CO) and Methane (CH4)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Dunwei Wang, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 308,161.00

Catalysts, substances that increase the speed of chemical reactions without
themselves being consumed, play critical roles in large-scale chemical processes
that underpin our economy. One example is found in the reforming of natural gas,
where catalysts convert methane to hydrogen and carbon monoxide (CO). Hydrogen
can be readily used as a source of clean energy. CO can serve as a starting
material for the synthesis of valuable chemicals such as methanol and acetic
acid. A critical challenge presented by the current natural gas reforming
processes, however, is that they are often energy intensive. The key to
addressing this inefficiency is through novel catalyst designs. With funding
from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Wang of
Boston College, Drs. Batista and Brudvig of Yale University, and Dr. Pan of the
University of California, Irvine are investigating a new type of catalyst that
has the potential to meet this challenge. Featuring precisely designed and
defined structures, the catalysts are being studied for two prototypical
reactions, carbon monoxide oxidation and methane activation. In an effort to
broaden the impacts of the project, concerted educational and outreach
activities are being carried out. These programs involve participants from
diverse backgrounds, especially those of underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Division of Chemistry, this project studies new class of catalysts, dinuclear
heterogeneous catalysts (DHCs), for selective oxidation of CO and methane (CH4).
DHCs belong to the emerging class of heterogeneous catalysts featuring
atomically dispersed motifs. They offer new properties for chemical
transformations. Dr. Wang from Boston College, Drs. Batista and Brudvig from
Yale University, and Dr. Pan from the University of California, Irvine leverage
their complementary expertise in catalyst design, synthesis, characterization,
and reaction mechanisms. They collaborate to test the hypothesis that DHCs are
more effective toward reactions such as selective CO oxidation and CH4
activation, than conventional catalysts or the recently characterized single-
atom catalysts. The study is unique as it examines the involvement of
heterogeneous catalysts with dinuclear active centers whose catalytic core is
well defined. The research activities are complemented by educational efforts
aimed at promoting scientific research by underrepresented groups, K-12
students, and the general public as well as undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.