* 1955892
* Complexity-building Approaches in Photoassisted Synthesis of Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Andrei Kutateladze, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Andrei Kutateladze, Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Denver. The research is focused
on developing new methods for synthesis of complex organic molecules containing
multiple ring substructures. This will be done using photons of light as an
environmentally abundant and safe reagent and the approach achieves structural
complexity with a minimal number of experimental steps. Besides the fundamental
importance of learning about interactions of light and matter in the context of
synthetic chemistry, the targeted complex polyheterocycles (i.e. molecules which
contain nitrogen, sulfur, or oxygen atoms as a part of a ring) are intentionally
designed to resemble alkaloids (a class of naturally occurring organic bases)
and other biologically active natural products that may potentially possess
useful therapeutic properties. Importantly, this award supports research
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students, especially those from
historically underrepresented groups in science, provided them with useful skill
sets in modern organic chemistry and photochemistry; excellent preparation for
career paths in either academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
expands the toolbox for excited state intramolecular proton transfer
(ESIPT)-based synthetic photochemistry with several new photo-assisted synthetic
reaction cascades. The photo-induced reaction cascades allow the experimentalist
to achieve large step-normalized complexity increases and rapidly assemble novel
fused polyheterocyclic molecular architectures. Additional growth of complexity
is realized through post-photochemical transformations, such as multi-step
carbocationic cascades and rearrangements. Investigations of reaction mechanisms
and stereochemistry of these ESIPT-triggered cascades help achieve control of
stereochemical and regiochemical outcomes. This experimental work is augmented
by computation, especially to facilitate solution structure elucidation of the
complex polyheterocyclic products by NMR. The new integrated DU8+ method for
fast and accurate calculation of NMR parameters includes PCM models and solvent-
specific parameterization schemes. This computational tool is are critical for
success of this project, but also has broader implications for structure
elucidation of complex synthetic and natural product target molecules.
Additionally, this research provides hands-on laboratory training for graduate
and undergraduate students, and research associates, especially those from
historically underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.