* 1955049
* IGE: Toward an interdisciplinary blueprint for Open Science Graduate Education
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Kyle Johnsen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,449.00

The bedrock of any scientific enterprise is the ability to reproduce
experiments: following the same set of instructions with the same instruments
and obtaining the same results. Unfortunately, there are numerous obstacles in
contemporary scientific research that preclude universal reproducibility. These
range from key omissions or vague instructions in the experimental description
to journals that require subscriptions and thus restrict access to the entire
scientific product. Open Science is an approach to conducting reproducible
research, but its practices are difficult and time-consuming to adopt. The
National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to
University of Georgia will pilot an educational program that teams up students
and faculty conducting research, with the ultimate goal of lowering barriers to
conducting Open Science and catalyzing an institutional shift toward an open and
transparent approach to science. The project will incentivize Open Science
practices in research and education and will provide additional training
opportunities to students and faculty alike to obtain skills in Open Science
that are otherwise not offered in a contemporary research setting. This project
will establish new curricula, creating new opportunities for future students and
faculty as well as endowing them with skills that are highly sought in a variety
of fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent surveys reveal a pervasive belief that
there is a broad reproducibility crisis in science. Examples abound across
disciplines: seminal studies have been, upon later scrutiny and attempts to
replicate, revealed as irreproducible. Open Science offers a principled, albeit
abstract, approach to scientific research that emphasizes openness and
reproducibility. Most scientists agree reproducibility must be addressed. Yet,
the adoption of open practices has remained anemic, as the culture surrounding
research has not been sufficiently incentivized to change, nor has the practice
of Open Science been defined as a concrete process. This 3-year project aims to
study how to catalyze a cultural shift in the research and educational practices
at the University of Georgia. Critically, the approach is process-oriented and
bidirectional: students will be recruited at varying stages of their graduate
careers as the experimental cohort, and a peer support structure will be
established among them. Faculty will also be recruited: supervisors of
participating graduate students and experts in Open Science and institutional
change. These students and faculty, representing a variety of STEM disciplines,
will participate in a series of workshops to obtain a formal understanding of
Open Science. Participating faculty will sustain this curriculum through their
own Open Science training with external experts, course modifications, and an
interdisciplinary graduate certificate program formalizing the coursework and
standards for training in Open Science principles and practices. This will
establish a network of influencers to effect broad institutional change, further
facilitating a cultural shift toward adoption of Open Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to
pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.