* 1955975
* Excellence in Research Project: Functional Characterization of the X-antigen Gene Family
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Steven Damo, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 08/31/2023
* USD 493,036.00

Sequencing of the human X chromosome has revealed the existence of many genes
that have a unique expression pattern; they are usually expressed in the testis
and aberrantly expressed in proliferative tissue, such as cancer. This project
proposes to study one family of these genes, the X-antigen gene family (XAGE)
whose functions are completely uncharacterized. The overarching goal of this
project is to discover the biochemical function of XAGE proteins and to
determine the molecular processes that drive their expression. Consistent with
Fisk Universityâ€™s mission to provide students with every tool they need to
emerge as future scholars and leaders, this research program will provide Fisk
undergraduates with the hands-on opportunity to obtain interdisciplinary
scientific knowledge as well as the technical and problem-solving skills that
they need to successfully transition to post-undergraduate education and a
career in the sciences. In addition to providing faculty mentored research in
the investigatos's own laboratory, some of these research concepts and their
applications will be introduced in a course-associated laboratory. This project
focuses on identifying the underlying mechanisms that cause certain genes on the
X chromosome to be expressed only in certain cells at certain times, an area of
research that due to its wide scope, is particularly appealing to undergraduate
students interested in biological science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; X-antigen genes
are located on the X-chromosome and considered to be cancer-testis antigens due
to their expression in testis and aberrant expression in proliferative cells.
These genes have recently evolved, and their biochemical function and mechanisms
regulating either expression is entirely unknown. Using a combination of
biochemical and genetic approaches such as tandem affinity IP-Mass Spectrometry
and RNA-Sequencing the investogator will determine the biochemical functions of
XAGE proteins and those signaling pathways that are perturbed upon aberrant
expression. To determine the transcriptional networks and epigenetic mechanisms
that lead to this unique expression pattern of XAGE genes, the investigator will
perform bioinformatics analysis of methylome sequencing data and promoter
elements and then using wet-lab experiments determine the transcription factors
that bind to XAGE gene promoters to drive expression. The research will also
discover which cis-acting elements, such as enhancers, regulate XAGE expression
using Pro-Seq to compare chromatin accessibility in cells expressing XAGE genes
versus those that do not. The proposed research will determine whether XAGEs
have evolved to provide cells a proliferative or survival advantage and if so,
what mechanisms drive their expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.