* 1955170
* CAREER:Asymmetric Functionalization of 2-D Nanomaterials for Tailored Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Emily Pentzer, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2021
* USD 222,480.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In both nature and the
synthetic world, particulate materials on the nanoscale play an important role
in meeting a wide range of societal needs, from harvesting solar energy to
making medicine more efficient to preventing barnacle growth on the underside of
ships. As such, controlling how nanoparticles organize into larger structures
could lead to major advances in these areas. The research focus of this CAREER
project is to develop an entirely new class of tailored nanomaterials and to
assemble them into well defined geometries. Specifically, nanosheets that are
only a few atoms thick (graphene oxide) will be functionalized on each face with
polymers that have different properties (such as positive and negative charges).
These unique structures, called Janus nanosheets, will have properties that are
not currently accessible with even current state-of-the art technology and have
potential to improve the properties of coatings, medicines, batteries,
lubricants, etc. Moreover, this work will help researchers across many fields
understand how nanoparticle organization influences and dictates properties so
they can be improved. This project will afford interdisciplinary training for
the next generation of scientists and engineers, as well as engage elementary
school students in science through hands-on demonstrations. The PI will mentor
researchers at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels of their
education, develop an after-school interactive class on hydrophilicity and
hydrophobicity for elementary school students, and prepare college students for
careers beyond academia through a professional development course for
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop and
evaluate a new class of materials for the controlled spatial and temporal
organization of nanoparticles in assemblies, as a route to rationally design and
optimize form, function, and application. To this end, Janus graphene oxide (GO)
nanosheets will be synthesized by the asymmetric functionalization of the two
faces of GO with different polymers. The functionality of these Janus GO
nanosheets can be tailored to give unique and well-defined hybrid and responsive
assemblies. Three specific systems will be exploited to show the properties of
these novel materials: 1) Janus GO nanosheets functionalized with phase
separating polymers for organization in a defined direction within a polymer
host to prepare composite films with directional conductivity, mechanical
strength, and gas barrier properties; 2) Janus GO nanosheets functionalized with
polymers that can bind to nanoparticles for assembly into well-defined, higher
order, and hybrid assemblies with inorganic nanoparticles to improve charge
transport, catalysis, and energy storage; and 3) Janus GO nanosheets
functionalized with stimuli responsive polymers to reversibly scroll and wrinkle
platelets in a responsive manner for dynamic control of gas adsorption and
conductivity. The key outcomes of this work will provide the fundamental
principles governing structure-property relationships of nanoparticle assemblies
such that transformational advances in technological applications can be
realized. This work will also provide a framework within which to technically
train future scientists at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels,
as well as engage the interest of elementary students in science through hands-
on lessons. Moreover, through this CAREER project at Case Western Reserve
University, a professional development course for senior undergraduate and early
graduate students will be developed, helping students attain career skills
needed for success beyond academia.