* 1955109
* IGE: Transforming the Education and Training of Interdisciplinary Data Scientists (TETRIDS)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jessica Alzen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Computational and data analysis skills are an increasingly important part of
graduate education to prepare students for their future careers. Academic
researchers collect and analyze data to advance scientific knowledge. Businesses
and policy-makers use data to inform decisions. The nation needs to educate and
train more students with deep technical skills in data science and broad
interdisciplinary collaboration skills to work with these researchers,
businesses, and policy makers to convert data into benefits for society. This
National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to the
University of Colorado Boulder will test the effectiveness of a new program to
educate and train interdisciplinary data scientists who can move between theory
and practice to solve problems for real-world impact. This program combines
innovative classroom instruction and learning activities in the theory of
interdisciplinary collaboration with practical data science experience working
on real projects in the Laboratory for Interdisciplinary Statistical Analysis
(LISA). Specifically, graduate students will learn how to adopt effective
attitudes of collaboration, how to structure effective meetings with domain
experts, what to focus on to make deep contributions to the domain, effective
communication skills, and how to cultivate strong relationships with their
collaborators. At the same time, students will learn how to put this knowledge
into practice by collaborating with researchers, businesses, and policy makers
to apply data science to solve a wide variety of domain-specific problems for
decision-making. Ultimately, this program may lead to a transformation in who
can be trained to become data scientists, where they can be trained, and what
can be achieved when we transform data into societal benefits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this IGE project is to evaluate how
effectively the LISA program educates and trains graduate students from a
variety of backgrounds to become collaborative data scientists. Specifically,
this project will combine assessments of students’ technical skills, student
self-evaluation surveys, LISA administrative records, domain expert feedback
surveys, and independent expert evaluations of students’ projects to answer two
research questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. To what extent are LISA students effective
interdisciplinary data science collaborators? (i.e., how well do they do on
their projects compared to historical norms, other cohorts of students, and an
expert collaborative data scientist?) &lt;br/&gt;2. What degree of technical
preparation in data science is sufficient for graduate students to become
effective interdisciplinary data science collaborators? &lt;br/&gt;Knowledge
generated from this project may inform best practices across colleges and
universities for thousands of graduate students to be educated and trained to
become effective interdisciplinary data scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.