* 1955815
* SHF: Medium: A Technology-Architecture-Algorithm Co-Design Exploration of Scalable Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Neuromorphic computing is an inspiring and ambitious problem because by
understanding how the human nervous system is able to work efficiently using
less than 20-Watts of power, we should be able to design intelligent computing
systems that can solve complex problems like humans. While there have been
significant advancements in the accuracy of artificial neural networks (ANNs),
the quest for power efficiencies akin to biological systems remains elusive.
Consequently, there has been significant interest in an approach called spiking
neural networks (SNNs) which uses biologically-inspired event-driven spike
communication. However, SNN design is still in its infancy, with need for
exploring different neuromorphic computing models, learning algorithms, hardware
substrates and designing a communication fabric that can scale to meet a strict
power budget. This research seeks to explore the design space of scalable, low-
power SNNs. The outcomes of this research could be highly valuable and will pave
the way for an array of related research in designing intelligent machines. On
the educational front, plans include the involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students in this emerging research, where they will get exposure to
cross-cutting topics in computer architecture, electronic devices, circuits, and
applications. Female and minority students will be recruited to work in the
project. Several Broadening Participation in Computing (BPC) activities such as
summer camp for girls and collaboration with the Education Department to expose
K-12 students to many areas of computer science will be
pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to take a comprehensive approach
spanning device/circuit level innovations for designing extremely low-power
spiking neurons and synapses, architectural level solutions for designing
hierarchical communication networks, algorithm level optimizations to improve
the accuracy of SNN models, and evaluation of the designs with different classes
of applications. The proposed research consists of four research tasks. First,
the team plans to investigate the design of neuron device primitives using
Magnetic Tunnel Junction (MTJ)-based spintronic devices that are orders of
magnitude more power efficient than existing technologies. Second, using these
MTJ-based neuron tiles, the design space of a scalable on-chip interconnection
fabric will be explored. Third, the research focuses on developing algorithmic
solutions to enhance the accuracy of SNNs, and a hybrid solution to leverage the
benefits of both SNNs and ANNs. Finally, the plan includes to develop a
simulation platform to evaluate the performance and energy efficiency of
different designs using diverse applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.