* 1955635
* Mechanism and Discovery of Metal-Catalyzed Fluoroalkylation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* John Hartwig, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 710,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor John F. Hartwig in the Department of Chemistry at the University of
California, Berkeley to improve catalytic processes that form organic molecules
containing fluorine atoms. These studies are important because fluorinated
organic molecules are vital to material, agricultural, and medicinal sciences.
For example, over 30% of new pharmaceuticals and 25% of licensed herbicides
contain fluorine. This project answers a series of questions to understand how
these catalytic systems work. This knowledge is then being used to design
solutions to overcome catalytic bottlenecks that will increase the availability
of fluorinated organic molecules. The program also includes outreach activities
for K-12 students on chemical catalysis topics, short training courses for the
chemical workforce, and presentations to general audiences to reach future
scientists from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a large
fraction of pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals contain fluorine, available
fluorinated molecules are largely limited to those derived from simple
fluoroarenes, trifluoromethylarenes, or trifluoroacetates. In order to reliably
synthesize molecules with fluoroalkyl groups, new ways to induce and control the
reactivity of fluoroalkyl transition-metal complexes in catalytic processes are
needed. These studies are improving catalytic capabilities for forming
fluorinated organic compounds by preparing fluoroalkyl complexes of palladium
and fluoroallylic complexes of iridium and determining the factors that promote
carbon-carbon bond formation with these intermediates. This fundamental work is
revealing how to turnover catalytic processes involving these transition metal
intermediates to advance the synthesis of fluorinated organic molecules. In
addition, these studies are determining how to control the formation of
stereogenic centers and how to tolerate a larger array of functional groups.
This project is impacting the catalytic synthesis of molecules that are
important in materials science, medicinal chemistry, and agroscience.
Simultaneously, this program is providing training for a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as outreach activities to K-12
students to motivate the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.