* 1955161
* Quantum-Designed Models of Bulk and Interfacial Solvation
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Thomas Beck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 509,999.00

Thomas Beck of the University of Cincinnati is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop new theoretical and computational methods to better
understand complex liquid mixtures. Beck and his research group develop and use
advanced computer simulations to investigate how molecules interact with each
other to produce the great complexity in living things, industrial chemistry,
household chemicals such as soaps, and battery materials. They use these
advanced methods to model the basic properties of various charged particles
(ions) in water and near the water surface. They also extend these techniques to
studies of ions in organic liquids that are used in lithium ion batteries. In
addition, the Beck group employs the new calculations to model phase separation
in liquid mixtures relevant to industrial chemical processes. Accuracy is
important because slight changes in the force fields that describe interactions
between molecules often lead to completely different theoretical behaviors of
the mixture. Gaining more insight into the interactions and resulting system
properties results, for example, in the development of more efficient and safer
battery materials. Communicating this basic science to the broader community is
increasingly important, and Beck oversees a program at the Cincinnati Museum
Center that will train 10 Ph.D. students from his Department to engage in
effective science demonstrations on the floor of the museum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solvation and interfacial phenomena are central to a
diverse array of physical, chemical, and biological systems including
nanomaterials, surfactants, synthetic chemistry, membranes, proteins, and the
energy sciences. While significant progress has been made in developing accurate
models of complex ionic and molecular mixtures and interfaces, major challenges
remain in building a predictive science of solvation. The principal objectives
of this grant are threefold. The Beck group performs extensive ab initio quantum
molecular dynamics simulations coupled with advanced statistical mechanical
theories that establish a fundamental single-ion free energy scale in water and
that explores the basic structure and dynamics of ion solvation in organic
solvents. The team utilizes data from the ab initio simulations in constructing
novel quantum-designed models that incorporate the essential physical components
of solvation. They also applying these new models to challenging systems such as
predicting liquid-liquid equilibrium and competitive solvent binding to ions in
complex molecular mixtures. The theoretical methods employed include distributed
charge multipole models and Drude oscillators optimized with evolutionary
algorithms to mimic the electronic distributions in the condensed phase quantum
simulation data. The resulting predictive computational models are employed in
studies of interfacial electrostatics, specific ion effects in solution and near
interfaces, and in ion solvation studies in organic solvents used in energy
storage devices and in green chemistry processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.