* 1955963
* Research Initiation Award: Computational Studies of 2D Magnetism of Chromium Triiodide
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Xiuping Tao, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,585.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Winston-Salem State University has potential to broaden impacts in
several areas. The proposed work will use computer simulations to understand
magnetism in compounds of interest. Under-represented students will receive
training in computational chemistry which will have applications in the fields
of physics, chemistry, math and computer science. The PI will use their research
in the classroom which will impact 30 majors each year. The results of the work
could be used in innovative device design which will benefit
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of intrinsic ferromagnetism in 2D
CrI3 is noteworthy because of its potential applications in ultra-compact
sensors and memory modules. But current understanding about 2D magnetism is
limited: while there is consensus among researchers that the magnetic
interactions in the material are anisotropic, there are many different opinions,
some in conflict with others, about the origin of its magnetic anisotropy. This
project seeks to shed light on the enigmatic magnetic interactions in 2D CrI3 by
hypothesizing both the exchange coupling and single-ion anisotropies. The
Hamiltonian coefficients will be extracted by density functional theory
calculations, and then be used to perform Monte Carlo simulations for deciding
the ferromagnetic phase transition temperature Tc. Spin dynamics simulations
will be carried out to investigate whether the hypothesized anisotropies induce
a gap on the spin wave spectrum necessary for maintaining the long-range
magnetic order in 2D CrI3. Better understanding about 2D magnetism means more
features can be utilized in innovative device design to benefit
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.