* 1955432
* Exploring N-Alkynylazole Cyclizations in Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sean Kerwin, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Sean Kerwin of Texas State University.
Dr. Kerwin works with undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs to
streamline the process of preparing complex chemical compounds. Compounds with
nitrogen-containing ring systems are very common in nature and often possess
interesting biological activity. In this research, specific examples of these
compounds are targeted for synthesis, and the prepared compounds will be made
available to address important biological questions. The scientific approach
employed for these syntheses focuses on the utilization of simpler starting
materials to prepare structurally complex, biologically active natural products.
The educational activities undertaken prepare students for careers in STEM
through training in an interdisciplinary team employing laboratory automation.
Outreach activities include the design and preparation of 3D printed materials
to highlight the historical, structural, and medicinal impacts of chemistry for
students and the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficient synthesis of
complex heterocyclic natural products and related biologically-interesting
compounds has broad potential impact on pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals,
materials, and other areas. Retrosynthetic analyses of heterocyclic compounds
reveal simplifying disconnections leading to N-alkynylazole intermediates, in
which an acetylene group is bonded to the nitrogen atom of a five-membered
heteroaromatic ring. Professor Kerwin is developing cyclization reactions to
enable these simplifying disconnections as well as other methods to access the
requisite N-alkynylazoles. Multiple cyclization strategies are being pursued in
the synthesis of analogs of pentostatin, morodin, and lycoposerrine natural
products, including 5-endo-dig cyclization of homopropargylic systems,
indolization of N-alknynylazoles, and thermal rearrangements of
1,x-dialkynylazoles. In addition to providing access to the targeted compounds
as tools for biological research, the broader impact of this work derives from
its wide potential applicability to diverse synthetic targets. Other broader
impacts include the recruitment of underrepresented students to science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) careers through research training
experiences. These training experiences include the use of laboratory automation
systems and the implementation of outreach activities for students and the
public focused on the impact of natural products on
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.