* 1955302
* Real-time path integral methodology for condensed-phase quantum dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Nancy Makri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 510,000.00

Nancy Makri of the University of Illinois is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop accurate computational methods for studying proton,
electron, and energy transfer processes in chemical and biological systems.
These transfer processes play a vital role in living organisms, as well as in
energy production and storage. Reactions involving light particles and energy
transfer are dominated by quantum mechanical effects. These effects are based on
the idea that elementary particles (protons, electrons, etc.) also behave as
waves and thus, have mathematical interpretations of their structure and
interactions with other matter. Quantum mechanical effects cannot be modeled
correctly using classical treatments. Professor Makri and her coworkers design
new theoretical and computational approaches for circumventing this problem;
their approaches produce more accurate and efficient simulation algorithms. The
resulting software may aid in the interpretation of experimental results. The
new software enhances the learning experience in the classroom by augmenting the
visualization ability offered by classical simulations. The project offers
graduate students and a postdoctoral researchers opportunities to receive
training in quantum dynamics, mastering state-of-the-art theoretical ideas and
simulation tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traditional formulation of quantum
mechanics is based on wave functions, which require array storage that far
exceeds current computer capabilities. Makri’s approach is based on the fully
quantum mechanical path integral formulation while the influence of thousands of
solvent or protein atoms on the dynamics of the quantum system of interest is
captured through classical trajectories. The real-time path integral methods
developed by Makri’s group are free of assumptions and uncontrolled
approximations, leading to highly accurate results. In the case where the
effects of the environment are described in terms of a harmonic bath, Makri’s
work may extend the capabilities of simulation algorithms to systems with long
memory and multiple states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.