* 1955137
* RUI: Spectroscopic and Computational Studies of Cyclic Enone Molecules in Electronic Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Stephen Drucker, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 334,554.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A), Professor Stephen Drucker of the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
(UW-Eau Claire) is investigating how chemical reactions are affected by
ultraviolet (UV) light. Chemical reactions started by exposure to light are
called photochemical reactions. These reactions can contribute to environmental
problems. On the other hand, they can also be beneficial when carried out under
carefully controlled conditions. For instance, photochemical reactions can be
used to make new materials that would benefit society. In the future, the most
detailed information about the steps taken when photochemical reactions occur
may come from computer modeling. Computational scientists can predict the
structures of molecules produced during photochemical reactions, but the
computational methods do not always yield accurate results and thus, they are
still being improved. Professor Druckerâ€™s research uses laser spectroscopy to
test computational predictions on molecules that can take part in photochemical
reactions. Undergraduate student researchers perform the experimental work. UW-
Eau Claire undergraduates gain experience with lasers, electronics,
computational chemistry and experiment design. This research project helps
prepare them for graduate programs and STEM-based careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, students are recording vibronically
resolved spectra of singlet-triplet transitions in gas-phase monocyclic enone
molecules. Molecules under investigation are 2-cyclopenten-1-one (2CPO),
2-cyclohexen-1-one (2CHO), and 4H-pyran-4-one (4PN). The objective is to
determine fundamental frequencies for vibrational modes in the lowest triplet
excited states of the test molecules. The project focuses on triplet-state
vibrations in the C=O/C=C stretch region of the spectra. Experimentally
determined fundamentals for these stretching modes augment frequency information
previously obtained for ring vibrational modes and carbonyl wagging modes. Those
bands appear in the lower-energy region of each spectrum near the origin band of
the S0-T1 transition. In previous work, the research group used cavity ringdown
(CRD) spectroscopy at room temperature to measure the lower-frequency
fundamentals. However, in the higher-frequency C=O stretch region, the S0-T1 CRD
bands at room temperature tend to be submerged by vibronic hot bands belonging
to the S0-S1 transition. To eliminate this interference, the S0-T1 spectra in
this project are recorded under jet-cooled conditions, using two-color resonant
enhanced two-photon ionization to detect the transitions. Experimentally
determined excited-state fundamental frequencies are compared to predictions
from a variety of state-of-the art computational methods. Broader impacts of the
research promote academic and intellectual growth of undergraduate students.
These educational activities include scientific training, enhancement of the
academic curriculum at UW-Eau Claire through the development of a computational
chemistry course, and the expansion of access to contemporary physical chemistry
research by groups underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.