* 1955401
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: Security through the Lens of Information Asymmetry: A Pragmatic Evolution of Goals and Models in Physical Layer Security
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Matthieu Bloch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 335,000.00

The needs of future networks beyond 5G and Internet of Things call for a
comprehensive and inclusive approach to security. By harnessing the
imperfections of communication channels, physical-layer security integrates
security concerns into the design of communication systems with benefits such as
energy efficiency and simplified key management; physical-layer security often
imposes requirements, however, which has impeded its practical adoption and
deployment. Furthermore, in some applications where physical-layer security is
uniquely suitable and no obvious cryptographic solution exists, such as
situations requiring covertness, results to date have been disappointing in
terms of predicted data transmission speeds. This project addresses these two
points. The outcomes of this project can ensure secure wireless communications
in future networks with minimal performance impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first thrust of this project brings a new perspective to the study of
cooperative security through the lens of information asymmetry against
adversaries. This part of the project aims to elucidate how cooperation can
provide knowledge to one user about the variations in the channel induced by the
signaling of another in a manner that creates new and hitherto unforeseen
advantages over an adversary. The second thrust of this project explores the
benefits of information asymmetry for covert communications, including the role
of channel state knowledge, which is foreseen as a key mechanism to not only
circumvent the square-root law of covert communication but also to alleviat the
need for a shared secret key. The impact of different-quality channel states
being available at different nodes will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.