* 1955318
* CAS: Excitonically Coupled Hydroporphyrins as Functional Component for Solar Energy Conversion
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Marcin Ptaszek, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 465,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Marcin Ptaszek of the Department of
Chemistry at University of Maryland, Baltimore County, is developing an
understanding of roles of electronic coupling on photochemical properties in
biomimetic arrays for solar energy conversion. Natural photosynthesis remains
the main inspiration for designing artificial systems for solar energy
conversion. The arrays of strongly interacting pigments are the key components
in the initial process of photosynthesis, i.e. solar radiation harvesting and
initial charge separation. In order to gain a deeper understanding of the
fundamental processes in photosynthesis and to establish the key design
principles for development of artificial solar energy conversion systems, with
efficiency comparable to (or better than) that observed for photosynthesis, the
series of model arrays are prepared and characterized. This project combines
advanced organic synthesis, spectroscopy, photochemistry and computational
chemistry, therefore provides diverse educational opportunities for students at
various levels. Special emphasis is devoted to involve students from
underrepresented groups in science, and students from high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excitonically coupled photo- and redox active molecules
are the key components in photosynthetic arrays responsible for light harvesting
and charge separation. The extent in which excitonic coupling determines the
photophysical mechanisms underlying the highly efficient charge separation in
photosynthetic arrays, and therefore its potential benefits for artificial
photosynthesis, is not fully understood. The goal of the proposed research is to
determine structure-photophysics relationships in excitonically coupled
hydropoprhyrin arrays in order to develop an understanding of the role of an
excitonic coupling in natural and artificial solar energy conversion systems. A
series of dyads, composed of hydroporphyrins, i.e. synthetic analogs of
photosynthetic pigments, featuring various modes of electronic interactions, are
prepared, and the effect of varied electronic coupling on the physical
properties of resulting arrays are determined. Subsequently, it is determined to
what extent strength and mode of electronic coupling in hydroporphyrin dyads
affect the energy and electron transfer dynamics in multicomponent arrays. Four
specific aims are realized: (1) Determination of how molecular geometry and type
of electronic interactions affect photophysical properties in excitonically
coupled hydroporphyrin dyads; (2) Determination of effects of redox properties,
metalation, and vibrational properties of hydroporphyrins as well as electronic
asymmetry on photochemical properties of excitonically coupled dyads; (3)
Determination of the role of excitonic coupling in electron transfers dynamics;
and (4) Determination of energy and electron transfer dynamics in bio-inspired
reaction center models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.