* 1955936
* Modular Automation and Chemical Methods for S- and O-linked Plant and Microbial Carbohydrate Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Nicola Pohl, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Nicola Pohl of the Department of Chemistry
at Indiana University in Bloomington. Professor Pohl is developing automated
tools to construct carbohydrates bearing S-linkages a feature that stabilizes
the carbohydrate polymers in biological systems. Carbohydrate chains known as
oligosaccharides are found in every organism—from plants to humans to
microbes—as well as on the surfaces of viruses. These organisms also contain
glycosidases, biological catalysts that can cleave carbohydrate linkages. More
stable oligosaccharides are needed to study the biological activity of linked
sugars and to design glycosidase inhibitors. Professor Pohl and her students are
developing new automated tools to create oligosaccharides associated with plants
and microbes that include specific features that will allow them to be used to
study proteins that assemble and dismantle these chains. This research is
impacting plant studies, as well as providing foundational understanding for the
agricultural and pharmaceutical industries. In addition to training the students
in her research group in the development and use of information technology
(IT)-enabled automation, Professor Pohl is also building a new undergraduate
laboratory curriculum that aims to expose undergraduate students to synthetic
automation and carbohydrate synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical
need for the development of automated methods for the synthesis of defined
oligosaccharides to support studies on the activities of these compounds in
biological systems. Professor Pohl and her research team are developing the
first glycosylation reactions for S-linked sugars that are amenable to automated
liquid-handling. The Pohl group is pursuing the automated synthesis of S-linked
sugars due to their greater metabolic stability, a key feature that facilitates
their study in biological systems. Automated synthetic methods for S-linked
sugars are being developed under batch and continuous flow conditions.
Simultaneously, Professor Pohl and her students are developing low-cost flexible
automated systems to allow the efficient site-selective incorporation of both O-
and S-linkages into plant and microbial oligosaccharides in multi-step
syntheses. These research activities are training students at the undergraduate
and graduate levels to work at the interface of synthetic organic chemistry and
information technology (IT)-enabled automation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.