* 1955282
* Quantum Chemistry Methods for Excited States at Liquid- and Solid-State Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* John Herbert, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 507,466.00

Professor John M. Herbert of The Ohio State University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop molecular-level computer models of how
molecules interact with each other. The research addresses chemistry at the
surface of water droplets, which are the primary medium of atmospheric chemical
reactions. The studies also examine the surface of semiconductor photocatalysts
that are promising materials to conduct “artificial photosynthesis”, that is,
the storage of solar energy in chemical bonds. Professor Herbert develops
theoretical methods that combine with emerging experimental techniques in laser
spectroscopy to characterize complex systems. Professor Herbert’s theoretical
calculations answer fundamental questions regarding the efficiency limits of
metal oxide photocatalysts as well as how the chemical reactivity of surface
water molecules differ from that of interior water molecules. New theoretical
and computational tools developed as part of this work will be incorporated into
the QChem software package, which is widely used in chemical education and in
high-throughput computational efforts such as the Harvard Clean Energy Project
and the Electrolyte Genome Project. Furthermore, a crucial part of this work is
the development of an interface between computer programs that is made freely
available to supercomputer centers, which includes all colleges and universities
within Ohio (including primarily undergraduate and non-Ph.D.-granting
institutions) through the Ohio Supercomputer Center. This work will put new
software tools into the hands of practicing chemists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Herbert is developing quantum chemistry methods
that can describe excited states of complex systems, with specific focus on
interfacial phenomena. These methods are examples of “QM:QM” embedding, using
high-level electronic structure methods (correlated wave functions or hybrid
density functionals) to describe excited states and lower-level methods
(periodic density functional theory) to describe the environment. Two types of
interfacial phenomena are considered: photochemical generation of solvated
electrons at the air/water interface, whose spectroscopy may offer a sensitive
molecular probe of the structure of that interface and transition metal oxide
photocatalysts of interest for water splitting, where the goal is to understand
the polaron self-trapping dynamics that limit catalytic efficiency. This
research is closely aligned with emerging spectroscopic techniques, including
surface-sensitive UV spectroscopy using liquid microjets to probe the air/water
interface and femtosecond transient XUV spectroscopy to study charge-carrier
dynamics of photocatalytic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.