* 1955328
* New Extensions to Symmetry-adapted Perturbation Theory: Spin Splittings, Explicitly Correlated Dispersion, and Intramolecular Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Konrad Patkowski, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 433,561.00

Professor Konrad Patkowski of Auburn University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the Division
of Chemistry to develop new computational methods that extend the capabilities
of calculating weak interaction energies between molecules. These methods
combine high accuracy with interpretive power, providing insight into the
physical origins of interactions between molecules. This kind of insight is aids
in the understanding, simulation, and rational design of interactions that play
key roles in chemistry, physics, biochemistry, and materials science. The new
methods developed by Patkowski and his group, which are being implemented in an
open-source computer program, are useful for describing interactions relevant to
atmospheric chemistry, molecular magnetism, and transition metal catalysis. They
also provide a new route to quantifying and interpreting interactions between
different fragments of the same molecule, such as those that control the three-
dimensional structure of proteins and nucleic acids. In addition, Patkowski
continues to develop hands-on computational chemistry modules within the
framework of the Auburn University Summer Science Institute, providing realistic
research experiences to high-school students and enhancing their awareness of
careers in science. He is also facilitating course redesign workshops for Auburn
University faculty to facilitate active learning techniques into their
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approaches developed by Professor Patkowski
and his group extend the symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT) method for
calculating interaction energies between molecules in terms of electrostatic,
induction, dispersion, and exchange interactions. In its most common closed-
shell formulation, SAPT is widely used to construct intermolecular potential
energy surfaces, interpret, and compare the origins of bonding for different
complexes and structures, and aid in the construction of force fields. Patkowski
is developing three new approaches that enhance the basis set convergence of
existing SAPT treatments through an explicitly correlated framework. This will
extend the method to complexes in low-spin states by building explicit spin-flip
excitations into the exchange energy expressions, and open up a new avenue of
application to intramolecular noncovalent interactions, based on range
separation of the Coulomb potential rather than fragmentation of the system.
Applications of the newly constructed SAPT variants include the elucidation of
spin splittings in organic ferromagnets, radical cation-radical anion
interactions, and pancake-bonded dimers, the refinement of benchmark energy
component databases for force field fitting and classification of complexes
according to interaction types. This enables the quantitative description of
intramolecular interactions responsible for the stability of sterically crowded
molecules and the conformational profiles of molecular
balances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.