* 1955488
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Reasoning about Optimizers for Data-Intensive Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alvin Cheung, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Today, we witness an explosion of new data-intensive systems, both for
traditional data processing and for machine learning, and these systems
critically require powerful optimizers for their declarative languages.
Developing and verifying such optimizers is very difficult: in the past, they
were developed only by a small number of commercial database vendors with
dedicated teams, while most modern systems are developed by small teams without
such expertise. To address this challenge, this project studies and implements
automated methods for verifying query optimization rules in data-intensive
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will have four research
focuses: (1) We will develop an axiomatic foundation based on algebraic
identities in a semiring, implement it as a framework, and apply it to verify
optimization rules in existing systems. (2) We will extend the framework to
reason about languages that combine linear algebra with relational algebra, for
example languages that manipulate vectors, matrices, and tensors, and extend the
verifier to reason about tensor optimization rules. (3) We will conduct a
theoretical study of the completeness and decidability of the semiring-based
axiomatic system used for verifying optimization rules, and specialize this
study for various query language fragments. (4) We will build a new cloud-based
infrastructure for automated reasoning of declarative query languages, to enable
researchers to easily develop executable semantics for different data-intensive
systems, formal methods researchers to develop new techniques targeted for query
language reasoning, and application developers to build new applications that
make use of our infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All software artifacts
developed in this project will be released to the public, with plans to
incorporate their usage in both the undergraduate and graduate curricula. Any
collected benchmarks from open source will be aggregated into a repository that
is publicly accessible, with the goal to enable researchers and practitioners in
the field to experiment and reproduce the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.