* 1955349
* Nitrogen Centered Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Andrzej Rajca, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 510,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Drs. Andrzej and S Rajca of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln investigate organic radicals,
molecular structures with a single unpaired electron. These new radical
compounds are relevant to the development of novel magnetic, electronic, and
optical technologies. Radical-containing compounds usually are unstable species,
easily reacting with other molecules. The goal of this research is the design,
synthesis, and characterization of stable radical-containing molecules which
have unconventional magnetic properties. The new results and insights may
provide fundamental understanding of structure and property relationships for
organic molecules while advancing the development of new materials. Such
materials may serve as contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
relaxation enhancement agents for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.
The materials may also serve as organic spin filters for spintronics, and other
applications. The research activities comprise multi-step organic synthesis,
diverse physical/materials characterization of organic molecules, and high level
computations. This research provides students with opportunities to gain a broad
education as well as to develop a wide range of skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of this project are the synthesis and
study of robust high-spin nitrogen-centered radicals. These include: di- and
tri-radicals based on tetrazolinyl radical derivatives and diradical dications
and triradical trications of double helical pi-systems. The tetrazolinyl
radicals possess properties for thin film fabrication by evaporation under
ultra-high vacuum. The double helical nitrogen-centered high-spin diradical
dications and triradical trications are predicted to be strongly paramagnetic
but stable at room temperature. These may provide future building blocks for
high-spin polyradical cations. The strength of chiroptical properties of
nitrogen-centered high-spin diradical dications of double helical pi-system is
comparable to those of [n]helicenes. The combination of strong paramagnetism
with double helical pi-systems may render unique properties due to the
combination of chirality and delocalized electronic spin. This provides an
avenue for development of novel paramagnetic materials with strong chiral
properties that could facilitate discovery of new organic magneto-optic
materials and devices, including efficient organic spin filters for spintronics.
The radicals are prepared by modern organic synthetic methodologies, including
newly developed radical-radical cross-couplings, and characterized by electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, superconducting quantum interference
device (SQUID) magnetometry, as well as computations. This research provides
opportunities for students to develop a wide range of professional
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.