* 1955558
* RUI: Lithospheric Velocity Structure and Anisotropy of the Alaskan Subduction Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Aubreya Adams, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 289,644.00

The southern coast of Alaska is the most seismically and volcanically active
portion of the United States, and was home to the second largest earthquake
recorded anywhere on Earth. The behavior of earthquakes and volcanos, however,
changes dramatically between regions along the coast. Some areas produce
extremely large earthquakes, while other regions have only small to moderate-
sized earthquakes. Similarly, the chemistry and eruption styles of volcanos
change along the coast. Understanding the origins of these differences could
lead to important insights into global earthquake and volcano hazards.
Scientists believe that the key to understanding this system may lie in the
structure and fluid-content of rocks 100-200 km beneath the surface, where the
Pacific tectonic plate dives beneath the North America tectonic plate. This
study will use earthquake waves to image these rocks buried under Alaska’s
coast. These waves, called surface waves, travel across the earth near the
surface and change speeds based on the characteristics of the rocks that they
travel through. By measuring differences in wave speed based on location and the
direction the waves travel, we will examine whether differences in earthquake
and volcano behavior are connected to (a) changes in magma-production regions,
(b) changes in the fluid content of rocks, or (c) changes in the direction that
rocks slowly flow deep beneath the surface. The work will be completed at a
Primarily Undergaduate Institution and provides research experience for
undergraduate students. The project also supports the training of an early
career Postdoctoral Investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subduction zone along
the southern margin of Alaska is home to numerous active volcanos, and is the
most seismically active portion of the United States. It has hosted several
megathrust earthquakes, including the 1964 Great Alaskan Earthquake, the second
largest earthquake in recorded history. The seismic and volcanic behavior of the
subduction zone, however, undergoes dramatic changes along strike, with some
areas slipping in great (M&gt;8) events while other regions deform primarily
through creep. Understanding the origins of this variability could lead to
important insights into subduction zone processes and global geophysical
hazards. Recent studies have highlighted the role that hydration of the
subducting slab and the mantle wedge may play in governing these behaviors. In
this study, recently collected data from the Alaska Amphibious Community Seismic
Experiment and the Alaska Transportable Array will be leveraged to build
Rayleigh and Love wave velocity models and to solve for radial and azimuthal
anisotropy of shear waves in the upper mantle beneath the Alaskan subduction
zone. These velocity models will be used to determine how forearc mantle
structure, hydration of the incoming plate and the mantle wedge, and mantle flow
combine to influence volcanic and seismic behavior along the subduction
zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.