* 1955876
* Discovering Modular Catalysts for Asymmetric Synthesis with Computation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Robert Paton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 420,786.00

Dr. Robert Paton of the Department of Chemistry at Colorado State University is
supported by an award from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop new computational approaches for chiral catalyst discovery.
The preparation of chiral molecules plays a vital and enabling role in the
discovery of medicines, agrochemicals, and materials. Newly approved drugs are
dominated by single enantiomer, chiral compounds. Dr. Paton’s group develops new
methods of theory and simulation to accelerate the discovery of new catalysts
and new reactions for the highly-selective construction of chiral molecules.
This will go hand-in-hand with new mechanistic discoveries and collaborations
with experimentalists that broaden the horizons of participating scientists. The
research team, which will include undergraduate and postgraduate researchers,
will learn a diverse array of skills well-aligned with the modern STEM workplace
and will engage the public through outreach events in
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a widely recognized need for rational
approaches to replace empirical screening in the discovery of new catalyst
structures. In this project, Dr. Robert Paton is developing computational
protocols that combine small-molecule fragments adhering to the synthetic logic
of known coupling reactions to construct and optimize catalyst architectures for
asymmetric transformations. Virtual catalyst libraries are being assembled and
mapped in an automated fashion using computational chemistry descriptions of
steric and electronic properties. A triaged approach is being developed that
directs in-depth quantum chemical efforts towards the most profitable areas of
catalyst space to promote enantioselective hydrogen-bonding phase-transfer
catalysis, bifunctional organocatalysis, and transformations involving metal-
phosphoramidite complexes. In each case, new mechanistic discoveries are
revealing the structural pre-requisites for catalytic activity and high
enantioselectivity for a given substrate. The automated construction of large
catalyst libraries, and the computation of steric and electronic parameters are
providing that large datasets of use to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.