* 1955724
* Synthesis, Characterization, and Reactivity Studies of Cerium, Thorium, and Uranium-Ligand Multiple Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Eric Schelter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 495,000.00

With support from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Eric Schelter at the University of Pennsylvania is investigating the
chemistry of cerium, thorium, and uranium compounds. His team is testing new
ways that these metals form chemical bonds to nitrogen and phosphorus. The
resulting compounds will be evaluated for their relevance to the production of
nitrogen- and phosphorus-containing pharmaceuticals and new materials. The
project is particularly focused on ways that organic scaffolds can be build to
wrap around the metals in ways that stabilize new kinds of bonds. Guidance and
insight into the new bonding patterns are obtained by comparing the structures
of the various cerium vs thorium vs uranium compounds. Rare earth materials are
used extensively in diverse applications such as catalysts, phosphors and
polishing compounds as well as for illuminated screens on electronic devices and
air pollution control.Professor Schelter supervises a laboratory that provides
graduate and undergraduate students with both theoretical and hands-on
experimental training in the synthesis and reactivity of the rare earth
elements. The effort supports outreach projects for elementary and high school
students; Young students are instructed about the technology and strategic
importance of rare earth elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the
Chemical Synthesis Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Eric Schelter at
the University of Pennsylvania leads a program aimed at understanding cerium-
ligand multiple bonds. The research will establish their d/f bonding patterns
and electronic structures using spectroscopy and computation. Comparative
reactivity studies with 5f-element congeners will provide fundamental insights
into chemical bonding. The central hypothesis is that control of the relatively
large 5d- character in the bonding of cerium(IV) will enable isolation of new
examples of metal-ligand multiple bonds. Cerium, thorium, and uranium-heteroatom
multiple bonds such as nitrides, phosphinidines, and others will be synthesized
and their electronic structures compared. Reactivity patterns for cerium-ligand
multiple bonds will be established. The fundamental knowledge developed from the
research is expected to demonstrate how bonding of elements at the key d-f
interface of the periodic table could be understood, and how their chemical and
reactivity properties can be leveraged for new applications. Rare earth
materials are used extensively in diverse applications such as catalysts,
phosphors and polishing compounds as well as for illuminated screens on
electronic devices and air pollution control. Advancing the chemistry of rare
earths and developing new and distinctive chemical reactions for thorium and
uranium contributes to improving beneficiation and separations of those
elements, and therefore national security as many of these elements are not
mined in the US. This project supports instruction of high school students about
the importance of rare earth elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.