* 1955790
* Technical Education Pathways for Advanced Manufacturing Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Michael Hernandez, NEXTFLEX LEARNING PROGRAMS
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2023
* USD 363,192.00

Due to rapidly changing technologies that are being adopted in manufacturing
facilities and retirements of current technicians, America’s manufacturing
industry is facing a critical shortage of skilled technicians. To address this
shortage, industries in northern California, Evergreen Valley College, and a
Manufacturing U.S.A. Institute (NextFlex) will work together to create industry-
aligned education programs, increase student awareness of careers in advanced
manufacturing, and recruit students into advanced manufacturing education
programs that meet their interests. This partnership will develop multiple
education pathways including certificates and an Associate of Science degree in
Advanced Manufacturing Technology. The central goal of this project is to
increase the supply of technicians who have the right skills in advanced
manufacturing to meet regional industry demand. It is expected that lessons
learned in this project will result in a set of highly effective practices for
regions across the country facing similar challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project partners will use the successful Business Industry
Leadership Team model to identify the critical knowledge, skills, and attributes
(KSAs) required by advanced manufacturing industry partners. The KSAs will be
used to inform the curriculum development process for the technical education
programs. Courses will include work-based learning experiences at industry
partner facilities. To increase the supply of students in the new programs, an
existing high school outreach model, FlexFactor, will be used to engage
students, industry partners, and project team members in project-based learning
experiences. To evaluate the effectiveness of the project, partners will monitor
student outcomes and employer satisfaction. Project partners will also document
lessons learned and best practices with the intent of sharing them with the
technical education community in the region and the nation through conferences
and media releases. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.