* 1955823
* Approximate Quantum Mechanical Methods for Excited State Potential Energy Surface Exploration
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Christine Aikens, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 456,096.00

With this award, the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry is supporting Dr. Christine Aikens of Kansas State
University (KSU) to develop quantum mechanical methods that will enable the
study of photochemical processes in large biological molecules and
nanoparticles. There are broad potential applications of these studies to the
fields of biomedical imaging, photochemistry, and solar energy conversion.
Without these methods, it is currently not feasible to study excited state
processes in large systems with hundreds of atoms accurately. The methods being
developed in this work will enable excited state potential energy exploration of
large biological molecules and nanoparticles for the first time. This will allow
the examination of energy transfer pathways and light emission in these systems.
Outreach efforts through the GROW (Girls Researching Our World, 6th-8th grade)
and EXCITE! (EXploring sCIence, Technology, and Engineering, 9th-12th grade)
programs at KSU for middle and high school girls will foster a continuing
interest in STEM, particularly computational chemistry, among the participants.
This work will also be presented at Science Cafés at a level aimed at a general
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Christine Aikens and her research group are
developing a suite of approximate methods based on time-dependent density
functional theory (TDDFT) that will enable the calculation of excited state
energies and gradients at about 50 to 60 times lower computational cost compared
to current TDDFT methods. These methods will include open-shell versions that
are expected to be effective for radicals and triplet states, as well as
versions that include Hartree-Fock exchange that are designed to accurately
treat charge-transfer excitations. Methods that include fractional occupation
numbers will also be developed, which will be beneficial for systems such as
large metal nanoparticles that have a very small HOMO-LUMO gap. These
computational methods are expected to have broader scientific impacts on
biological imaging methods development, photochemistry studies, and upon solar
energy conversion research, endeavors in which nuclear relaxation and dynamics
on excited state potential energy surfaces are critical for predicting
luminescence emission wavelengths,&lt;br/&gt;reactive pathways, and energy
transfer pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.