* 1955554
* Molecular Crystal Polymorph Prediction: High Accuracy at Lower Computational Cost
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Gregory Beran, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 548,150.00

Professor Gregory Beran of the University of California-Riverside is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Chemistry Division to develop new computational tools that will
facilitate the prediction of three-dimensional crystal structures. Knowledge of
molecular crystal structures is essential in pharmaceuticals and many other
areas of chemistry. Different crystal packing arrangements, or “polymorphs,” of
the same molecule can exhibit vastly different properties. The occurrences of
undesirable polymorphs have caused major drug recalls and other serious problems
for patients and pharmaceutical manufacturers in the past. The pharmaceutical
industry increasingly employs crystal structure prediction to complement their
experimental drug formulation efforts and to reduce the potential for
polymorphism-related problems. It has recently been discovered that the current
theoretical models in widespread use exhibit significant problems for predicting
the crystal structures of drug molecules. This project is developing new
computational models that correct these weaknesses and improve the reliability
with which crystal structures can be predicted. Software developed by this
project will be released to the community as free, open-
source&lt;br/&gt;software. Beyond the core research, Professor Beran is actively
involved in pedagogical efforts to help train next-generation scientists, a
large proportion of whom come from low-income, first-generation, and/or
traditionally underrepresented minority demographics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research occurs in three parts. First, new computationally-practical electronic
structure methods for modeling the non-covalent interactions that govern
molecular conformation and crystal packing are being developed to enable
identification of good initial crystal structures. Second, an approach that
combines the strengths of the new electronic structure methods for describing
intramolecular interactions with the lower computational costs of density
functional theory for modeling intermolecular interactions is being developed to
enable improved crystal structure predictions in pharmaceutical compounds.
Finally, new lower-cost approximations for handling the vibrational
contributions to crystalline stability are being investigated to allow
investigation of how temperature affects polymorph stability. This project is
developing new computational models that correct weaknesses in current
theoretical models and improve the reliability with which crystal structures can
be predicted. Software developed by this project will be released to the
community as free, open-source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.