* 1955614
* Microlocal Analysis in General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Peter Hintz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 01/31/2022
* USD 74,417.00

This project addresses several problems in the study of black holes in general
relativity from a mathematical perspective. At the heart of general relativity
lies Einstein's field equation which relates the curvature of spacetime to its
energy/matter content. Solutions of this equation describe astrophysical
phenomena such as black hole and gravitational waves. The primary goal of this
project is a precise description of the dynamics of black holes which are out of
equilibrium: as time evolves, they are expected to settle down to a stationary
black hole under emission of gravitational waves. Attaining this goal requires
the development of novel mathematical tools in microlocal analysis and spectral
theory. In a nutshell, the main principle of microlocal analysis is to keep
track simultaneously of the position and the momentum (or frequency) of a
propagating wave. Spectral theory, in this context, is concerned with the
characteristic frequencies and amplitudes of waves surrounding an almost
stationary black hole. The problems under investigation are closely connected to
recent advances in astrophysics. The gravitational waves emitted by a dynamical
black hole were recently detected experimentally; their frequencies and
amplitudes contain a large amount of information about the properties of the
black hole, such as its mass and angular momentum. Directly motivated by the
experimental detection of the merging of binary black holes, the investigator
furthermore aims to initiate the mathematical study of the interaction of
several black holes. This project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear stability problem of the
Kerr family of black hole spacetimes has been a driving force behind the
development of the modern theory of wave equations on curved spacetimes. The
investigator will study this problem for slowly rotating black holes by
combining recent advances in spectral theory and dynamical systems with novel
microlocal tools. This will in particular require a significant extension of the
set of tools developed for the analysis of elliptic partial differential
equations on compactified/singular spaces to the hyperbolic setting. Using
similar techniques, the investigator will analyze the sharp asymptotic behavior
of solutions of linear wave equations, including the Maxwell and Klein-Gordon
equations, on black hole spacetimes. Moreover, the investigator will consider
problems related to proving quasinormal mode expansions and ringdown for black
holes settling down to their equilibrium state, motivated by recent experimental
observations of gravitational waves. The investigator plans to relate the decay
rate of spacetime metrics towards equilibrium in the exterior of black holes to
their regularity near the inner black hole horizon in the context of Penroseâ€™s
Strong Cosmic Censorship conjecture. The second part of this project concerns
the construction of multi-black hole spacetimes. In particular, on cosmological
spacetimes, the investigator proposes to construct vacuum spacetimes in which
the black holes are eventually out of causal contact. The third part concerns
inverse problems for passive and active measurements for nonlinear wave
equations in settings in which the inverse problem for the corresponding linear
equation has not been solved yet. The investigator plans to use the nonlinear
interaction of waves deep inside of an object of interest in order to create
artificial waves which carry information about the object back to its
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.