* 1955942
* CAS: Catalytic sp3 Carbon-Hydrogen (C-H) Functionalization with Earth Abundant Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Timothy Warren, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 490,325.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Timothy Warren of the Department of
Chemistry at Georgetown University to develop sustainable catalysts that link
abundant chemical building blocks. Using catalysts to link molecular fragments
by the formation of new carbon-carbon, carbon-nitrogen, and carbon-oxygen bonds
usually requires multi-step chemical processes to first activate the molecular
fragments so that they are more reactive. Professor Warren and his team of
graduate and undergraduate researchers are designing new ways to connect
chemical building blocks using carbon-hydrogen bonds that are difficult to break
but found in most feedstock chemicals. The catalysts that are being developed
for these reactions are derived from earth abundant copper. These studies
involve experiments designed to gain fundamental insight into how the catalysts
work to be able to improve their performance in the advanced manufacture of
industrial chemicals. This project is providing training for a diverse group of
students. Dr. Warren and his group introduce the general public to chemistry at
the biannual USA Science and Engineering Festival in Washington, DC. The team
will continue to work with young scientists at the beginning of their scientific
careers. Each summer a high school student will gain valuable experience and
access to a range of more experienced scientists (undergrads, grads, PI) while
contributing to the chemical enterprise. Finally, Professor Warren and his
students will also provide day-long, hands-on laboratory experiences each summer
for rising high school seniors from the Cristo Rey and KIPP networks that serve
underprivileged, low-income, and diverse student populations that illustrate
connections between Chemistry and the
Environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic reactions for the conversion of
carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bonds in abundant chemical feedstocks to value-added
carbon-nitrogen (C-N), carbon-oxygen (C-O), and carbon-carbon (C-C) bonds are
valuable for improving the efficiency of synthetic processes. These
transformations bypass the steps required to activate reagents and
simultaneously decrease waste. Professor Warren and his research group have
discovered that a copper-catalyzed radical relay reaction can be used to
functionalize C-H bonds and they are currently investigating new synthetic
transformations that can be achieved with this catalytic system. These studies
involve optimizing the catalyst to accommodate new types of reagents to react
with the C-H bonds, exploring new oxidants to decrease the excess amount of
alkane currently required, and investigating asymmetric systems for C-H
amidation. In addition, fundamental mechanistic studies are being performed to
collect information that will facilitate further development and optimization.
These research activities also serve as a training ground for a diverse group of
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.