* 1955697
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Discovery and Exploration of Design Trade-Offs
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Wojciech Matusik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 383,000.00

To build functional, complex, and integrated products, we need tools that allow
engineers to efficiently explore a design space that encompasses geometry,
materials, electronics, software, and fabrication processes, and these
computational tools must be able to simultaneously optimize conflicting
objectives such as mechanical performance, weight, and cost. Currently, experts
and novice users alike go through a long process of trial-and-error to identify
top-performing designs, and a critical bottleneck then occurs when engineers
convert concepts created by designers into high-performance products because
design variations that improve one performance metric may worsen another, so
that there is no single best possible design but rather a set of "Pareto
optimal" designs that reflect different trade-offs. This research will create
algorithms that can discover the Pareto front of trade-offs efficiently and can
then present it to engineers and designers seeking to optimize the performance
of a design along more than one axis. Project outcomes will make foundational
contributions to computer-aided manufacturing, with demonstrations on a variety
of pipelines for creating different types of objects. The resulting methods will
both allow engineers to create high-performing products in less time while also
dramatically improving the quality of the products themselves. The work will
have additional broad impact through involvement of both undergraduate and high
school students in the research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the
project's goals, novel methods will be developed for capturing the full space of
optimal design trade-offs whose shape is typically nonlinear and even
disconnected. These methods will be driven by probabilistic analysis in the
context of multi-objective stochastic optimization. Efficient representations
and algorithms for exploring trade-offs with real-time feedback, showing which
designs achieve desired performance characteristics, will also be defined. These
techniques will then be used to implement a system that conveys an intuitive
understanding of design trade-offs, allowing engineers to quickly discover
desired solutions or find efficient ways to iterate on the design
specifications. In addition, for complex designs requiring assembly-based
approaches, tools will be created for iteratively constraining and refining the
design space until the engineer feels confident with the assembled artifact. The
workflow will allow engineers to find solutions that are better than what a
human or a computer alone would find.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.