* 1955010
* Advancing Mechatronics Education to Include Industry 4.0 Concepts and Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Joshua Whittington, Wiregrass Georgia Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,206.00

The field of advanced manufacturing is being transformed by the integration of
automation with digital data exchange. This integration of physical and digital
systems is often called, Industry 4.0. Examples of Industry 4.0 technologies
include Artificial Intelligence, the Internet of Things, and Cloud Computing.
This project is designed to help meet the rising need for highly skilled workers
who are ready for employment in Mechatronics and Industry 4.0. The College’s
South Georgia service area is home to more than 150 manufacturing companies.
Current industry partners include Polar Beverages, Kelly Manufacturing Company,
Campbell Scientific, NextEra Energy, Dillard’s Distribution, Letica Corporation,
BASF, and Innotek. To operate and maintain modern manufacturing facilities,
these companies need technicians who have Industry 4.0 skills. Coupled with this
growing demand for Industry 4.0-competent technicians, there is a shortage of
faculty who can teach Industry 4.0 concepts and skills. To meet the dual need
for educators and workers, this project plans to: 1) build on an existing
mechatronics program to develop a new Mechatronics – Industry 4.0 degree that
can produce workforce-ready technicians; 2) develop educational pathways from
local high school mechatronics programs into the new Mechatronics – Industry 4.0
program; 3) support the teaching and learning of workplace Industry 4.0
competencies; and 4) increase program enrollment, especially of underrepresented
student populations including female and Latinx students. A comprehensive
evaluation will determine the impact of the project as well as make
recommendations for modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to
develop a pipeline of students from a high-school advanced manufacturing program
into a college-level Mechatronics program that includes Industry 4.0 training.
Using industry experts as co-teachers, professional development activities will
provide college faculty with the necessary training and certifications needed to
provide high quality education in Industry 4.0 concepts and skills. The project
will develop blended-learning resources (i.e. in person and online) and generate
insights into how a blended environment affects student learning. Anticipated
outcomes of the project are an advanced mechatronics degree with an Industry 4.0
focus and articulated pathways in automated manufacturing from high schools to
community and technical colleges. Anticipated benefits to industry partners
include: 1) a steady stream of highly skilled, work-ready advanced manufacturing
technicians; 2) a curriculum more reflective of industry needs; and 3) an
opportunity to shape the educational future of students interested in advanced
manufacturing as a career path. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.