* 1955564
* Rigidity in Rank One Hyperbolic Dynamics and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Andriy Gogolyev, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2023
* USD 204,384.00

This research project is in the field of hyperbolic dynamical systems. This
field encompasses a variety of real-world dynamical systems, or systems that
change with time. Examples could be as simple as the motion of a mechanical
linkage in the plane or in 3-dimensional space, and as complex as the behavior
of gas in a closed vessel or the dynamics of convection currents in the
atmosphere. Hyperbolic dynamics is colloquially known as “chaos theory” and
studies chaotic (or “unpredictability” properties) and long-term ``behavior on
the average” of such dynamical systems. The project seeks to make significant
progress on certain foundational questions in hyperbolic dynamics. Potentially
this research could have impact in physics, chemistry, engineering, and other
areas where chaotic dynamical systems naturally appear. The project also has an
educational component and supports the training of graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anosov diffeomorphisms, partially hyperbolic
diffeomorphisms and geodesic flows in negative curvature are the prime examples
of chaotic dynamical systems. In the past decades, the study of statistical and
geometric properties of individual dynamical systems has flourished. However, we
still have a rather poor understanding of the structure of the space of Anosov
and partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms and flows. The project seeks to gain
such understanding primarily focusing on the structure of smooth conjugacy
classes. The principal investigator plans to utilize an arsenal of dynamics,
analytic and geometric techniques to achieve the goals of this proposal. More
specifically the project has three major parts: (1) gaining fundamental
understanding of the structure of smooth conjugacy classes of higher dimensional
Anosov diffeomorphisms and 3-dimensional Anosov flows; (2) advancing the
rigidity program for negatively curved surfaces and higher dimensional
manifolds; (3) advancing the rigidity program from hyperbolic to partially
hyperbolic dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.