* 1955310
* High-Resolution Molecular Spectroscopy on Multiple Potential Energy Surfaces using Cavity-Ring-Down-Based Two-Photon Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jinjun Liu, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 524,041.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jinjun Liu and his
research team at the University of Louisville (UofL) are using sophisticated
laser techniques to study the complex motions of nuclei and electrons in
molecules, including electrons’ “orbiting” around the nuclei, the spin of
electrons, and the vibrational and rotational motions of nuclei. In a molecule,
these motions are “quantized”, meaning that they are not continuous but
discrete. As a result, the molecule can be on separated “energy levels” with
different energies and “quantum states”. Understanding the energy-level
structure, and the distribution and transfer of energy between energy levels is
essential to many disciplines of physical sciences. However, experimentally
obtained data on the energy level structure of molecules are often extremely
complicated and difficult to understand because different motions of electrons
and nuclei coincide and are coupled to each other. Moreover, many quantum states
are “dark”, i.e., they cannot be accessed from the lowest-energy state of the
molecule using a single laser beam. These two factors often prohibit a
comprehensive and quantitative understanding of the molecular energy level
structure. The UofL team plans to overcome both obstacles by developing new
spectroscopy techniques that use not one, but two laser beams to interrogate
molecules. Using two laser beams provides the selectivity on energy levels that
is necessary to simplify experimental data. It can also create “detours” to the
dark states, given that intermediate quantum states are judiciously selected. In
the experiment, the laser light is trapped between two mirrors that form an
optical cavity, which significantly increases the time of interaction between
the laser and molecules, and hence improves the detection sensitivity. The first
molecules that the UofL team studies are nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and the nitrate
radical (NO3). Both molecular species play important roles in the chemistry of
the atmosphere. NO2 is one of the major pollutants of photochemical air
pollution, while NO3 is the primary oxidant in the night-time troposphere. The
UofL team is also collaborating with computational chemists to design their
experiments and to interpret the expected experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on developing two high-
resolution, high sensitivity spectroscopic techniques: double-resonance cavity
ring-down (DR-CRD) and stimulated-emission pumping cavity ring-up (SEP-CRU).
Both methods are based on the highly sensitive CRD technique. They have
advantages associated with two-photon spectroscopy, including simplified
spectra, sub-Doppler linewidth, and the capability of accessing molecular dark
states, which cannot be accessed using single-photon spectroscopy techniques due
to forbidding selection rules, small transition dipole moments, or unfavorable
Franck-Condon factors. Quantitative information of vibronic (vibrational-
electronic) coupling (e.g., the Jahn-Teller and pseudo-Jahn-Teller effects) and
related intramolecular interactions (e.g., the spin-orbit interaction) are being
investigated using these two new laser spectroscopic techniques. The first
target molecules, NO2 and NO3, are two prototypical molecules for the study of
vibronic interactions. They are interrogated with the DR-CRD and SEP-CRU
techniques at room temperature and under jet-cooled conditions (T~1 K). With
intermediate states for the two-step excitation predicted based on computational
chemistry and spectroscopic models, the UofL team investigate the spin-
rovibronic (spin-rotational-vibrational-electronic) energy level structure of
the ground and low-lying excited electronic states of these two free radicals.
Two previously developed spectroscopic models, one for vibronic analysis and the
other for rotational analysis, have been combined and employed to simulate and
fit the spin-rovibronic structure in experimentally obtained spectra, and to
unravel the complex mechanism of vibronic interactions. In terms of scientific
Broader Impacts, the experimental techniques and the theoretical model developed
in this project are a uniquely effective tool for the study of spectroscopy and
dynamics on multiple potential energy surfaces (PESs). The post-doctoral
researcher and Ph.D. students engaged in this research project are gaining
valuable experience in cutting-edge laser-spectroscopy technology, molecular
physics, theoretical chemistry, and computer simulations of experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.