* 1955648
* Main Group Metal Compounds with Terminal Hydride and Hydroxide Ligands:  Synthesis and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Gerard Parkin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2024
* USD 510,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Gerard Parkin of Columbia University seeks to prepare new
chemical compounds containing calcium, zinc, and related metals. These elements
underpin applications as diverse as pharmaceuticals, catalysis, and materials
science. Parkin has identified a new approach to exploiting these abundant
resources in ways that are of fundamental interest and of potentially practical
value. One project aims to generate bonds from these metals to hydrogen. This
new structural motif is being sought using new synthetic methodology.
Specifically, the hydrogen is attached only to one calcium or one zinc atom. It
is expected that this hydrogen atom may exhibit unusual behavior in reactions
that can be used to detoxify pollutants. Another reaction being pursued is the
production of new kinds of polymers. The project explores the extent that
calcium and zinc, which are earth-abundant, can replace precious metals such as
platinum, which is not found in the United States. In this way, the research
addresses our nation's economic and security interests. Professor Parkin's
program provides hands-on training to high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students in chemical synthesis, measurement, and theory. The project also
supports an outreach program that focuses on chemical demonstrations for
children from New York City's public schools. This program helps to attract an
ethnically diverse pool into chemistry and related technical
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Gerard Parkin of Columbia University investigates
the synthesis and the reactivity of metal hydride and hydroxide compounds. New
reactivity may result from the relatively unadorned structurees of the hydride
and hydroxide groups, owing to the use of large multidentate ligands. These
ligands enforce well-defined coordination environments and prevent pairs of
complexes from combining. One specific objective of comparing the Groups 2 and
12 main group metals is to demonstrate how completion of the 3d, 4d and 4f5d
levels influence chemistry. The research involves the use of single crystal
X-ray diffraction and NMR spectroscopic methods to determine the structures of
the synthesized molecules, and computational methods to analyze the bonding. An
important component of the broader impacts of the research activities involves
training students to be future professionals, be it in an academic or industrial
setting. The activities within the research group not only involve graduate and
undergraduate students (including those from Barnard College), but also high
school students, thereby providing an important STEM experience at a critical
point in their education. In addition, the research group also performs
chemistry demonstrations for children from ethnically diverse New York City
public middle schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.