* 1955649
* RUI: D3SC:  Advancement of Excitation Energy Transfer Modeling with Deep Learning Algorithms
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Dmitri Kosenkov, Monmouth University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 267,205.00

Dmitri Kosenkov of Monmouth University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to advance computational methods for modeling electronic excitation
energy transfer dynamics in complex molecular systems by the incorporation of
deep learning techniques. Excitation energy transfer is a fundamentally
important process for light harvesting and utilization in natural and artificial
systems. Modern technologies, such as photovoltaics and molecular sensors,
involve energy transfer. In particular, understanding excitation energy transfer
mechanisms in molecular fluorescent probes is crucial for targeting proteins,
DNA sequences, and sensing of intracellular environments. The challenges in
modeling excitation energy transfer processes is associated with the large sizes
and complex structures of the molecular systems. Professor Kosenkov and
coworkers are incorporating machine learning into computational chemistry
techniques to overcome these obstacles. This approach may accelerate
computations and reduce computational cost. The scientific knowledge has the
potential to advance in the fields of chemical biology, artificial
photosynthesis, organic photovoltaics, and phototherapies. Professor Kosenkov
involves undergraduate students at Monmouth University, a primarily
undergraduate institution, in his research. The Kosenkov group disseminates the
computational methods to the broader scientific community via computational
chemistry software and research-based laboratory projects that can be
implemented in colleges and universities in the United States and worldwide.
Finally, the work supports computational chemistry workshops for undergraduate
and high school students at Monmouth University, where leading scientists in the
fields of computational chemistry, chemical biology, and machine learning share
their knowledge and experience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research is focused on
novel bioorthogonal boron dipyrromethene-derived probes that offer a
revolutionary tool for visualization of cell organelles, intracellular drug
distribution, and open a possibility for potential phototherapy through
controlled generation of cytotoxic singlet oxygen under light activation.
Excitation energy transfer is a key process for operation of these molecular
fluorescent probes. Professor Kosenkov and his collaborators are developing an
original computational methodology that integrates quantum dynamics theories
with deep learning algorithms. The dynamics of energy transfer is modeled with
the quantum master equation methods. The deep learning component enables high-
throughput screening of electronic excitation energies and couplings further
used in quantum dynamics simulations. The methodology is advantageous due to its
flexibility and applicability to a wide range of molecular systems. The methods
enable elucidation and comparison of the mechanisms of excitation energy
transfer for molecular fluorescent probes of varied chemical structures.
Moreover, the software tools simulate a wide range of molecular systems and may
allow for further iterative improvements as the field develops. The educational
component is focused on development and dissemination of a sequence of research-
based multi-week computational laboratory units, primarily for physical and
computational chemistry courses. These laboratory units cover basics of deep
leaning algorithms and their applications in chemistry including modeling of
fluorescent probes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.