* 1955268
* CAS: Principles of Cooperativity for the Electrocatalytic Reduction of Carbon Dioxide
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Craig Grapperhaus, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 323,542.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry supports the
research program of Professor Craig Grapperhaus and Dr. Joshua Spurgeon of the
University of Louisville. This project focuses on the capture and reactivity of
carbon dioxide. Generating fuels and chemicals using electricity is one of the
most favorable approaches for using intermittent renewables such as wind and
solar. Also, making commercial chemicals from electricity may also be more
energetically efficient than using current methods which involve heating. This
project develops more sustainable systems to capture carbon dioxide and convert
it to fuels or other chemical products. The new reactions employ an abundant
metal, such as zinc, within a supporting molecular framework synthesized from
inexpensive starting materials. The fundamental research could provide a pathway
by which renewable electricity and high concentrations carbon dioxide from
fossil fuel combustion could be used to form commercially useful materials. The
research provides undergraduate and graduate students hands-on interdisciplinary
experience in renewable energy research preparing them for careers in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics. High-school student participants in
the annual renewable energy workshop at the University of Louisville have the
opportunity to participate in the research and develop independent science fair
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Craig Grapperhaus and Dr. Joshua
Spurgeon of the University of Louisville are developing hybrid
thiosemicarbazone-pyridylhydrazone metal complexes as co-catalysts for carbon
dioxide capture and reduction. The co-catalysts utilize metal-ligand
cooperativity through the incorporation of neighboring Lewis acid and Lewis base
sites. Reductions will be performed at a variety of electrodes including Cu-Ni
alloys. The project will investigate the factors influencing product
distribution, reaction mechanism, and reactivity between the co-catalyst and
electrode. Projected outcomes include the quantification of the effect of Lewis
acidity and Lewis basicity on the binding and catalytic reactivity of carbon
dioxide with the metal co-catalyst. The research team will identify of unique
C-C coupled products from carbon dioxide reduction at the Cu-Ni alloy and draw
mechanistic insights into the C-C coupling process. The group will increase
fundamental knowledge of the reactivity of Cu-Ni alloys with varying
compositions. High-school student participants in the annual renewable energy
workshop at the University of Louisville have the opportunity to participate in
the research and develop independent science fair
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.