* 1955776
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Spectroscopy of Metal-Containing Diatomics and Electronic Field Shift Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Leah O'Brien, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 198,553.00

This grant from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A program
supports the collaborative research projects of Professor Leah O’Brien at
Southern Illinois University Edwardsville and Professors James O’Brien and Jack
Harms at the University of Missouri-St. Louis. They use high-resolution
electronic spectroscopy to investigate small, metal-containing molecules. These
studies help to explain the way that metal ions are modified when they form
chemical bonds, providing valuable insight into the nature of larger metal-
containing molecules that are difficult to study directly. Research participants
acquire a wide range of skills through a combination of activities, including
development of instrumentation, data collection using light-absorption and/or
emission spectroscopic methods, and digital data analysis. This project
continues an inter-institutional collaboration of faculty and students at a
primarily undergraduate institution and a major research university. It enhances
the research infrastructure at both universities and develops students and
faculty with skills in contemporary spectroscopy and instrument development. The
project also contains an outreach program that allows talented high school
students to participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The O'Brien groups
use intracavity laser absorption spectroscopy combined with high resolution
Fourier transform detection (ILS-FTS). The plasma discharge techniques to
produce the molecules of interest employ direct current (DC) and radio frequency
(RF) pulsed DC plasma generators as used in industry. The spectra are
rotationally analyzed to obtain new and/or improved molecular constants (e.g.,
transition energy, rotational and vibrational constants, angular momentum
coupling constants, mass-independent parameters for species with multiple
isotopologues). These constants are used to develop energy level diagrams and
potential energy curves for molecules and may even provide a glimpse of the
metal nucleus through the electronic field-shift effect, which was recently
characterized for platinum-containing molecules. These parameters enable
comparison of the experimental results with on-going, high-level computational
results from colleague Prof. Wenli Zou for these small molecules. This work
enhances our understanding of metal-ligand interactions, periodic trends for
metal-ligand binding, and provides insight on metal-catalyzed
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.