* 1955256
* Meeting Workforce Needs for Skilled Geospatial Technicians through Virtual Geospatial Information Science Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Catherine DuBreck, Monroe Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2024
* USD 583,472.00

This project aims to develop one of the nationâ€™s first Associate in Applied
Science degree programs in geospatial information technology that is fully
accessible both on campus and online. It is expected that the program will help
meet the growing demand for geospatial technicians across Upstate New York. The
degree program will be designed to provide students with equal access to state-
of-the-art geospatial education, regardless of where they live. Innovative
aspects of the project include customizable in-person and online learning,
online internships, online mentoring, and hands-on technical support at the
college library and public libraries. In addition to educating new technicians,
the project will also address regional demand for on-the-job geospatial
education by developing an online nine-credit micro-credential focused on topics
such as data management, programming, and web mapping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project goal is to prepare students for more advanced Geospatial Information
Science Technology careers. It plans to achieve this goal by building on the
geospatial certificate program that was developed with support from a previous
award from the NSF Advanced Technological Education program. Industry-identified
requirements will guide improvements to existing courses and development of
three new advanced courses. These courses will form the core curriculum for the
new Associate in Applied Science degree and micro-credential, both of which can
be earned online. Virtual geospatial internships will be designed to support
rural organizations that need geospatial information, but are unable to employ a
geospatial expert. The project includes research on online education. This
research will include comparisons of the effectiveness online mentoring, remote
internships, and library support for online learning. The project will also
assess the effectiveness of the virtual internships in preparing students to
meet the increasing demand for geospatial technicians who can work remotely.
Additionally, the project will examine the extent to which online education can
meet the needs of underserved students who may be new to online learning or who
have limited broadband connections. Dissemination through social media,
websites, and presentations at conferences will provide information that other
colleges may use as a model for developing their own virtual technical education
programs. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.