* 1955260
* CDS&amp;E: D3SC: Developing A Molecular Mechanics Modeling Platform (MMMP) for Studying Molecular Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Junmei Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Junmei Wang of The University of Pittsburgh is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop a set of computational tools and build a publicly available
platform to facilitate users to study biomolecular systems. The award is
cofunded by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure. High quality molecular
mechanics force field (MMFF) parameters are critical to the successful modeling
and simulations of various molecular systems. However, users na√Øve to molecular
modeling may find it a daunting task to obtain high-quality MMFF parameters and
models without assistance. Dr. Wang and his team are conducting research to
develop novel software tools, derive MMFF parameters, build high-quality models,
and then integrate them into a freely accessible Molecular Mechanics Modeling
Platform (MMMP). MMMP will help users from a broad range of disciplines to study
molecular mechanisms of biomolecule-ligand interactions and to calculate the
binding affinity accurately and efficiently with ease. Researchers from the drug
discovery community can employ MMMP to increase the success rate on the
discovery of drug candidates for combating a variety of diseases including the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A major bottleneck
for studying novel molecular systems is the availability, accuracy and
validation of consistent molecular mechanics parameter sets. Dr. Junmei Wang is
developing a Molecular Mechanics Modeling Platform (MMMP) which integrates force
field parameters and residue topologies, novel online tools, and Application
Programming Interfaces (APIs) to break the bottleneck. He is conducting research
to (1) improve the atom type and bond type perception algorithm to handle
arbitrary small molecules; (2) develop molecular mechanics model databases for
non-standard amino acid/nucleic acid residues and co-crystallized ligands in the
Protein Data Bank, and other compounds (3) develop and advance a software tool
coined re-Affinity to bridge the the gap between the efficient docking methods
and more computer resource-demanding yet more accurate free energy-based
methods; (4) develop a physical, efficient and highly transferrable charge model
which can significantly improve the accuracy of free energy calculations; and
(5) create a user-friendly Graphic User Interface (GUI), ClickFF, which allows
users to generate energy profiles, compare force fields, and optimize force
field parameters for selected bonded force field parameters with a few
clicks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.