* 1955889
* EAGER: The Fundamentals of Exotic Exciton Complexes in 2D Janus Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Sefaattin Tongay, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Named after the two-faced Roman god, Janus crystals are a new class of ultrathin
two-dimensional materials. Here, the name ''Janus'' originates from the ancient
Roman God of beginnings and transitions with two faces one looking to the future
while the other facing to the past. Similar to Janus himself, Janus materials
have two different faces with two different atomic arrangement at the nanoscale.
The theory tells us that these materials have rather extraordinary optical,
electrical, and magnetic properties and show promise towards new technologies in
quantum engineering, quantum optics, and spintronics. But our understanding of
these materials are only limited to theory without any experimental insights due
to limitations in sample preparation and measurement techniques. This project
aims understanding the optical properties of Janus crystals using impressive
synthesis and characterization techniques. Next, it takes steps to integrate
them with other quantum platforms for next generation optical quantum
applications. While doing so, the educational efforts create completely new lab
tours to material deposition / growth labs at Arizona State University for
prospective K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to investigate
optical properties of post-transition metal chalcogenide 2D Janus layers and
integrate them with microcavities to stabilize complex exciton complexes for new
type of quantum applications. The initial experiments focus on the synthesis of
epitaxial and excitonic grade 2D Janus crystals and establishing their optical
properties through the state-of-the-art microscopy and spectroscopy
characterization techniques. The goal is to establish the fundamental excitonic
behavior of these materials such as excitonic series, exciton binding energies,
dipolar-dipolar excitons, and lifetimes when the mirror symmetry is broken and
large colossal polarization is present in the layer. Once established,
additional studies focus on formation and understanding of Bose condensates or
rich exciton complexes when these 2D Janus layers are integrated with DBR
microcavities. If successful, the project provides the very first experimental
insights into these new class of quantum material. This study also paves the way
for development of numerous applications of quantum detectors, sensors, and
valleytronics. The principal investigator continues to be committed to outreach,
education and collaborative efforts within the university as well as with
Phoenix middle and high schools, Sun Devil Days and Open House events and
technical laboratory training and tours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.