* 1955394
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Code demography: Addressing information needs at scale for programming interface users and designers
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Bjoern Hartmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Society is undergoing a digital transformation. More and more aspects of life
are touched by software. Programmers often write new software by combining pre-
existing pieces of software in novel ways. These pre-existing pieces, called
programming interfaces, are written by other programmers, to be reused. However,
the creators of programming interfaces often do not know enough about how their
work gets used by others. Users often face barriers in deciding which of a set
of interfaces they should choose, and how to use them. This project will conduct
studies to learn about the unmet needs of programmers and then create novel
tools to support the design, comparison, and use of programming interfaces. For
this investigation, the team will develop a software infrastructure that
automatically analyzes and processes large sets of online
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will deepen our understanding of unmet
information needs of programming interface designers and users, and how these
are reflected in community usage data. To address the unmet needs, the team will
perform an iterative design process, developing novel tools, interaction
techniques, and implications for helping developers understand the big picture
of existing code repositories. This is expected to help make emergent software
design choices within a community explicit, rather than implicit, and for
improving code quality. The research is based on an approach called code
demography: the study of recurring patterns in large code corpora. It will apply
code demography to investigate: (1) how to use programming interfaces in a
particular context; (2) how to design and evolve a programming interface; and
(3) how to assess and select among multiple programming interfaces with similar
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.