* 1955552
* Theory of Single-molecule Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Dmitrii Makarov, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Dmitrii E. Makarov of the University of Texas at Austin is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry. Biomolecules and their assemblies act as machines,
performing myriads of tasks in living organisms. These tasks include the
synthesis of other molecules, the transport of cargo across cells, generation of
mechanical forces, recognition, signaling and others. An understanding of the
microscopic chemical basis of these functions will enable the design of
bioinspired materials and nanomachines. Such understanding provides important
insights into the molecular origins of diseases. A key challenge to achieving
this goal is that many molecular motions, e.g. the “power stroke” of a molecular
motor, are both too fast to observe via direct experiments and too slow to model
on a computer. The Makarov research group uses theory to bridge the gap between
experimental observations in single molecule studies and computer simulations of
biomolecules in action. Through synergy between experiments, theory, and
molecular simulations, they are developing accurate models and theories to
describe the motion of biomolecules as inferred directly from experimental
observations. This project will increase integration of education and research
through organization of a Summer School on molecular kinetics, organization of
the Biophysics Day at UT Austin, involvement of undergraduate students in the
PI's group research activities, and participation of students in scientific
meetings. Outreach efforts will include talks at Texas universities serving
underrepresented groups, with the goal to establish relationships with students
and faculty, and mentoring a competitive Science Olympiad team of middle and
high school students. The studies of the recently discovered novel mechanism of
biomolecular interactions may have important implications in the biotechnology,
as well as for the development of bioinspired materials with high
toughness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this grant includes
two major components. In the first component, a coherent picture of microscopic
biomolecular dynamics at multiple timescales and at different levels (from
atomistic to coarse, low-dimensional) of theoretical description is being
developed, with the focus on the intrachain dynamics of intrinsically disordered
proteins, biomolecular folding, and protein association, especially the
formation of “fuzzy” protein complexes. The second component focuses on the
dynamics of barrier crossing in nonequilibrium processes such as those
underlying the action of molecular machines, with the goal to uncover underlying
dynamics, beyond discrete states and transition rates, from high-temporal-
resolution single-molecule data. The group also seeks to elucidate how molecular
machines break the symmetry between the forward and backward
motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.