* 1955368
* ANT LIA: Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Patterns and Mechanisms of Trait Diversification in the Antarctic Notothenioid Radiation
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,165,450.00

Part I: Nontechnical description &lt;br/&gt;The ecologically important
notothenioid fish of the Southern Ocean surrounding Antarctica will be studied
to address questions central to polar, evolutionary, and adaptational biology.
The rapid diversification of the notothenioids into &gt;120 species following a
period of Antarctic glaciation and cooling of the Southern Ocean is thought to
have been facilitated by key evolutionary innovations, including antifreeze
glycoproteins to prevent freezing and bone reduction to increase buoyancy. In
this project, a large dataset of genomic sequences will be used to evaluate the
genetic mechanisms that underly the broad pattern of novel trait evolution in
these fish, including traits relevant to human diseases (e.g., bone density,
renal function, and anemia). The team will develop new STEM-based research and
teaching modules for undergraduate education at Northeastern University. The
work will provide specific research training to scholars at all levels,
including a post-doctoral researcher, a graduate student, undergraduate
students, and high school students. The team will also contribute to public
outreach, including, in part, the develop of teaching videos in molecular
evolutionary biology and accompanying educational
supplements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will leverage their comprehensive notothenioid phylogenomic dataset
comprising &gt;250,000 protein-coding exons and conserved non-coding elements
across 44 ingroup and 2 outgroup species to analyze the genetic origins of three
iconic notothenioid traits: (1) loss of erythrocytes by the icefish clade in a
cold, stable and highly-oxygenated marine environment; (2) reduction in bone
mass and retention of juvenile skeletal characteristics as buoyancy mechanisms
to facilitate foraging; and (3) loss of kidney glomeruli to retain energetically
expensive antifreeze glycoproteins. The team will first track patterns of change
in erythroid-related genes throughout the notothenioid phylogeny. They will then
examine whether repetitive evolution of a pedomorphic skeleton in notothenioids
is based on parallel or divergent evolution of genetic regulators of
heterochrony. Third, they will determine whether there is mutational bias in the
mechanisms of loss and re-emergence of kidney glomeruli. Finally, identified
genetic mechanisms of evolutionary change will be validated by experimental
testing using functional genomic strategies in the zebrafish model
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.