* 1955939
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Detecting and Controlling Network-based Spread of Hospital Acquired Infections
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Philip Polgreen, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 381,761.00

Hospital Acquired Infections (HAIs) are becoming a major challenge in health
systems worldwide. Detection and control of HAIs are challenging and resource
intensive, because of the high costs of patient treatment and disinfection of
hospital facilities, making them fundamental public health problems. Despite its
huge importance for hospitals, and the interest from both clinical and
epidemiological researchers, these problems remain poorly understood. This
project seeks to develop a novel network-based approach to improve hospital
infection control using models and data science. This proposal brings together a
highly multi-disciplinary team of researchers, and will lead to fundamental
contributions in different areas of computer science (data mining, machine
learning, graph mining, social networks, and optimization), network science
(mathematical models and dynamical systems) and computational epidemiology
(infectious diseases, and hospital epidemiology). The planned work has immediate
implications for public health e.g. it can lead to new design policies and
guidance for hospital infection control. Research findings will be incorporated
into graduate level classes, tutorials, contests and workshops to bring
computational biologists and data miners together. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are several challenges in studying HAI outbreaks primarily because the dynamics
of HAI spread are much more complex than other diseases, such as influenza, due
to many more factors and pathways involved. To overcome these issues, the
project team will use a new class of two-mode cascade models, which have very
different dynamics than the standard models, and have not been studied in data
mining. The will investigate the following topics: (1) Surveillance, early
detection of HAI outbreaks, (2) Designing interventions to control the spread of
HAIs, and (3) Modeling and estimating exposure risk for HAIs. A unified set of
problems will be considered, including modeling, detection, control and
inference of missing infections. These are challenging stochastic optimization
problems on networks, and the project team will invent rigorous and scalable
methods using tools from data mining, machine learning and combinatorial
optimization. Their research will use a unique fine-grained, large-scale data
set of operations from a public hospital, supplemented with data from other
hospitals. The results will be validated with the help of domain experts
including epidemiologists and clinicians involved in hospital infection
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.