* 1955027
* QCIS-FF: Quantum Computing &amp; Information Science Faculty Fellow at Indiana University
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yuzhen Ye, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,897.00

In the first part of last century, quantum mechanics revolutionized physics. We
are now at a critical time when the quantum worldview promises to revolutionize
not only everyday technologies of communication and computation, but even the
very laws of thought underlying logic, computation, and the fabric of science.
Today, computer science lives in an idealized, classical, and deterministic
worldview that only approximates physical reality. This approach is
fundamentally limiting when dealing with modern applications and problem domains
and this state of affairs requires a fresh approach. Although individual
advances in physics and computer science separately are needed for this fresh
look, a crucial step to facilitate answers to the big question of utilizing
quantum theory to solve real-world problems is to bring together physicists,
mathematicians, logicians, and computer scientists to ensure that the quantum
worldview is embraced in mainstream computational models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the institutional support behind creating a new
center of Quantum Science and Engineering Center (QSEc) at Indiana University,
the creation of a new department of Intelligent Systems Engineering, and the
broad interest of faculty in QSEc activities, a new faculty fellow in the
Computer Science department will provide much needed expertise enhancing both
the number and quality of cross-departmental research collaborations at Indiana
University that can benefit from the involvement of computer-scientists. To
attain higher successes, existing quantum research collaborations at Indiana
University need a critical mass of experts at the intersection of physics,
chemistry, material science, engineering, and computer science areas such as
machine learning, complexity, logic, and programming systems. The new faculty
fellow is also critical in engaging the expanding educational activities related
to quantum information. These include newly established classes for computer
science seniors as well as plans for an ambitious and intense one-year MS degree
aimed at training computer science and engineering graduates to pursue the new
opportunities in quantum information science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.