* 1955284
* GOALI: Fluoroalkylation Enabled by Lewis Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Joseph Tucker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 460,585.00

The presence of fluorine atoms in pharmaceutical and agrochemical compounds
generally enhances their biological activity and stability. For this reason,
many of these important chemicals contain fluorine atoms located in very
specific positions within these molecules. Progress in preparing new and better
compounds is hindered by the limited number of ways fluorinated molecules can be
synthesized with this desirable precision. In this project, with funding from
the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Szymczak of the
University of Michigan is working with Dr. Joseph Tucker at Pfizer Corporation
to develop a new class of chemical starting materials and reactions to introduce
fluorine into pharmaceutically-relevant molecules. This academic/industrial
collaboration is uncovering fundamental chemical reactions to address
challenging problems in chemical synthesis, including how to utilize inexpensive
fluorine-containing raw materials. The results of this work have broad-reaching
impact in the agriculture, pharmaceutical and fluorochemical industry. Dr.
Szymczak and Dr. Tucker are actively engaged in outreach activities that build
upon their research to promote engagement of students in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities, which include
a nationwide meeting series across multiple institutional levels, volunteering
time and expertise at community schools, and engagement with students through
university seminars and panel discussions are directed at exposing students to
the breadth of STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Szymczak of the
University of Michigan is developing fluoroalkylation synthetic methods that use
fluoroalkanes as the principle building blocks. These efforts build on a recent
discovery showing that acid/base pairs can be rationally selected to promote
fluoroalkane activation and transfer to molecules of pharmaceutical relevance,
where the construction of more complex –CF2– linkages is a primary goal. This
research project addresses the chemical synthesis problem of how to promote C-C
bond forming reactions using fluoroalkyl groups derived from cheap building
blocks: reactions that are highly coveted in medicinal chemistry because of the
desirable properties that fluorination imparts to many pharmaceuticals. The
GOALI award involves a partnership with scientists at Pfizer to develop
integrated design tools that can be applied across academic and industrial
sectors. Use of high throughput reaction development is used to prepare complex
chemical libraries that incorporate fluoroalkyl tags onto medicinally relevant
organic compounds with distinct (regio)selectivities which provide
straightforward access new molecules that expand structural diversity available
and allow examination of structure/function relationships. Dr. Szymczak and Dr.
Tucker are actively engaged in outreach activities that build upon their
research to promote engagement of students in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities, which include a nationwide
meeting series across multiple institutional levels, volunteering time and
expertise at community schools, and engagement with students through university
seminars and panel discussions are directed at exposing students to the breadth
of STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.