* 1955997
* CNS Core: Medium: Resource Constrained Reinforcement Learning for Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christoph Studer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2024
* USD 926,739.00

Reinforcement Learning has surfaced as a promising algorithmic paradigm for
online decision making and control. Recent efforts demonstrate impressive
results, but with relatively unlimited computational resources, data, and
training. However, many real-world decision-making and control problems require
real-time decisions but are severely constrained in terms of throughput,
latency, memory, and power. Existing algorithms are employed in software on
general purpose processors, and do not translate well to real-timeresource-
constrained computation in hardware. This project will develop new algorithmic
paradigms as well as hardware acceleration primitives that work in sync to
enable real-time reinforcement learning at scale in embedded applications. From
the algorithmic perspective, this work will study efficiency in computational
resource tradeoffs, and design reinforcement learning algorithms that
efficiently adapt to given hardware constraints and hardware primitives. From
the hardware perspective, this work will design new hardware primitives that
support the developed reinforcement learning algorithms for real-time
applications in a storage- and energy-efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
reinforcement learning algorithms, analyses, and experiments will shed new
insights about how to make optimal trade-offs between performance and different
system constraints such as memory, power, and latency. The research will be
guided by systems applications including switch scheduling for network routers,
resource management for data centers, network congestion control, memory
management for computers, and adaptive sensing for wireless networks and the
Internet of things. The outcomes of this project have the potential to transform
how data centers, communication networks, and wireless systems are managed.
Applications beyond computer and network systems include operational challenges
in large-scale systems, such as inventory management and resource allocation, or
low latency control problems that arise in brain-machine interfaces. The project
also includes an extensive outreach plan that involves women and
underrepresented minorities in computing research in reinforcement learning from
an algorithmic and architecture-level perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.