* 1955189
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Towards Scalable and Interpretable Graph Neural Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Shuiwang Ji, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 06/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Graphs are ubiquitous data structures in numerous domains, such as social
science (social networks), natural science (physical systems, and protein-
protein interaction networks) and knowledge graphs. As new generalizations of
traditional deep neural networks to graph structured data, Graph Neural Networks
(or GNNs) have demonstrated the power in graph representation learning and have
permeated numerous areas of science and technology. However, GNNs also inherited
the drawback of traditional deep neural networks, i.e., lacking
interpretability. Moreover, the complexity of graph data introduces the
scalability as a new limitation for GNNs because graph structured data are not
independent. These drawbacks have raised tremendous concerns to adopt GNNs in
many critical applications pertaining to fairness, privacy, and safety. Thus,
this project aims to tackle the major drawbacks of GNNs and greatly enlarge
their usability in critical applications. To achieve the research goal, this
project systematically investigates advanced principles for scalable GNNs and
new mechanisms to interpret GNNs. The proposed research extends the state-of-
the-art GNNs to a new frontier, investigates original problems that entreat
innovative solutions and paves the way for a new research endeavor effectively
tame graph mining. As many real-world domains problems requires scalable and
interpretable graph mining techniques, the project has potential to benefit many
real-world applications from various disciplines such as Computer Science,
Social Science, Healthcare and Bioinformatics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes novel
principles and mechanisms for scalable and interpretable graph neural networks
to facilitate the adoption of GNNs on critical domains, investigates associated
fundamental research issues and develops effective algorithms. The project
offers the first comprehensive investigation on these directions, and the
designed novel methodologies and tasks will deepen our understanding on the
inner working mechanisms of GNNs and contribute to real-world applications. The
success of this project will be (1) New scalable and interpretable GNNs with
state-of-the-art graph representation learning and predictive performance; (2)
Theoretical analysis such as convergence and complexity; and (3) Open-source
implementations of all key algorithms and frameworks. Disparate means are
planned to disseminate the project and its findings, such as web enabled data
and software repositories, books, journal and conference publications, special
purpose workshops or tutorials, and industrial collaborations. The project can
be effectively integrated to undergraduate and graduate courses as well as in
student research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.