* 1955926
* Application of Redox-Switchable Polymerization for the Synthesis of Advanced Polymeric Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Jeffery Byers, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 399,998.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Dr. Jeffery A. Byers of the Department of
Chemistry at Boston College to develop new catalysts that can change what type
of polymer is produced when exposed to external stimuli such as oxidants,
reductants, or electrolysis. These switchable catalytic polymerization tools are
being used to accelerate the development of sophisticated materials with
tailored physical and mechanical properties, including degradable plastics. A
diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students are being trained in
catalyst development and polymer synthesis. A summer research program for local
high school students called “Paper to Plastics” is being continued, evolved, and
expanded to spark interest in STEM fields and to communicate the needs and
challenges involved with the development of sustainable materials with useful
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redox-switchable polymerization catalysts are
being developed to control block co-polymerization processes and polymer
molecular weight distributions. An iron-catalyst system discovered by Dr. Byers
and his research group undergoes a change in monomer selectivity when exposed to
redox reagents and is being adapted to expand the types of monomers that can
engage in redox-switchable polymerization reactions. Activation of this catalyst
system with electrical current is being investigated to remove the need for
chemical redox reagents and further broaden substrate scope to include reagents
that need to be used under pressure. Electrolysis is also being studied to
control molecular weight distributions through catalyst redox-switching, which
provides additional opportunities to control polymer characteristics. The
overarching goal of these activities is to enable the synthesis of sophisticated
polymeric materials with desirable materials
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.