* 1955768
* Molecular dynamics with nuclear quantum effects: merging the quantum and classical domains
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Sophya Garashchuk, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 435,000.00

Sophya Garashchuk of the University of South Carolina is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop theoretical and computational approaches that
consider the behavior of the nuclei in molecules and materials. This research is
motivated by the need to understand nanomaterials and large molecular
structures. In-depth understanding of how such structures and materials interact
with light, current and heat in applications such as electronics, batteries and
medical devices requires theoretical and computational methods capable of
spanning several orders of magnitude in time, space, and hierarchy. Professor
Garashchuk's research starts at the most fundamental level possible, for
example, by examining protons. The more advanced computational descriptions
(quantum calculations) that are restricted to just a few atomic nuclei at a time
due to computational cost are merged with simpler classical representations for
more complex, bigger and heavier nuclei. The atomistic simulations yield
experimentally relevant properties such as predictions of the speed of the
reaction or charge and energy transport rates. These parameters are necessary
for the development of even more advanced models of bigger molecular systems.
Modeling the systems’ properties and responses to external stimuli (temperature,
electric and magnetic fields) guides the experiments and accelerate the
development of new materials and molecular devices for sensing, computing,
communications and other applications. Professor Garashchuk's research and
educational activities will train the workforce ready for the emerging quantum
information science. She promote use of computational chemistry and computing in
education and research among students and researchers at her home institution,
as well as at sister campuses and predominantly undergraduate institutions
throughout the state of South Carolina. The research team is engaged in K-12
science demonstrations to showcase molecules and their roles in everyday
technologies. These activities broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in research, develop of the next-generation technologies, and communicate
contributions of STEM to the general public of South Carolina, a geographically
underrepresented group in the global research
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Garashchuk develops theory and computational
methods for the hierarchical treatment of nuclei practical for large (10-1000
atoms) molecular systems. The hierarchy consists of exact (time-dependent bases)
and approximate methods (classical dynamics, possibly, with quantum corrections)
unified by the trajectory framework. The exact quantum dynamics employs Gaussian
bases which adapt to the evolving nuclear wave function by following the
probability density flow, which follows the quantum trajectories. Such basis
function evolution defines ‘minimalistic’ representation of a wavefunction in
configuration space and improves the scaling properties of the method with the
system size. The Gaussians are correlated and normalizable by construction. The
multilevel description of the nuclei, helps to exploit the time- and mass-scale
separation for an efficient computational methodology, interfaced with on-the-
fly electronic structure calculations. The Quantum Trajectory-guided Adaptable
Gaussian (QTAG) dynamics is employed to study nuclear quantum effects in
molecular aggregates, i. e. crystalline materials, active sites of enzyme
catalytic cycle, functional molecules integrated into covalent and metal-organic
frameworks, as a way to tune and control their properties relevant to the design
of molecular sensors, switches, catalysts, and to the emerging quantum device
and computer applications. Connecting research with education and workforce
development, Garashchuk incorporates computational chemistry into the graduate
and undergraduate curriculum, by providing cyber-research opportunities to
regional undergraduate colleges, and by hands-on training of students at all
levels in computational chemistry tools and methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.