* 1955130
* RUI: CAS: Mapping Catalytic Sites on Alkali Promoted Anatase Titanium Dioxide (TiO2)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alexey Ignatchenko, St. John Fisher College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 213,652.00

Lowering the cost of renewable fuel production is a key goal for a society
moving toward a sustainable economy. Substances that accelerate chemical
reactions without themselves being consumed, commonly referred to as catalysts,
will continue to be the key element towards achieving this goal. Recent advances
suggest new ways of improving catalysts by modifying the shape of the catalyst
particles. The proper shape exposes the catalyst’s most useful reactive sites
while minimizing other sites that are either unreactive or that lead to
undesirable side reactions and waste. With funds from the Chemical Catalysis
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Alexey Ignatchenko of St. John Fisher
College is fine-tuning catalyst shapes to maximize catalyst effectiveness for
the preparation of industrial chemicals and biofuels. Cost savings in catalytic
biofuel processing brings a clear economic benefit to society. The study
provides enriching research experiences for undergraduate students from a
predominantly undergraduate institution. The students interact with scientists
at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory and use the specialized instruments housed
at the Center for Nano Materials. The project prepares students to be the next
generation of scientists engaged in renewable energy research that will ensure
our country’s energy independence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success
of many renewable energy technologies depends on detailed knowledge about the
structure of reactive catalytic centers and the mechanism of their action on the
atomic scale. With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program, Dr. Alexey
Ignatchenko of St. John Fisher College is strategically selecting the best
available surface of anatase TiO2 crystals and further fine-tuning its catalytic
activity by alkali doping. His research group studies catalytic centers created
by adding potassium and cesium separately to (001) or (101) surfaces of anatase
TiO2 single crystals as well as on nano shaped particles enriched by one of the
surfaces. A combination of theoretical and experimental methods, such as Density
Functional Theory (DFT) computations, Diffuse Reflectance Infrared Fourier
Transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS), X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS),
electron microscopy analysis, and catalytic activity testing of individual
surfaces is applied to understand the role of acidic and basic catalytic centers
in the reaction mechanism of the decarboxylative ketonization reaction, which is
important for upgrading biofuels. This study is guiding research and development
in rational modification of the type, amount, or location of the alkali
promoters and the satellite basic centers made of oxygen, –OH, and –O– for many
other catalytic reactions. The students involved in the project learn how to
control the activity and selectivity of a catalytic process by manipulating
catalyst structures at the molecular level and by refining critical steps of the
reaction mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.