* 1955620
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: New Approaches for Large Scale Secure Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Arkady Yerukhimovich, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 412,534.00

Secure multi-party computation (MPC) allows multiple distrusting parties to
perform joint computations on their data without exposing the data to one
another. Due to their promising security guarantees, the cryptographic protocols
for MPC have gained unprecedented exposure in the last decade. With the
proliferation of large, distributed systems and computations such as Tor and
blockchain, there is an urgent need for large-scale MPC to ensure security and
privacy for these applications. However, large-scale applications pose some
unique challenges for the design of MPC protocols. There are thousands of
parties, often with unequal resources, and some number of parties are likely to
fail during a protocol execution. This project proposes to design MPC protocols
to address these challenges. The project’s novelties are the design of new MPC
protocols satisfying the requirements of large-scale distributed applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators put forward a new
framework for committee-based MPC for large-scale secure computations. These
protocols distribute the computations across thousands of parallel committees to
maximize the utilization of available resources for improved throughput. The
designed protocols optimally choose committees and committee sub-protocols that
optimize resource utilization and security. Additionally, they handle party
failure and provide efficient oblivious access and search capabilities over data
generated in these computations. The team of researchers combines techniques
from prior work on secure computation (MPC) and oblivious data structures to
simultaneously achieve all of these goals. The project’s impacts are to enable
new classes of privacy-preserving computation, analytics, and applications
geared to the needs of real-world distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.