* 1955764
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Deep Learning for In Situ Analysis and Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Han-Wei Shen, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2024
* USD 715,314.00

As scientists anticipate the benefits of exascale computing, the lack of novel
solutions to process data at scale and calibrate the simulation parameters has
become a significant roadblock to further accelerating scientific discovery. The
goal of this project is to develop a new end-to-end data analysis and feature
extraction workflow based on deep neural networks to help computational
scientists address three major challenges: (1) identify important simulation
parameters and generate the essential data for analysis, (2) transform the
simulation data to compact feature representations to convey the most insight,
and (3) design scalable visualization algorithms coupled with large-scale
simulations to glean insight into their scientific problems. Working with domain
scientists in jet engine design, climate models, cardio/cerebrovascular flow,
superconductivity, and fusion energy, the team will demonstrate how deep
learning techniques can help extract features from vast amounts of simulation
data and navigate in the huge simulation parameter space. Through summer
internships and project collaborations, this research will create opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students, including students from
underrepresented groups, to participate in key research initiatives with leading
scientists. Through the planned annual summer school on "Deep Learning for
Visualization," the research results will enable visualization researchers and a
broader community to incorporate the principles and practice of deep learning
techniques developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop a
comprehensive analysis framework that encompasses a suite of state-of-the-art
deep learning techniques for in situ processing and analysis of large-scale
scientific simulation data. The framework will consist of three tightly-
integrated components: (1) analysis of simulation parameters and data reduction,
(2) post-analysis of data and features, and (3) in situ workflow optimization.
For the first component, methods will be developed to assist simulation
surrogate creation, parameter space exploration, and comparative analytics of
ensemble simulations. For the second component, deep learning techniques will be
developed to learn features from data for interactive exploration of
representatives and to upscale reduced simulation output in the spatial and
temporal domains. For the third component, in situ solutions will be developed
for feature detection, workload estimation, and feature computation surrogates.
The framework will be evaluated using four types of quantitative metrics: data
reduction ratio, data-, feature-, and image-level error measures, scalability
measures, and cross-validation with training and testing data. The team will
work closely with scientists in the domains of jet engine, climate,
cardio/cerebrovascular flow, superconductivity, and fusion energy. The domain
scientists will play a critical role in enabling the research team to understand
the requirements of their applications and to evaluate the outcomes of this
research. The project's dissemination plan will address a much broader audience,
including students, practitioners, and domain scientists, to enhance their
understanding and appreciation of the value of deep learning for visualization.
The team will release open-source software, pre-trained models, and training and
test data generated from this research, including auto-encoder for feature
learning, DNN-assisted parameter space exploration, CNN-based feature extraction
and tracking, and load-balancing based deep predictive
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award includes funding from the Information
Integration &amp; Informatics Program in the Division of Information &amp;
Intelligent Systems, Software &amp; Hardware Systems Program in the Division of
Computer &amp; Computing Foundations, and the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.