* 1955068
* Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Reaction Intermediates in Atmospheric Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Marsha Lester, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms A and B
Programs (CSDM-A and CSDM-B) of the Chemistry Division, Professor Marsha I.
Lester and her students at the University of Pennsylvania is using sophisticated
laser techniques to study intermediates formed in the atmospheric reactions of
ozone (O3) with volatile organic molecules, especially alkenes (a class of
molecules containing carbon-carbon double bonds) emitted by plants. The
reactions of O3 with alkenes can produce a very reactive class of molecules
called Criegee intermediates. Criegee intermediates are known to decay and
release hydroxyl radical (OH) molecules, which are often called the atmosphere’s
detergent because they can react (and deactivate) other potentially harmful
pollutants in the air. Prof. Lester and her students generate these
intermediates in the laboratory and then use an infrared laser pulse to excite
the Criegee molecule and cause it to fall apart. Another technique called laser-
induced fluorescence (LIF) is used to detect the production of OH radicals over
time. The students engaged in this research are gaining valuable experience in
modern laser technology, and analysis approaches for determining the identifying
reaction pathways that create different products. The students are also
utilizing theoretical models and computational tools to aid in the
interpretation of the experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on reactive intermediates that give rise to hydroxyl radicals in the
atmosphere. These intermediates originate from reaction of ozone with volatile
organic compounds containing carbon-carbon double bonds, such as isoprene that
is emitted in large quantities by plants. When formed in the atmosphere, these
reactive intermediates have enough internal energy to spontaneously fall apart
into an organic fragment and hydroxyl radical, in a process known as
unimolecular decay, or react with other molecules. Professor Lester and her
group generate these reactive intermediates with various substituents and
conformations in the laboratory, and study their unimolecular decay processes to
hydroxyl radicals using infrared action spectroscopy, LIF and theoretical
modeling (Rice–Ramsperger–Kassel–Marcus (RRKM) theory with tunneling). The
students working with Professor Lester gain experience is sophisticated
experimental and theoretical methods that probe the physical properties of
reactive intermediates in chemical reactions, and thus a significant broader
impact of the project is its training of future
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.