* 1955656
* Improved Methods for Including Vibronic and Environmental Effects in Simulations of Optical Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Christine Isborn, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 435,000.00

Professor Christine Isborn of the University of California Merced is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry to develop and apply improved methods for
simulating optical spectroscopy. Her research focuses on how the environment
(e.g. solvent, surface, protein) surrounding a chromophore (light absorber)
affects the electronic excited states. New simulation techniques will be
developed that better represent atomistic and experimental
details.&lt;br/&gt;The new methods for simulating optical spectroscopy in
complex environments can be used to guide the design of new molecules and
materials that have desired optical properties. Improved tools for simulating
optical spectroscopy will improve understanding of electronic excitation
processes in complex environments, with the potential for this increased
understanding to drive new technologies in the fields of photovoltaics, electro-
optics, or photo-catalysis. Professor Isborn also engages in broader impact
activities at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate student levels. To
serve a primarily first-generation student population, undergraduate students
create short videos in both English and the student’s native language in which
they discuss their experiences. A week-long graduate student level summer school
focused on the fundamentals and applications of computer theory helps to train
the next generation of chemists for the workforce of the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical spectroscopy, including optical absorption,
fluorescence, and time-resolved ultrafast electronic spectroscopy, is the most
commonly used technique for probing the electronic behavior of many chemical
systems and molecular reactions. These methods are sensitive to environmental
effects, however, traditional approaches for modeling optical spectra of
molecules in complex environments often fail to reproduce spectral shapes due to
either lacking vibronic effects and/or missing specific interactions between the
molecule and its environment. Professor Isborn and her group are developing a
family of approaches for simulating optical absorption, fluorescence, and
ultrafast spectra that account for both vibronic transitions and specific
solute-solvent-environment interactions by computing ground and excited
vibrational modes in the presence of the atomistic environment. They are
examining how the environment affects spectral shapes and electronic relaxation
for a variety of chromophores within complex
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.