* 1955521
* RUI: CAS: Carbon Dioxide Hydrogenation to Light Olefins over Carbon Nanosphere Encapsulated Metal/Metal Carbide Core-Shell Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Cheng Zhang, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Carbon-rich fossil fuels, such as coal, oil, and natural gas, have been heavily
utilized to power human civilization. This has resulted in massive emissions of
carbon dioxide (CO2), a potent greenhouse gas, to the environment. There is an
urgent need to mitigate the negative impacts of these emissions on the
environment. Efficient utilization of CO2 to produce chemicals and fuels is one
potential solution. This research project is examining the conversion of CO2 to
light olefins. Olefins are important chemicals and raw materials heavily used
for the packaging, plastic processing, construction, and textile industries. The
huge market demand for light olefins offers a great opportunity for this project
to significantly impact CO2 utilization technology. While significant advances
have been made, considerable challenges remain for the discovery and development
of practical catalysts for this transformation. In this project, Professor Cheng
Zhang of the Long Island University (Post), New York is developing a new
approach using carbon nanosphere (CNS) encapsulated metal catalysts for CO2
conversion to light olefins. Dr. Zhang is studying CNS encapsulated iron-cobalt
catalysts and investigating their fundamental reaction mechanisms. These
fundamental insights are being used to design new catalysts that perform much
more efficiently. Dr. Zhang is actively engaged in training the next generation
of undergraduates in chemistry education and research. Dr. Zhangâ€™s lab involves
diverse students from various majors in this interdisciplinary setting. This
research is further serving as a platform to inspire students from
underrepresented groups to become scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr.
Zhang of the Long Island University (Post), New York is developing fundamental
understanding of a class of new catalysts, carbon nanosphere (CNS) encapsulated
metal/metal carbide nanoparticle core-shell structures, for catalytic CO2
conversion to light olefins. This project is significant in studying the
composition, structure, and catalytic performances of CNS encapsulated
metal/metal carbide catalysts by integrating synthesis, testing, and
characterization of the catalysts with multiple compositional and structural
variables. Specifically, the CNS encapsulated Fe catalyst provides an intriguing
catalytic performance for CO2 conversion to light olefins. A variety of
characterization instruments including in-situ time-resolved X-ray diffraction
(TR-XRD), ex-situ x-ray absorption near edge structure spectroscopy (XANES), and
high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) are utilized to achieve
a fundamental understanding of the reaction pathways and the confinement effect
that contributes to the superior performance. Furthermore, with CNS serves as a
nanocontainer, the encapsulated Fe-Co catalyst is expected to exhibit enhanced
catalytic performances due to the synergistic effect of the bimetals, together
with the unique confinement effect of CNS. By synthetically changing the
relative shell thickness and core dimeter, a core-shell nano-environment of
encapsulated active Fe/Co core species in the CNS shells provides an ideal and
practical model system to explore the fundamentals of structural variables on
the role of confinement in catalysis. This project has the dual impact of
removing CO2 from the atmosphere while generating desired commercial products.
Dr. Zhang incorporates undergraduate research and education as a very
significant component. Dr. Zhang is developing a training-learning platform that
allows undergraduate and high school students to gain valuable skills in
synthesis, catalyst evaluation techniques and basic characterization, in
conjunction with their quantitative and critical thinking skills, which paves
the way for their future career development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.