* 1955444
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Computer-Aided Design and Fabrication for General-Purpose Knit Manufacturing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* James McCann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 480,541.00

General-purpose fabrication of complex 3D shapes is possible today with
industrial knitting machines, which provide a powerful alternative to
conventional 3D printing, given their ability to use a wide range of feedstock
to produce strong and durable artifacts that can withstand extreme deformations
and stretch. Machine knitting is already used in applications ranging from
composite preforms for aircraft parts, soft robotics, and medicine to functional
clothing like body-armor, cut-proof gloves, and everyday apparel. However,
controlling industrial knitting machines is a difficult task, as it involves
determining an efficient sequence of low-level knitting machine instructions
that produce a desired 3D form. The goal of this project is to develop a
complete framework, from computer-aided design to fabrication, for general-
purpose knit manufacturing that will allow users to start with an arbitrary 3D
shape, convert the shape to a virtual knit structure, customize the knit
structure, and simulate the behavior of the result. Project outcomes will enable
widespread use of customized fabrication via machine knitting, with the
potential to alter manufacturing practices and enable new products and
applications in numerous industries, including robotics, furniture, automotive,
space exploration, medicine, defense, and clothing. A key contribution of this
project will be simulating at the meso-scale, using a large database of common
patterns to preview behavior at the many-stitch level. Additional broad impacts
will derive from seeding interdisciplinary cross-department and cross-college
collaborations in both institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key steps in the
new CAD/CAM workflow, which involve converting arbitrary shapes to knit
structures, will build on prior work by members of the team. The project will
involve: customization of the knit structure using both high- and low-level
operations; live simulation of the knit structure by exploiting a novel data-
driven patch-based approach that draws on calibration data captured from
photographs; and low-level instruction generation and verification to include a
hint-based scheduler that allows (optional) user control of the scheduling
process. Major contributions of this work will be the measurement-based
simulation and the optimization steps of the pipeline, as well as the novel
image-based yarn measurement technology to support them. The integration of a
hinting system, and the use of a topological verifier, are innovations that will
impart to the work the flexibility and guarantee of correctness required to
enable the proposed pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.