* 1955561
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Combating Latency and Disconnectivity in mmWave Networks: From Theory to Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Taejoon Kim, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 438,000.00

The ever-increasing number of wireless devices that are projected to exceed 12.3
billion by 2022, is catalyzing a coming spectrum crisis in the sub-6 GHz bands.
These devices are fueled by applications with ultra-low latency and extremely-
high data rate requirements. Thus, spectrum-rich millimeter-wave (mmWave)
frequencies, between 30-300 GHz, are being considered critical components of
future mobile cellular systems and emerging WiFi networks with Gbps data rates.
While it is true that the mmWave band has the potential to provide very high
rates, its unreliability could lead to very poor end-user performance.
Therefore, this project aims to develop low-latency mmWave communication
protocols that substantially improve end-user performance. The developed
techniques will be evaluated and refined using proof-of-concept implementation
and testing. Tied with a wide range of novel applications – ranging from mobile
AR/VR streaming to autonomous vehicles – this project has a broad appeal to
young minds, including women and underrepresented minorities. Through an annual
workshop and a summer camp program, this project will also increase
participation in computing among female university and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The true value of 5G-and-beyond wireless networks relies
heavily on mmWave connectivity and availability. Thus, their full potential
cannot be realized until stringent requirements on latency are satisfied even
under stressed conditions. In mmWave-based systems, the delay is primarily
dominated by availability (or lack thereof) and not by data rate, where lack of
availability manifests itself due to blockage, highly directional communication,
inefficient resource allocation, and scheduling policies, and the need for
additional beam alignment/refinement steps. This project is aimed at developing
the theoretical foundations and algorithmic development for low-latency mmWave
networking design from the physical layer and MAC layer to the network layer and
data prediction at the application layer. The project will leverage diverse
tools across information theory, communication systems, wireless networking,
protocol design, stochastic control, optimization, and software development. To
achieve these goals, this project is organized in three inter-related thrusts:
(i) agile connection setup, (ii) multi-user management and predictive data
delivery, and (iii) proof-of-concept implementation and
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.