* 1955838
* Iterative Csp3 Cross Coupling for Natural Products Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2025
* Martin Burke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 03/31/2025
* USD 806,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Martin D. Burke at The University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) who works with undergraduate and graduate
students to develop strategies and methods for the Lego-like synthesis of small
organic molecules. Such small molecules have many applications that positively
impact society, these include serving as medicines, biological probes, crop
protectants, fertilizers, and materials such as light-harvesting
organophotovoltaics. The discovery and development of small molecules with new
and/or improved functions is challenging and slow. This is because most small
molecules are prepared using customized synthetic routes that require many
person hours and a high level of specialist expertise. The Burke group is
pioneering an alternate approach where most small molecules can be made using a
common Lego-like platform. This platform has been automated, and non-specialists
can assemble a wide range of small molecules using a bounded set of building
blocks and cross-coupling reactions. This modularization and automation of the
process of small molecule synthesis is saving time and resources, and expanding
the range of people who can participate in the process of discovering molecular
solutions to some of the most challenging problems facing society. In order to
further expand the range of small molecules accessible by this platform,
Professor Burke and his students are now developing novel methods for the
assembly of small molecule building blocks. The broader impacts of this project
include leveraging the relatability of Lego-like small molecule synthesis to
inspire high school chemistry students to engage in the molecule making process
through “3D printing” their own organic molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
continued development of new methods for cross-coupling of three-dimensional
“sp3” carbon atoms, especially forming Csp3-Csp3 bonds or those flanked by
adjacent heteroatoms, represents a roadmap toward generalized, automated,
building block-based small molecule synthesis. As a means to efficiently access
sp3-rich and topologically complex polyketide natural products, palladium
catalyzed cross-coupling reactions are being developed to enable the coupling of
Csp3 boronic acids possessing beta-oxygens with a specific focus on avoiding
non-productive elimination of beta-heteroatoms. New electronically and
sterically tuned phosphine ligands as well as directing group strategies will be
employed as a means to efficiently access polyketide-like frameworks through
cross-coupling. Complementary methods not using transition metals are also
investigated as a means to access Csp3-Csp3 cross couplings and interrogate
their potential to form adjacent stereocenters. These methods are evaluated for
their capacity to access polyketide chemical space through the automated
building block-based synthesis of three stereochemically complex center natural
products. This research stimulates the identification of new and more robust
ligands which can reversibly attenuate boron reactivity to enable the iteration
of such Csp3 cross-coupling reactions. These research activities yield powerful
new avenues to access stereospecific Csp3 cross-coupling though manual and
automated chemical synthesis. This research program also contributes to the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in the concepts and practice of
next generation chemical synthesis, and inspires high school students to
participate in the molecular innovation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.