* 1955922
* CAS: Expanding Base Metal-Catalyzed MHAT Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ryan Shenvi, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 464,400.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Ryan Shenvi of The Scripps Research
Institute. Professor Shenvi and his research team are developing inexpensive,
earth-abundant, and stable metal catalysts to add hydrogen to carbon-carbon
double bonds. This work is providing sustainable alternatives to precious metal-
catalyzed processes that have traditionally been used for this purpose. The
Shenvi research group is investigating, simplifying, and adapting these
reactions for large-scale implementation. They are also developing tandem
processes to form new carbon-nitrogen and carbon-carbon bonds after the initial
addition of hydrogen. These studies are providing students in the laboratory
with training in catalyst design, reaction development, and complex molecule
synthesis. Professor Shenvi is also engaged in outreach activities introducing
the scientific method to elementary school students and to undergraduate
students involved in the Scripps Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Shenvi and his research group have
recently developed metal-catalyzed hydrogen atom transfer (MHAT) catalysts that
can be used in combination with base metal cross-coupling catalysts as a
sustainable approach to hydroelementation. To advance the breadth of these
studies, new applications of MHAT catalysis in hydroamination and
hydrobenzylation processes are being explored. In addition, a new MHAT catalytic
cycle is being developed based on inspiration from hydrogen evolution reaction
catalysts where reductive turnover is used to eliminate the challenges
associated with the delicate balance of oxidant and reductant required in
established MHAT systems. These investigations are advancing new modes of
catalysis based on readily available metals, particularly manganese, with the
optimal choice of and balance of silane reducing agent and oxidant being
examined so as to produce a process that is both economical and efficient. This
methodology development has the potential for broad scientific impact by
providing a viable Mn-catalyzed alternative to precious metal-catalyzed alkene
hydroamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.