* 1955806
* Collaborative Research: Electronic Coherence Effects in Multichromophore Systems Probed by Two-Dimensional Electronic Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Lin Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 275,000.00

In this collaborative project, co-funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics
&amp; Mechanisms B and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms A
programs of the Chemistry Division, Professor Lin X. Chen of the Department of
Chemistry at Northwestern University and Professor Felix N. Castellano from the
Department of Chemistry at North Carolina State University lead a project to
understand the effects of coherent electronic motions in energy and electron
transfer in distinct classes of multi-chromophoric synthetic platforms. The
knowledge obtained through the proposed studies will greatly enhance the ability
to rationally design chemical materials/devices for catalysis, optoelectronics,
and energy sustainability. The proposed research engages University graduate
students to use advanced laser spectroscopy for characterization, incorporates
state-of-the-art computational chemistry for quantum mechanical and molecular
dynamics modeling, and utilizes advanced chemistry laboratory facilities for
molecular syntheses and structural characterization, engendering them with
expansive training necessary for the development of multidisciplinary scientific
expertise. The proposed research/education activities are integrated with
numerous K-12 public outreach activities at both universities, including
Photonics Day at North Carolina State University and NU Bond at Northwestern
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, they will employ newly developed
two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy in their studies with very high time
resolution of approximately 6 femtoseconds. The rationally designed molecules
are engineered to tune electronic coupling in their excited states, which are
either responsible for or can be correlated to electronic coherence originating
from in-phase motions of electrons induced by photoexcitation. The measured
coherences will be correlated with the observation of photoinduced
intramolecular energy and/or electron transfer chemistry and rationalized using
continuously developing theory to assess the role of electronic and/or vibronic
coherence in these fundamental primary processes related to light activation.
Two types of molecular designs are targeted for these investigations: (1) Pt(II)
dimers bridged by hydroxypyridines featuring metal-metal-to-ligand charge
transfer excited states where a metal-metal bond is transiently formed following
light excitation; and (2) Pt(II) dimers whose terminal cyclometalating ligands
are decorated with bay-substituted naphthalenediimide based energy and/or
electron acceptors. The proposed project seeks to glean new insight into excited
state chemistry and how this knowledge can be leveraged to control reactivity in
condensed phases, molecular photonics, and
photocatalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.