* 1955529
* Catalytic Alkene Carbofunctionalization and Carbodifunctionalization: Catalyst Identification, Reaction Development, and Mechanistic Insights
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Levi Stanley, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Dr. Levi Stanley of Iowa State University to
develop new chemical reactions that are useful for the field of organic
synthesis. Specifically, in this study, the research team is developing chemical
reactions that combine simple and readily available chemical building blocks to
form new compounds or the ketone class with greater complexity and desirable
characteristics. The chemistry being developed adds to the stable of methodology
utilized by organic and medicinal chemists to study biological systems and
develop therapeutic agents. In particular, the team seeks to develop chemical
catalysts that mediate the targeted chemical transformations with high
efficiency; this is central to this research program. The research provides a
platform for training undergraduate and graduate students to solve important
scientific challenges. The nature of the studies enables students to gain skills
in multiple areas of chemistry and prepares students for careers that require
the ability to solve increasingly interdisciplinary problems. Additional
societal benefits are expected to accrue from the planned educational activities
to increase retention in STEM disciplines and from new STEM outreach activities
for K-12 students and the public in Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Levi Stanley
and his students are developing new chemical reactions and catalysts for the
targeted transformations to generate carbonyl compounds that are important to
medicinal, process, and materials chemists. The reactions couple readily
accessible alkenes and alkynes, carboxylic acid derivatives, and organometallic
nucleophiles to form new carbonyl compounds. The studies are driven by a central
hypothesis that chemical intermediates generated by activation of carboxylic
acid derivatives with a transition metal catalyst can be harnessed to develop a
range of new alkene and alkyne functionalization reactions. The new alkene and
alkyne functionalization reactions streamline syntheses of carbonyl compounds
and provide access to a variety of valuable molecular architectures via new
methods to form carbon-carbon bonds. Further broader impacts of this work
include training for students in modern synthetic chemistry and catalysis
science, increasing STEM retention by engaging undergraduate students in
laboratory research experiences, and significant STEM outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.