* 1955206
* Collaborative Research: FET: Medium: Quantum Localization and Synchronization Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Xiaodi Wu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 331,893.00

The demand for highly accurate position and time information, provided by
localization and synchronization methods, respectively, is growing rapidly.
However, classical localization and synchronization methods are approaching
their limits. Utilizing quantum properties promises to push these boundaries
beyond classical limitations and provide unprecedented accuracy. This project
aims to develop theoretical and practical methodologies for the design and
analysis of quantum localization and synchronization networks. These
methodologies consist of statistical models and distributed algorithms to
harness quantum phenomena for beyond-classical localization and synchronization.
The broader impact of this research includes the creation of a new network-
centric approach for future quantum localization and synchronization networks.
Cross-pollinating ideas and methodologies adopted in this research effort will
bring new perspectives and initiate new directions in the study of quantum
information science. The outcomes of the proposed research will be widely
disseminated through publication in premier journals and international
conferences, presentation in seminars and tutorials, as well as integration into
teaching materials. Furthermore, the project will create a cadre of engineers
with the capability to design and engineer future quantum networks. The success
of this project will contribute to the leadership of United States in quantum
information science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will explore
new opportunities and dimensions offered by the unique properties (e.g.,
multipartite entanglement), associated with discrete- and continuous-variable
quantum states, inherent in quantum networks. To this end, the project will
employ multidisciplinary approaches (including statistical inference, network
optimization, and quantum information science) to (i) determine the performance
limits of quantum localization and synchronization networks, and (ii) develop
strategies for exploiting the unique properties of quantum
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.