* 1955744
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Design and Analysis of Quantum Networks for Entanglement Distribution
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Donald Towsley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,999.00

Recent advances in quantum information processing like quantum key distribution
(QKD) are already in deployment ensuring secure end-to-end communication. This
is especially important today, because of the risk posed by quantum computing to
current Internet-based encryption technology such as RSA. At the same time there
is a multitude of emerging quantum information based technologies with a high
promise of revolutionizing their respective areas of application. These include
ultra-high-precision distributed sensing with applications to metrology and
science discovery (e.g., LIGO), much higher-rate deep space optical
communications than possible with conventional systems, and polynomial speedups
on search with implications to big data. Most of these applications are enabled
by high-rate distributed shared quantum entanglement between pairs and groups of
users. The goal of this project is to develop a distributed infrastructure in
the form of a quantum network to enable reliable, large scale quantum
entanglement distribution. Progress in that direction will catalyze quantum
computing advances in the same way the Internet boosted computing to conquer
most aspects of contemporary economy and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project is the fully-informed study of the design and operation of
quantum networks combining physical-layer device noise models with the ground-up
development of higher-layer network protocols. It aspires to bridge the
intellectual gap between the quantum information and physics communities who are
the ones primarily involved in developing quantum communication protocols, and
the networking community who have decades of experience in the design and
analysis of practical computer and communication networks. The proposed research
will both: (a) inform device needs and specifications pushed down by network
application requirements; and (b) help develop network routing and resource
allocation protocols optimized for device quality metrics, such as quantum
memory coherence times and detector excess noise. The project will culminate in
the development of new tools and algorithms for a completely new family of
networking protocols for a problem set up and resource constraints that have no
immediate classical analogues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.