* 1955933
* CAS: Accessing and Tuning the Reactivity of Late-Metal Oxo and Nitrido Complexes Using Iminoxolene Supporting Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Seth Brown, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 490,000.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in NSF's Division of
Chemistry, Professor Seth Brown of the University of Notre Dame is designing new
kinds of catalysts to speed up important chemical reactions. The particular
catalysts of interest promise to contribute to the US economy by enhancing the
efficiency of chemical manufacturing. The project is focusing on metal-
containing catalysts with attention to both the identity of the metal and the
metal environment. Knowledge of the metal-environment interactions will guide
the design of improved catalysts that will react with oxygen gas to produce
commodity chemicals. This grant also supports the professional training of the
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students who are conducting research
under the supervision of Professor Brown. Educational materials suitable for
high school or beginning college students are being developed in order to
enhance scientific education on a larger scale.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With
support from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in NSF's Division of
Chemistry, Professor Seth Brown of the University of Notre Dame is developing
new oxidation catalysts. Oxidation reactions mediated by catalysts of the late
transition metals are important in nature as well as in the chemical industry.
Terminal oxo compounds are often invoked as reactive intermediates, but few
well-characterized examples are known. Specifically, Professor Brown is
exploring the ability of ancillary ligands that strongly perturb the electronic
structure of the metals to allow access to, or modify the properties of,
terminal oxo and nitrido groups bonded to late transition metals. Synthetic,
spectroscopic, and computational studies are carried out on such complexes to
clarify the nature of the metal-ligand interactions and how these interactions
modify the properties of the metal-oxo linkage. These studies are complemented
by detailed mechanistic studies of reactions such as alkane hydroxylation or
dehydrogenation to elucidate design rules. These insights contribute to the
design and implementation of new oxidation catalysts with enhanced reactivity or
selectivity. This project supports the professional development of the graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students in Professor Brown's research group,
affording them the technical and intellectual skills that help them become
successful in the scientific workforce. Educational materials centering on
chemical kinetics, which underpins the study of catalysis, at an advanced high
school/introductory college level are being developed and made broadly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.