* 1955239
* Reaction Dynamics of Polyatomic Molecules: Low Temperature Reactions and Coherent Photodissociation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Arthur Suits, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2023
* USD 517,012.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Arthur Suits and his
research team at the University of Missouri, Columbia are developing new tools
for studying how chemical reactions occur, in other words, how the atoms within
the molecules move, how bonds are broken and new ones formed. The Suits
laboratory is developing reaction chambers where the starting materials are
injected as uniform supersonic flows of gas. After a pulse of laser light is
applied, the changes in molecular structure caused by the laser are observed at
different downstream distances. Since the flow rate is known precisely, the
downstream distances correspond to time since the laser pulse, and the rates at
which the molecules change structure can be calculated. The use of supersonic
flows allows very fast chemical reactions to be studied. The downstream events
are captured using other laser or microwave spectroscopy techniques. Microwave
light causes some molecules to rotate in very specific ways, which in turn
reveals information about their structure. The reactions being studied include
oxygen atoms reacting with hydrocarbons with double carbon-carbon bonds (C=C)
and triple bonds (C≡C), and the light-induced dissociation of ethylene sulfide
(C2H4S) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). These studies are providing new insights
into how chemical reactions occur in general. The specific reactions being
studied are also important for more accurate modeling of chemical reactions in
the atmosphere and in astronomical environments. This project is providing
training for a graduate student and a post-doctoral fellow. Data analysis
software developed during the research is made available to other research
groups worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research takes advantage of two
unique new instruments to probe the reaction dynamics, spectroscopy, and low
temperature kinetics of polyatomic molecules. The first of these instruments
combines the revolutionary Chirped-pulse Fourier-transform microwave (CPTMW)
technique with intense low-temperature pulsed uniform supersonic flows for
kinetics and dynamics studies. The research also involves an instrument that
combines the same uniform supersonic flows with high-resolution ultra-sensitive
continuous-wave cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS), providing capabilities
complementary to those of the microwave-based system. The latter instrument has
recently demonstrated Simultaneous Kinetics and Ringdown (SKaR) in a supersonic
expansion for the first time. In addition to the studies in low temperature
flows, the Suits team is also investigating how coherent orbital polarization
reveals effects of the so-called geometric phae, wherein the system wavefunction
must undergo a sign change following a transit around a conical intersection
(CI). The current studies extend investigations of the geometric phase to NO2
and ethylene sulfide, promising novel probes and insights into nonadiabatic
dynamics. In terms of scientific Broader Impacts, this project extends
capabilities into the mid-IR spectrum, which in turn permits the application of
the SKaR kinetics method to many systems of astrochemical and astronomical
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.