* 1955842
* Electrochemical Additive Manufacturing of Functionally Graded High Entropy Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Murali Sundaram, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 539,976.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge related to a new
alloy manufacturing process, promoting both the progress of science and
advancing national prosperity. Additive manufacturing is the process of making a
three-dimensional object of virtually any shape from a digital computer model.
The technique, often called three-dimensional printing, has the potential to
revolutionize the way things are made. Alloy manufacturing processes currently
available often require high temperatures and produce alloys of uniform
composition. This award supports fundamental research for the development of a
method for the additive manufacturing of a new class of alloys, high entropy
alloys, with desired compositions at room temperature. High entropy alloys are
made up of large proportions of five or more alloying elements and exhibit
unusual mechanical and other properties. The new process, electrochemical
deposition, eliminates residual stresses and cracks associated with thermal
fields in directed energy deposition processes. High entropy alloy parts have
applications in energy, healthcare, biomedical, aerospace, chemical, and
automotive industries. Therefore, results from this research benefit the U.S.
economy and society. This research involves several disciplines including
manufacturing, electrochemistry, control theory, and materials science. The
multi-disciplinary approach helps broaden the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in research and positively impacts engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrochemical additive manufacturing
process can be used to structure functionally graded high entropy alloys made of
multiple materials and allows for greater versatility in localized control of
texture, composition, and properties. However, some scientific barriers are yet
to be overcome to realize the full application potential of electrochemical
additive manufacturing of functionally graded high entropy alloys. This research
is to fill the knowledge gap on the reaction mechanisms for varying ion-
substrate configurations during multi-material electrochemical deposition. The
research team plans to perform molecular dynamics simulations of multi-material
electrochemical deposition to acquire critical insight into the dynamic charge
transfer with varying reactive potentials for each of the constituent elements.
Guided by the simulations, the team conducts experiments to understand the
deposited alloy composition, microstructure and morphology towards achieving
functionally graded high entropy alloy deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.