* 1955074
* CAS: Design and Mechanistic Understanding of Selective Electrocatalysts Based on Earth-Abundant Metal Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Song Jin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 679,545.00

With this award,the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting Drs. Song Jin and Jordan Schmidt of the University of Wisconsin-
Madison to combine theory and experiment to design, develop, and understand new
electrochemical methods to generated hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) from molecular
oxygen. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is an environmentally benign oxidant with many
industrial and environmental applications. It is also a recommended disinfectant
in general, including for the novel coronavirus responsible for the COVID-19
pandemic. The current commercial production of H2O2 is characterized by
significant cost, energy consumption, and safety concerns. To be economically
competitive the current process is practiced in a few large, centralized
manufacturing plants. In comparison, small scale, decentralized, on-site
production of H2O2 directly from oxygen using electricity could be a more
effective and sustainable approach. However, electrochemical approaches to H2O2
need to be much more efficient and less costly to be viable. The success of this
project can facilitate the efficient decentralized production of H2O2 and have
broad technological impacts related to the environment, sustainability, and the
healthcare fiels. This project includes a significant educational outreach
component and seeks to build a more diverse scientific workforce through
inclusive training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Song Jin and Jordan
Schmidt and their team combine theory and experiment to exploit the unique
attributes of unexplored metal compound electrocatalysts to design, develop, and
understand new and selective electrocatalysts based on metal chalcogenides for
the selective two-electron oxygen reduction reaction (2e ORR) in acidic and
neutral solutions. Such selective 2e ORR electrocatalysts can facilitate
decentralized electrochemical production of H2O2, an environmentally benign
oxidant with diverse applications in industrial, environmental, and healthcare
settings. Density functional theory calculations and kinetic models provide
detailed insights into activity and selectivity and identify promising candidate
structures among transition metal chalcogenides for subsequent synthesis and
performance evaluation. Electrochemical and (in situ) spectroscopic studies
reveal catalyst activity, selectivity, and potential-dependent reaction
intermediates, with computational examination providing mechanistic insights
into the catalytic mechanism(s) and further design principles governing catalyst
selectivity and stability. Understanding and rationally designing complex metal
compound catalysts for enabling various selective electrocatalytic reactions can
lead to fundamental and transferrable insights into how complex structural
motifs influence catalyst activity and selectivity. The success of this project
can also facilitate the efficient decentralized electrochemical production of
H2O2 and, as such, has the potential for broad scientific and societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.