* 1955090
* Entropy Theory for Non-Amenable Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Brandon Seward, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 157,223.00

Originally, dynamical systems comprised the study of systems that change over
time, such as the motion of planets in the solar system, variations in the
weather, traffic patterns, and populations of species. As this field of study
has grown, it has expanded to include more general types of systems that, rather
than changing with time, are transformed by more general groups of symmetries.
This would apply, for instance, to the study of information spread over a large
and highly regular network. In this general form, dynamical systems has
significant connections to other branches of mathematics and science, such as
number theory, geometry, combinatorics, statistical physics, operator algebras,
and data science. One fundamental tool in the study of dynamical systems is the
concept of entropy, which is a measurement of how chaotic or unpredictable a
system is. This notion was first introduced in 1958 by Kolmogorov in the case of
time transformations but was soon after extended to systems with an amenable
group of transformations, i.e. systems where boundary phenomena are mostly
inconsequential. For systems having a non-amenable group of transformations, the
concept of entropy was formalized only a decade ago. This new terrain of entropy
theory is still in its early stages and has not yet become as well understood or
as powerful a tool as in classical settings. The goal of this project, broadly
speaking, is to further the development of entropy theory in the context of non-
amenable groups so that it may become a widely applicable tool like its
classical version.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
improve our understanding of entropy and widen its scope of applications. In
particular, the principal investigator intends to address whether sofic entropy
and Rokhlin entropy coincide for principal algebraic actions of sofic groups, to
investigate whether tailed-percolation entropy is a lower bound to sofic
entropy, and to determine whether completely-positive-entropy actions are
uniformly mixing. Historically, the most potent applications of entropy theory
have been to the study of Bernoulli shifts. Specifically, entropy played a
significant role in the development of Ornstein theory - a theory that
completely characterized and classified Bernoulli shifts over countable amenable
groups up to isomorphism. In recent work, the principal investigator established
a generalization of Sinai's factor theorem to all countably infinite groups. As
part of this project, the PI plans to utilize and expand upon this recent work
to make initial steps towards an Ornstein theory. As part of this goal, the
principal investigator plans to further generalize Sinai's factor theorem to the
settings of f-invariant entropy and naive entropy, to study the properties of
finitely determined processes, to investigate whether the high temperature Ising
model over the rank 2 free group is isomorphic to a Bernoulli shift, to
determine when Popa factors of Bernoulli shifts are isomorphic to Bernoulli
shifts, and to investigate the orbit equivalence class of Bernoulli shifts over
free groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.