* 1955650
* CNS Core: Medium: Real-time Energy-elastic GPUs for Embedded Autonomous Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Daniel Wong, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 907,410.00

Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) provide massive computational power that
enables modern transformative applications such as computer vision, machine
learning, and scientific discovery. However, these benefits are typically
confined to large-scale computer systems, such as cloud computing and
supercomputers. Embedded resource-constrained environments, such as autonomous
systems and aerial drones, can make limited use of GPUs due to constraints on
available energy, computing and communication resources, and timing requirements
(real-time constraints). This project fundamentally rethinks the design of GPU-
enabled computer systems in embedded resource-constrained environments with
real-time behavior. This research consists of three main goals: (1) to develop
energy-efficient and elastic microarchitectures for computational resources and
storage structures, (2) to develop timing-aware GPU hardware schedulers that
coordinate with an operating system real-time task scheduler, and (3) to
dynamically balance timing requirements and energy-elastic microarchitectures by
holistically coordinating across the entire software-hardware computing
stack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These next-generation real-time embedded GPUs
provide more computational power to enable future embedded autonomous systems to
become safer and more energy-efficient. This proliferation of computing power
can also lead to myriad impacts on society such as improved portable medical
devices that are smaller and with expanded capabilities, automobile collision
detection systems with improved accuracy and safety, and lower electricity
consumption for internet-of-things and even for larger-scale GPU-based computer
systems. This project will offer research opportunities to undergraduate
students, and broaden participation of underrepresented minorities, providing
training to a new generation of computer engineers who will meet the design
challenges of future embedded systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.