* 1955215
* RUI: Condensed Phase Radiolysis vs. Photolysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Christopher Arumainayagam, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 384,885.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Christopher
Arumainayagam of Wellesley College to study the differences and similarities
between condensed-phase (as opposed to gas-phase) chemical reactions driven by
low-energy electrons and light (photons). The main goal is to provide detailed
chemical explanations (at the level of the mechanisms of molecular interactions)
for macroscopic effects such as how photon- and electron-induced ice chemistry
contribute to the (1) ozone hole over the Antarctic and (2) formation of
prebiotic (precursors to life) molecules such as glycine in outer space. As well
as providing insight into the energetic processing of ices in nature, Professor
Arumainayagamâ€™s studies may help to better control industrial chemical reactions
to form specific products without unwanted side products. For example, both
photons and electrons play a critical role in extreme ultraviolet lithography
(EUVL), which is a next-generation manufacturing technique of semiconductor
chips critical for better smartphones. In addition to scientific broader impacts
to knowledge of ice chemistry, atmospheric chemistry, astrobiology, and
industrial chemistry, this Research at Undergraduate Institutions award has a
significant impact on education of female undergraduate students, including
promoting participation by minority and economically disadvantaged students, and
the award includes plans to further promote diversity within the STEM workforce.
Students participating in research under this award gain experience with
advanced experimental techniques, in addition to skills such as critical
thinking, troubleshooting, and problem solving in the research
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radiolysis and photolysis of condensed phase NH3, H2O,
and CH3OH are being investigated under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions by
using post-irradiation temperature-programmed desorption (TPD), post-irradiation
infrared spectroscopy, and isothermal electron/photon-stimulated desorption
(ESD/PSD) techniques. Electrons/photons with sub-ionization energies (&lt;10 eV)
are employed to avoid the production of cations and low-energy secondary
electrons, ensuring that fundamental differences between electrons and photons
can be probed. The experiments involve a recently-commercialized high-intensity
laser-driven low-energy (&lt;7.4 eV) broadband photon source. When coupled to a
monochromator, purchased with funds from this award, this high-intensity photon
source will allow for wavelength-dependent condensed phase photochemistry
studies that have previously been done at synchrotron facilities. Studying
condensed-phase radiolysis and photolysis in a single UHV chamber using the same
experimental protocol is critical in exploring fundamental differences between
the dynamics of condensed phase electron- and photon-induced
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.