* 1955044
* Organocatalytic Enantioselective Sigmatropic Rearrangements to Probe Divergent Reactivity of Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Stacey Brenner-Moyer, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 597,761.00

Divergent reactivity is a phenomenon that occurs when reacting molecules can
follow two competing reaction pathways, each leading to different products. This
reactivity can be both an advantage and disadvantage in the synthesis of organic
molecules. If the factors dictating the reaction pathways are well understood,
divergent reactivity can be deliberately manipulated and harnessed to advantage.
When this fundamental understanding is lacking, however, this dual reactivity
diminishes synthetic utility. In this project, with the support from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Brenner-Moyer of
Rutgers University-Newark is investigating the influence of catalysts on
divergent reactivity. Catalysts are substances that increase the rates of
chemical reactions but are themselves not consumed, and are of enormous
importance in fundamental and industrial chemistry. This knowledge gained from
this research ultimately enables improved control of reaction outcomes,
permitting direct access to useful chemicals. Professor Brenner-Moyer and her
group are especially interested in new strategies to synthesize alkaloids, which
are a broad class of naturally occurring compounds that exhibit a range of
biological activities. Professor Brenner-Moyer is also coordinating a peer-
mentoring program for academically at-risk, first-year female students
interested in the sciences, with the goal of increasing their retention as STEM
(science, technology, engineering, mathematics) majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Brenner-Moyer of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers University-
Newark is investigating catalyst control in reactions of dienamine and ammonium
ylide intermediates through the lens of new reaction development. These
investigations entail a combination of synthetic studies, including the design
and synthesis of new reaction catalysts, and synthetic mechanistic studies.
Findings of these studies improve catalysts used in divergent reactions; this is
a crucial step in harnessing their enormous synthetic potential for advanced
manufacturing. Specifically, attaining generally accepted models for catalyst
control of dienamine and ammonium ylide intermediates enables access to valuable
enantiopure, remotely functionalized aldehyde synthons and complex alkaloid
structures, respectively. Concurrent with these research activities, Professor
Brenner-Moyer also coordinates a peer-mentoring program for first-year female
Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) and Educational
Opportunity Fund (EOF) students designed to increase their retention as STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.