* 1955449
* Photoelectron-Photofragment Coincidence Studies of the Dynamics of Decarboxylation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Robert Continetti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 660,046.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms -A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Robert Continetti of the
University of California, San Diego is using laser optical techniques to study
the decarboxylation reactions of various organic molecules including carboxylic
acids, fatty acids, and esters. The term decarboxylation refers to the removal
of carbon dioxide (CO2) from the molecule. A common carboxylic acid is acetic
acid (C2H4O2), the distinctive component of vinegar. Decarboxylation of acetic
acid gives CO2 and methane (CH4). Fatty acids are carboxylic acids with very
long carbon+hydrogen chains. Fatty acids are what constitute animal fat and
vegetable oils. The process of decarboxylation plays a key role in complex
phenomena ranging from the Krebs acid cycle used by many organisms to release
stored energy, to new particle formation in the chemistry of atmospheric
aerosols. In spite of the importance, little is known about the mechanism of the
elimination of carbon dioxide that occurs in decarboxylation. The Continetti
research group uses a technique called photoelectron-photofragment coincidence
(PPC) spectroscopy. In the PPC experiment, a beam of the carboxylic acid
(actually a negatively charged form) is directed into a vacuum chamber, and the
beam is exposed to a strong laser beam, which ejects an electron from the acid
molecule. The resulting molecule is unstable, and falls apart into CO2 and
hydrocarbon fragments. PPC spectroscopy measures the speed (and kinetic energy)
of the ejected electron and the CO2 and hydrocarbon fragments, and therefore
provides insights into how the laser light energy is absorbed by the acid
molecule and leads to fragmentation. This research project is providing
fundamental insights not only into the chemical process of decarboxylation, but
to molecular fragmentation in general. It is also likely to contribute to our
understanding of biofuel combustion and other complex chemical phenomena. In
addition to the basic science questions, researchers engaged in this research
project are gaining valuable experience in the design and operation of a novel
experimental apparatus, the analysis of multifaceted data, and the computer
simulation of molecular ion motions. This research project provides
opportunities for the training of students and postdoctoral associates in the
design and construction of novel experimental instrumentation and complex data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decarboxylation is a fundamental process in
chemistry driven by the thermodynamic stability of CO2, with implications for
biology, combustion and atmospheric chemistry. In this project, decarboxylation
is studied using the dissociative photodetachment of precursor anions
synthesized by proton abstraction from carboxylic acid precursors. The heavy ion
PPC spectrometer provides the opportunity to directly examine the full gamut of
dissociation pathways including anionic photodissociation (PD) and dissociative
photodetachment (DPD) for large species of interest. The PPC spectroscopy
measurements are focusing on a series of complex anions that are expected to
undergo decarboxylation, including the carboxylate anions, dicarboxylate
dianions and fatty acids, probing the full range of low energy decomposition
pathways accessible following photoabsorption. This project seeks to reveal new
insights into the role of intramolecular hydrogen bonding on the relative
energetics and dissociation dynamics. Finally, the dissociation dynamics of the
methyl- and ethyl-esters of long chain saturated and unsaturated fatty acids of
relevance to biofuels are also being studied, providing benchmark energetics
data that can aid in the validation of theoretical calculations in complex ions
and radicals. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal
benefits from understanding decarboxylation dynamics of relevance to the
atmosphere and biology, as well as providing training opportunities for graduate
students and postdoctoral associates in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.