* 1955139
* Water and Environmental Technology Education for Rural Small Water Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* James Nurmi, Clackamas Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2024
* USD 285,489.00

Access to clean water is uniquely crucial for health and economic prosperity of
all human communities. Efficient production of enough potable water for an
increasing population requires technicians with specialized knowledge and
skills. Well over 90% of US public water systems serve fewer than 10,000 people
and are classified by the Environmental Protection Agency as Rural Small Water
Systems. Because of retirements and use of new technologies, the rural water
industry has a growing need for new technicians who are skilled in these new
technologies. Filling this need is complicated by chronic challenges in
providing equitable education and training opportunities to rural residents.
This project will address the need for Rural Small Water Systems technicians by
providing an educational model that is designed to serve a rural population.
Specifically, this project plans to develop online instructional modules to
educate rural water technicians who have the knowledge and skills required by a
modernizing industry. Through distance learning strategies, the project will
also enable practicing rural technicians to build or update their skills. The
rural small water system curriculum will cover the spectrum of knowledge and
skills needed to ensure the proper installation, inspection, maintenance,
repair, management, and operation of successful small public water
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop 20 online instructional
modules that address advanced knowledge and skills not currently fully covered
in the existing Water and Environmental Technology program. These modules will
be integrated into six current Water and Environmental courses and fully online
versions of the courses will be developed. These changes are expected to better
serve students who live and work beyond commuting reach, as well as working
technicians who seek additional education from rural locations. The modules will
include video presentations, technical documents, and virtual field experiences.
This work will be done in consultation with industry partners, the Advanced
Technology Environmental Education Center, and the Regional Center for Nuclear
Education and Training, thus leveraging existing knowledge and resources that
include expertise in online and virtual education. All modules will be available
nationwide to other educational programs and to industries for training
purposes. Representatives of the regionâ€™s water industries have agreed to work
with the project personnel to ensure that the modules address their needs for
technical knowledge and skills. It is expected that this online module-based
training platform can serve as a model for other programs interested in reaching
rural students and meeting rural needs. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.