* 1955496
* D3SC: GOALI: Development of a Temperature Scanning Reaction Protocol for Pharmaceutical Catalytic Reaction Screening and Optimization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Donna Blackmond, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,820.00

In this GOALI (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry) project,
supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Donna Blackmond at the Scripps Research Institute
and Dr. Shashank Shekhar of AbbVie are developing new methods to study the rates
and mechanisms of complex chemical reactions. This research addresses challenges
and opportunities inherent in the modern study of complex organic reactions
related to the pharmaceutical industry, which warrant an integrated approach in
order to discover transformative solutions. The specific goal is to develop a
new Temperature Scanning Reaction (TSR) protocol for monitoring chemical
processes, which will be applicable in both industrial and academic
laboratories. Reactions to be studied in detail are of broad interest in
chemical synthesis but have complex kinetics and mechanisms. This new
methodology enhances safety and efficiency by providing a deeper understanding
of reaction processes and the mechanisms of chemical reactions. As a broader
goal, this research provides a platform for future innovations in organic
synthesis, synthetic methodology, catalysis, and reaction engineering. This
project requires the development of new data-rich experimental tools and is
partially funded through the Data-Driven Discovery Science in Chemistry (D3SC)
initiative. Commensurate with the GOALI program requirements, the project
involves an interdisciplinary team from Scripps and the four industrial partners
Bristol Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Merck and Abbvie; this is expected to foster
future collaboration between academic and industrial laboratories. Another major
goal of this project is to provide training for graduate and undergraduate
students, including experience in an industrial
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the expanding ability to monitor reactions in
real time, and as the accuracy and data-density of measuring tools increases,
chemists face the challenge of developing an integrated approach for data
capture and interpretation, along with the creation of new reaction analysis
tools. This project seeks to develop a novel Temperature-Scanning Reaction (TSR)
protocol and reactors for streamlining the use of temperature as a variable
kinetic parameter in reactions relevant to pharmaceutical process research. This
approach is expected to advance: a) fundamental mechanistic study; b) rapid
initial screening in pharmaceutical medicinal/discovery chemistry; and c)
process optimization in pharmaceutical manufacture. The choice of reaction
classes for these investigations is informed by current challenges in the
pharmaceutical industry and chemical synthesis in general. Specific reaction
classes include: a) asymmetric hydrogenation; b) electrocatalytic
transformations; c) photoredox catalysis; and d) non-precious metal catalytic
transformations. These studies aim to evaluate and develop this Temperature
Scanning Reaction (TSR) approach in the context of Reaction Progress Kinetic
Analysis (RPKA), a method developed earlier by the lead Principal Investigator.
This research enhances safety and efficiency by providing an improved
understanding of industrial reaction processes. New methodology for kinetic
analysis can be broadly applied across chemistry to enhance fundamental
mechanistic understanding. The pre-competitive nature of this project ensures
that no intellectual property considerations will hamper the open discussion
among industrial and academic participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.