* 1955590
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Teachable Activity Trackers for Older Adults
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* David Conroy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 119,992.00

Self-tracking of physical activities can support people of all ages in
understanding their lifestyle behaviors and making healthy choices, reducing
chronic disease risks. For older adults, movement behaviors are especially
critical. They help people maintain functional abilities and live independently.
Smart watches and other activity tracking technologies have become available,
making self-tracking easier than before, but older adults have adopted them
less. One barrier is that current physical activity trackers do not effectively
identify and track older adults’ activities. This project aims to understand (1)
what kind of data are needed from older adults to make activity tracking work
for them; and (2) how to engage older adults to collect the needed data. This
project will develop a new approach to personalizing older adults’ activity
tracking. It will open up new research avenues on personalized and multimodal
self-tracking that affect healthcare, quality of life, and privacy. This project
is expected to make broader impacts for older adults in enhancing their
motivation to engage in physical activities, as well as societal impacts in
nurturing a culture of diversity and inclusion that benefits the lives of older
adults and people with and without disabilities or health
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses “teachable interfaces” to
facilitate personalized, self-tracking for older adults’ physical activities,
while considering their changes in mobility and diverse physical
characteristics. The teachable interfaces are intended to help people provide
personalized activity labels, which will be used to recognize their unique
movements. They will also enable self-tracking of meaningful and modifiable
movement and non-movement activities, supporting older adults to displace
inactivity with physical activity, which can provide significant health
benefits. The research team will investigate: (1) older adults’ movement and
non-movement activities that they wish to change; (2) new personalized,
multimodal activity trackers that provide opportunities for self-reflection
through teachable interfaces; and (3) commonalities and differences in
efficacies for subgroups of older adults (e.g., people with mild dementia) and
what adjustments are needed to accommodate them. Combining expertise from human-
computer interaction, interactive machine learning, accessibility, aging, and
kinesiology, the project will employ a mixed-methods research approach: co-
design with older adults, technology design and development, and evaluations
both in the lab and in people’s natural environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.