* 1955450
* SHF: Medium: Enabling Real-Time Federated Learning at the Edge:  Algorithm and Circuit Co-Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Borivoje Nikolic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 726,050.00

Machine-learning applications are penetrating many new domains, and the
increased concern for privacy is pushing training to the user devices, as
opposed to being performed on large computers in the cloud. In the federated-
learning paradigm, model training is performed on a large number of distributed
devices with a userâ€™s private local datasets, while the aggregate model is
composed on the cloud. This approach poses a number of new challenges in both
development and analysis of new algorithms and co-design of optimized hardware
for efficient operation. For efficient deployment of federated learning, edge
devices need to support many other aspects of interest for this program, among
them on-device learning and incremental model updates with private data, often
performed in real time. This project proposes to build an end-to-end, real-time
federated-learning framework, ranging from algorithmic innovations, hardware-
software co-design, and efficient hardware demonstrations in scaled
technologies. Concurrently, the proposed education activities will enable the
development of engineers and scientists whose expertise spans a broad range from
algorithms to digital system implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The real-time
machine federated-learning concept requires integration of theoretical algorithm
aspects with their practical development. Theoretical aspects include the
compression of model size, reduction in communication requirements and the
assessment of performance. Practical aspects include efficient hardware for
training and inference, randomized sketching with near-memory computation and
hardware-aware neural network design. In particular, it aims to achieve: (1) A
full demonstration of a scalable and energy-efficient real-time federated
learning architecture suitable for deployment in various scenarios, (2)
Experimental measurements via test chips and cloud-based FPGA simulation to
validate the developed system models, (3) Release of the platform in the open
source. The key products of this work integrate research and education and
encompass scalable randomized sketching algorithms, energy- and cost-efficient
machine-learning accelerators for on-device training, and fast-and-accurate
hardware-modeling infrastructure for hardware-aware algorithm
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.