* 1956197
* RUI: Harnessing the redox chemistry of silver: fundamental studies of oxidation chemistry at dinuclear silver catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Michael Campbell, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 249,534.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry of
the National Science Foundation, Professor Michael Campbell at Barnard College
is exploring routes to new kinds of silver-based catalysts. Catalysts speed up
chemical reactions and often contribute to producing specific, desired products.
The potential of silver-based catalysts has been largely overlooked because
little is known about how silver behaves during the steps required for key
catalytic processes. In order to accomplish these goals, Professor Campbell is
designing new structures that will induce novel behavior of silver-based
catalysts. In some cases, multiple silver ions appear to cooperate in chemical
reactions, but the products are too fragile to be of practical value. By
systematically changing in the structure of the silver compounds, a new
generation of rugged, useful catalysts may be produced. The grant also supports
the training of undergraduate students for careers in science, with specific
emphasis on developing skills in the laboratory and in scientific communication.
A particular emphasis is placed on increasing the participation of women and
other underrepresented groups in scientific research. The grant is also
supporting a science literacy campaign involving the broader community of
students at Barnard College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical
Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry of the National Science
Foundation, Professor Michael Campbell at Barnard College is exploring routes to
new kinds of silver-based catalysts. Despite silver’s relatively high abundance
and lower cost compared to other late transition metals, homogeneous redox
catalysis with silver is underdeveloped. This is fundamentally due to a lack of
chemical design principles for controlling reactivity. To date there has been
little data on oxidized silver complexes that are relevant to catalysis.
Professor Campbell is systematically exploring the redox chemistry of dinuclear
silver complexes, with a focus on the role of silver–silver interactions in
facilitating redox processes. The results of these studies are used to inform
catalyst design for nitrene transfer and other group transfer reactions that
furnish valuable products from hydrocarbon substrates. By focusing on redox
catalysis with silver, this research ultimately aims to develop synthetically
useful reactivity than can supplant more commonly used rare-metal catalysts such
as rhodium and iridium. The Campbell group at Barnard College trains
undergraduate students for future careers in science. As a liberal arts college
for women, Barnard is particularly effective in promoting the participation of
women and other underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.