* 1956457
* CAS: Sustainable Technologies for Building Molecules: Cobalt, Nickel, and Copper Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Vy Dong, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Vy M. Dong of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of California, Irvine. The pursuit of new ways to
construct organic molecules is an essential field of research that impacts many
other scientific disciplines such as the development discovery of important
therapeutic agents, the invention of novel materials, and the search for
alternative energies. Professor Dong’s research team is committed to inventing
better catalytic tools for building organic molecules using earth-abundant metal
catalysts. Students pursuing these aims are training to be molecular architects
with a deep understanding of how to connect molecular fragments using new
transition metal-catalyzed processes. They will enter the work force with the
ability to design new sustainable transformations and to prepare molecules with
valuable characteristics. In addition, Professor Dong and her students are
broadening the participation of underrepresented minorities and women through
outreach efforts to engage Hispanic students in Santa Ana, a symposium for local
women in chemistry, and social media-based activities to showcase scientists
from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Dong’s laboratory is
motivated by (1) a fundamental interest in new reactivity and (2) a practical
need for more efficient and environmentally-friendly technologies. At the heart
of this program, her team is pursuing the discovery of catalysts that are
derived from sustainable and earth-abundant elements. Professor Dong and her
students are addressing three modern challenges in organic synthesis through
catalysis. First, they are inventing a method for cross-coupling Michael
acceptors using catalysts derived from copper or nickel. This cascade approach
provides access to quaternary carbon centers with high stereocontrol, offers a
novel way to construct amide linkages, and widens the scope of hydroarylation.
Second, they are investigating a dehydroamino acid/catalytic reduction approach
to making cyclic peptides. Two natural products (mahafacylcine -and beauvericin)
are being used to test these strategies to access these important targets.
Finally, a cobalt-catalyzed transfer hydroformylation is being developed to
provide a broadly applicable strategy for transforming aldehydes (or alcohols)
to olefins via a one-carbon dehomologation. These activities focused on
designing new catalytic tools for organic synthesis are advancing the many
fields of science that require the design and construction of functional
molecules, from medicinal chemistry to polymer science. The pursuit of these
aims is facilitating access to practical tools, while advancing our fundamental
knowledge on chemical reactivity and selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.