* 1956106
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Practical and Rigorous Correctness Checking and Correctness Preservation for Irregular Parallel Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 479,570.00

Many important — and in some cases, lifesaving — computations are performed on
graph structures consisting of millions of vertices and edges. For example, such
graphs might represent medical information, protein interactions, or taxonomies
of diseases. Since these graphs tend to be large, they are processed in parallel
to fully harness the speed offered by modern computers, which use multicore
processors and often general-purpose Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).
Unfortunately, parallelizing graph computations is difficult, especially for
GPUs,and often leads to accidental uncoordinated accesses known as data races.
Data races can be hard to track down as they only sometimes corrupt the result.
The project's novelties are the development of scalable and mathematically sound
methods for data-race and other bug detection on graph computations. The
project's main impact is the elimination of many human programming errors to
improve the trust in computations carried out on life-critical and other
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops generic symbolic representations
of allowed concurrent operations on primitive data operations. This provides
the&lt;br/&gt;ability to easily boil down new concurrency models into this
semantic base to quickly create new analysis tools, thus counteracting
verification tool obsolescence. It augments the power of small-scope symbolic-
analysis methods with execution-based dynamic-analysis methods that scale to
realistic code and data sizes. The project derives real-world case studies from
high-performance CUDA and OpenMP implementations of important graph algorithms
developed over a decade. The project plans to publicly release the new data-race
checking tools as well as verification micro-benchmarks and rigorously verified
parallel graph codes. It is also training students whose education is advanced
by teaching them modern program analysis methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by the Software &amp; Hardware Foundations Program in the
Division of Computer &amp; Computing Foundations, and the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.