* 1956399
* Chemical Triggers for Magnetic Switching: Discovery and Control of Switching Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Matthew Shores, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 460,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Matthew Shores of the Department of
Chemistry at Colorado State University is exploring new classes of transition
metal complexes that can serve as molecular switches. Complexes that can exist
in and reliably switch between two well-defined magnetic states offer the
possibility for functional materials development at the nano- and molecular
length scales. Along with fostering a fundamental approach to underdeveloped
chemical processes, these results will inform design principles of anion
sensors, switchable molecular magnets, and magnetic resonance contrast agents.
The project combines several synthetic, measurement and computational techniques
to provide diverse training for the graduate and undergraduate research students
involved. The group’s expertise in magnetic measurements and data interpretation
will promote discovery via several ongoing and new magnetic collaborations with
inorganic and materials chemistry research groups around the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Switchable molecular magnet behavior has been reported
with respect to spin crossover complexes and single molecule magnets. Refinement
of desirable properties is complicated by their extreme sensitivity to
environmental conditions. To nullify serendipity in their development, Shores'
research aims to decipher the impact of noncovalent interactions on the local
electronic structure of transition metal complexes. The specific research goals
for this project are the development of predictive models for magnetic state
switching through computational techniques; the refinement of the foundational
principles of noncovalent interactions to aid in the design of chemical
triggers; and the establishment of a structure function relationship with
respect to minute distortions and magnetic properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.