* 1956007
* CNS Core: Medium: Rethinking Architecture and Operating Systems for Modern Virtualization Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Josep Torrellas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 850,000.00

This project addresses important challenges posed by the widespread deployment
of modern virtualization technologies, including containers and function-as-a-
service environments. Containers are very low-overhead virtual machines, and
function-as-a-service environments are systems where users run many small jobs,
and are billed as such. In these environments, two major challenges are
insecurity due to the lack of isolation, and poor scalability due to the many
jobs that are running. This project rethinks the computer architecture and the
operating system of machines to support these environments securely and
scalably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work develops a set of novel, transformative
computer architecture and operating system technologies that will dramatically
improve the security and the scalability of novel virtualization technologies.
On the security side, this project will explore novel hardware and software
designs to filter system calls efficiently. The idea is to examine every system
call that programs issue at runtime and check and validate their arguments for
security. On the scalability side, this project will enable the ability to run
thousands of containers or functions on the same machine simultaneously, by
redesigning TLBs (Translation Lookaside Buffers) and page tables. Overall, these
technologies will enhance cloud computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will initiate an effort on multidisciplinary research and education on whole-
system support for modern virtualization technologies in cloud at the University
of Illinois. The efforts in this project include working with the Department of
Computer Science to broaden the course offerings with multidisciplinary courses
in the general area of cloud computing and datacenter technologies. This project
will also offer research opportunities to undergraduate students, and broaden
participation to under-represented minorities. The project will include an
effort of coaching middle and high school robotics teams.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will maintain a repository with all the data,
code, results, emulators and simulators used and developed during the duration
of the project. The repository will be accessible password-free through
http://iacoma.cs.uiuc.edu, and will be kept up to date for at least three years
after the project ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.