* 1956373
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium:  NetSplicer: Scalable Decoupling-based Algorithms for Multilayer Network Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sanjukta Bhowmick, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2024
* USD 336,042.00

A multilayer network is a powerful and expressive mathematical tool for modeling
and analyzing social, economic, biological, and technological systems.
Informally, a multilayer network is a collection of related graphs. Applications
of multilayer networks include understanding social networks, economic systems,
online marketplaces, and detecting vulnerabilities in cyber-physical systems.
While this research area is rapidly growing, there is a dearth of computational
tools for analyzing large-scale networks from diverse applications. This project
will develop the theoretical foundations and software infrastructure for
analyzing very large multilayer networks on modern computing systems, thereby
enabling their widespread use in diverse applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop NetSplicer, a collection of scalable high-performance
algorithms for multilayer-network analysis. The approaches in NetSplicer will be
based on a divide-and-conquer-like technique called network decoupling. Using
decoupling, the multilayer network can be subdivided into multiple components,
each of which could be potentially analyzed using known graph algorithms.
Network decoupling seeks to address issues that are critical for multilayer
analysis, such as reducing information loss and preserving structural and
semantic information. The challenges in efficiently applying network decoupling
include determining optimal decoupling strategies, preserving the structure and
content of multilayer networks that have multiple vertex and edge types, and
developing architecture-aware scalable algorithms that apply across different
layers of a network. This project will provide a new capability for multiple
research communities and will build a repository for multilayer networks. The
planned collaborations with domain scientists from academia and industry, as
well as curriculum development and outreach activities, will shape project
development efforts to maximize impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.