* 1956019
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Living Architectures: From Army Ants to Self-Assembling Robot Swarms
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michael Rubenstein, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,995.00

Army ants are unlike any other ant species. They are nomadic and therefore do
not build permanent nests. Instead, between two episodes of sometimes daily
migration, they build temporary nests called “bivouacs” by attaching themselves
to each other. In this way they build functional structures solely out of their
interconnected bodies. Army ants can assemble and disassemble bivouacs of up to
a million individuals in less than an hour and can do so in almost any condition
in which they find themselves. These incredible feats of constructions are of
great interest for engineers looking to create swarms of robots that could
autonomously assemble themselves anywhere into any desired shape. Similar swarms
could, for instance, self-assemble into habitats on Mars or in disaster areas
without human intervention and regardless of the state of the local environment.
This collaborative research brings together biologists and roboticists to
achieve two goals: understand the principles of self-assembling construction in
army ants, and adapt these principles to create a new generation of robots
capable of self-assembling into any desired functional structure, even in
unpredictable environments. The project will also give students from K12 to
Ph.D. an opportunity to learn how biological structures build themselves out of
smaller units, and how fundamental knowledge of natural processes can lead to
new technological developments and applications in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three complementary components. In
Component 1, the researchers will perform field experiments to determine the
rules used by army ants to self-assemble into functional structures. These
studies will combine computer vision-assisted behavioral observations to measure
the individual behaviors of the ants and high-definition 3D imaging using a
custom-designed CT-scanner to characterize the organization and dynamics of the
structure under construction. In Component 2, the result of the field
experiments will be used to generate a multi-agent mathematical model and a
physics-based simulation of the ant behaviors. The focus will be to design
generalizable agent abstractions that allow for mathematical analysis to
determine what forms of individual rules lead to correct and efficient
collective outcomes as determined by the functional goal (e.g. formation of
bivouac), and how modification of individual sensing and coordination
capabilities affect the colony capability. Finally, in Component 3, the
researchers will design a self-assembling robotic swarm with at least 30 robots.
The swarm will be capable of building functional structures in unknown
environments, through climbing and attaching to each other. These robots will
use similar principles as army ants for collective control and allow complex 3D
“organic” self-assembled structures. The goal is not to mimic ant morphology,
but instead demonstrate novel robot designs that use embodied intelligence and
bio-inspired control, to achieve similarly adaptive structures while also
allowing simplicity and large-scale manufacturability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.