* 1956401
* Dearomatization Reactions in Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christopher Beaudry, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2024
* USD 467,629.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Christopher M. Beaudry of Oregon State
University who is investigating new chemical reactions that are used to prepare
pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and building-block molecules for the chemical
industry. Aromatic rings are common features of many fine chemicals.
Traditionally, aromatic rings are viewed as stable, less reactive chemical
entities; however, the Beaudry group is developing new reactions to harness
their underutilized reactivity. They will enable more efficient syntheses of
clinical pharmaceuticals such as homoharringtonine (for leukemia), ergometrine
(for postpartum bleeding), and novel lead compounds such as himgaline (potential
applications in cardiovascular research). Educational benefits of this research
include training PhD students and undergraduates for careers in the chemical
industry. Additionally, outreach activities in Oregon schools involve the
Corvallis public school system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Beaudry and his
research team develop new pericyclic reactions of aromatic rings that transform
these molecules into new value-added molecules. Specifically, they are
transforming benzenes, pyrones, pyridines, and related starting materials into
other cyclic and polycyclic products with control over substitution. The
research leverages the contiguous unsaturated carbons of the arene starting
materials to give densely functionalized products. A key aspect is the
recognition that polarized cycloaddition coupling partners offer increased
reactivity and regioselectivity in these bond constructions. This work solves
long-standing problems in chemical synthesis, such as the preparation of
4-substituted indoles, 2,3-disubstituted phenols, and nitrogen-containing
bicyclic systems. Broader impacts of the work include training chemists in the
practice and strategy of sophisticated organic synthesis; preparation that
serves them well for careers in the agrochemical, pharmaceutical, and fine
chemical industries. Longer term benefits of this research may obtain as the
development of step-saving, convergent syntheses of high value-added targets
could lead to more efficient processes for the manufacture of these targets.
Moreover, the Beaudry group is actively engaged in reaching under-represented
minorities and first-generation college students and in providing them with
exposure to modern research in synthetic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.