* 1956098
* RUI: Contributions of Heavy-Atom Quantum Tunneling to Reactivity in Organic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Edyta Greer, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B Program of the Chemistry
Division of NSF is supporting the research of Professor Edyta Greer at CUNY
Baruch College. Professor Greer’s research focuses on thermally-activated heavy-
atom tunneling in organic reactions. Determining the level of contributions of
thermally-activated heavy-atom tunneling is critical to understand mechanistic
details in these reactions. Mechanistic details can lead to the development of
more efficient reactions, which are important in the chemical and pharmaceutical
industrials. This research also has relevance to quantum information science and
may be useful in helping to understand quantum computing, communication and
sensing. The research will be integrated with undergraduate curriculum at CUNY
Baruch College. Outreach activities include educational talks at local
elementary schools using demonstrations and experiments to convey the importance
of STEM to the youngest generations of students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermally-activated heavy-atom tunneling is a fundamental
process in which tunneling through the barrier can potentially contribute to
reaction rates. Its prevalence in organic reactions remains uncertain in part
due to challenges with its quantitation. This project seeks a computational
approach to assess thermally-activated heavy-atom tunneling. Three classes of
reactions are targeted: intramolecular metathesis reactions of carbonyls and
olefins; syn-elimination reactions of selenoxides; and electrocyclizations of
helicenes. Professor Greer’s research team will identify “sweet spots” in mid
and upper energy barrier regions to provide the needed insight to mechanistic
organic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.