* 1956276
* CNS Core: Medium: When Next Generation Wireless Networks Meet Machine Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jing Yang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 800,000.00

The demand on wireless networks is increasing at an exponential pace whereas the
spectrum resources are severely constrained. Millimeter-wave (mmWave) spectrum
offers orders of magnitude higher bandwidth than the microwave spectrum and
forms an integral part of next-generation wireless networking standards such as
802.11ad/ay and 5G. Because of high propagation path loss, mmWave communication
uses focused directional beams. Unfortunately, signal blockage and dynamic
mobility disrupt beam alignment and limit the efficient use of the spectrum. The
goal of this project is to build a new paradigm of learning based channel
estimation and tracking, network resource allocation, and optimization schemes
for mmWave networks operating in a highly dynamic and even non-stationary
environment. This project has the potential to transform the way how the next-
generation wireless networks operate, enabling more intelligent, adaptive, and
context-aware network management solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
consists of the following synergistic thrusts for the successful design and
implementation of mmWave communication networks, followed by a comprehensive
system-level validation. The first thrust exploits ideas in non-convex
optimization to quickly sense the wireless channels and learn optimal beams. The
fast channel sensing and beam tracking schemes recover sparse mmWave channels
with minimal measurements, even under highly dynamic conditions experienced
under high-speed mobility. The second thrust designs online learning based
access point (AP) scanning and association schemes for seamless mmWave
connectivity. A novel online framework is proposed to learn the statistics of
APs and rank them accordingly. This a ranked list will enable the device to
identify a suitable AP with high data-rate link fast before the connection is
dropped, thus achieving ubiquitous connectivity. The third thrust studies
collaborative and distributed resource allocation algorithms, enabling dynamic
data sharing with time-varying network topologies encountered in disruptive
applications such as autonomous driving and industrial robotics/IoT. Finally,
exhaustive experimental validation of the designed algorithms will be performed
across various environmental settings and topological
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.