* 1956002
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Integrating Large-Scale Machine Learning and Edge Computing for Collaborative Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Heng Huang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 473,860.00

Monitoring of possible hazards and disasters are crucial for mitigating their
effects on the physical environment or to humans. The unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAVs) have been successfully used in surveillance systems, also for many other
applications such as monitoring infrastructure, vegetation growth, coastline,
traffic, etc. Due to the widespread applications, a higher level of intelligence
and autonomy is required to ensure safety and operational efficiency. The
emerging high-resolution sensors and deep learning techniques hold great promise
for autonomous UAVs. However, the unprecedented scale and complexity of sensing
data (such as aerial images) have presented critical computational bottlenecks
requiring new concepts and enabling tools. To address these challenges, this
project focuses on designing principled large-scale machine learning, edge
computing systems, energy efficient algorithms and tools that are used to
achieve the real-time prediction, utilize cloud and edge computing resources,
advance data-driven model-based approaches, assure the safe and agile
collaborative vehicles navigation. These results address the challenges in
decision support and data revolution and lead to the next generation
collaborative autonomous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this project is to address the computational challenges in the innovative real-
time and intelligent collaborative autonomous vehicles. A novel large-scale
machine learning and edge computing framework is developed to integrate the
emerging key computational techniques, including fast deep learning
optimizations, asynchronous federated learning, cross domain deep learning model
compression, hierarchical edge computing, and collaborative autonomous aerial
and ground vehicles. Unlike most existing systems that perform big data analysis
in central servers or clustering for offline learning, this project provides
promising new directions to the real-time analysis of high-throughput sensor
data by addressing the critical embedded device data analysis issues including
efficiency, scalability, distributed computing, energy saving, and space
reduction. The research project combines rigorous theoretical analysis and
emerging application studies, and contributes to both academic research and
potential commercialized products. Such unique capabilities enable new
computational applications in a large number of research areas. It advances and
thus extends the relationship between engineering innovation and computational
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.