* 1956152
* Collaborative Research : Improving the teaching of genetics in high school to avoid instilling misconceptions about gender differences
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Brian Donovan, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,094,402.00

Recent research suggests that learning about genetics during high school biology
can lead to a belief that inherent differences in the genes and brains of men
and women are the main causes of gender differences in behavior and intellectual
abilities (a belief known as neurogenetic essentialism). This belief is
implicated in lowering girls’ sense of their own STEM abilities, their feelings
of belonging in STEM classes, and their interest in pursuing further education
in STEM fields. The goal of this project, led by a team of researchers at
Biological Sciences Curriculum Study, the University of Texas, Austin, and New
York University is to answer important questions about how to teach genetics at
the high school level in a manner that is scientifically accurate, but does not
have these detrimental side effects. Specifically, this new line of experimental
research will identify—and revise—the content in common genetics instruction
that promotes the belief in neurogenetic essentialism. The proposed experiments
will also explore how the beliefs of peers and teachers contribute to changes in
such beliefs in students. This work has further implications for how the topic
of differences between men and women is addressed during high school biology
education. Furthermore, the research findings will advance theory on factors
that contribute to gender disparities in STEM attitudes and aspirations. The
project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work
that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM learning, with co-
funding by the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK12) program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on preliminary evidence, this project aims to
accomplish four key goals. First, the project will study which specific aspects
of genetics instruction affect students’ beliefs in neurogenetic essentialism.
Second, the project will identify the cognitive mechanisms through which these
effects occur. Third, the project will uncover the downstream effects of revised
genetics instructional materials on a broad range of motivational variables
relevant to STEM pursuit, such as implicit person theories, sense of belonging
in STEM, and interest in this domain. Fourth, the project will explore the
contextual factors (e.g., teacher and peer beliefs) that may moderate or mediate
how students respond to the instructional materials. The research team will
develop and iteratively refine genetics educational materialsthat teach about
genetic, neurological, and behavioral variation within and between sexes, as
well as the social causes of such differences. The research team will then test
the effectiveness of these revised materials through two large-scale randomized
control trials, one targeting students directly and one targeting students’
learning via their teachers. The results of this project will produce
generalizable knowledge regarding the cognitive, sociological, and educational
factors that contribute to STEM gender disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.