* 1956269
* Catalyst Project: Synthesis of Novel Heteroaromatic Compounds Using Pyrroles Generated from Dihydropyridones
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Sezgin Kiren, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution.
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Winston Salem State University will study the organic synthesis of novel
compounds. Understanding how to synthesize these compounds will have
applications in materials science, pharmaceutical chemistry and other fields.
The research will enhance undergraduate student research at Winston Salem State
University and further enhance the research capabilities of the
institution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this research, new methodologies and
strategies will be developed using the novel pyrrole molecules that will be
obtained from the reaction of dihydropyridines with p-toluenesulfonylmethyl
isocyanide (TosMIC) reagent. As these underutilized molecules possess such
functionalities as pyrrole, ketone and amine, they will further be
functionalized to generate novel, complex and fused heteroaromatic scaffolds
hosting such privileged motifs as pyrrole, pyridine, indole, thiazoles,
indolizines and pyrimidines. Nucleophilic additions to the ketone, electrophilic
aromatic substitutions on the pyrrole followed by oxidative aromatization will
lead to structurally unique heterocycles in a couple of steps using simple
organic reactions. With these strategies, analogs of biologically significant
compounds Camphthothein, Isocryptolepine and Tibifarnib will be
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.