* 1956180
* CNS Core: Medium: Accurate Anytime Learning for Energy andTimeliness in Software Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Charles Catlett, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 902,755.00

Modern software systems increasingly rely on deep neural networks to perform a
wide range of tasks, such as natural language translation and autonomous
driving. The key to their success is that deep neural networks can well
approximate these difficult tasks. Unfortunately, the more accurate the
approximation, the more resources required. When deployed on mobile devices or
autonomous vehicles those resource needs directly impact people as the time or
energy/battery required to produce an answer. This project tackles this crucial
problem by developing sound engineering methods to make disciplined tradeoffs
between neural network accuracy and resource usage in software systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will take an interdisciplinary approach.
Its first thrust will design novel neural networks that efficiently produce a
series of outputs, instead of just a single output, such that the output
accuracy will increase with increasing resources. The second thrust will develop
new resource management software that automatically adjusts both underlying
system settings and one or multiple neural networks to meet high-level software
accuracy and energy requirements. The third will create tools for automatically
analyzing the software context where neural networks are used, inferring
accuracy and resource requirements for neural networks and identifying
inefficient use of neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the
potential to improve the efficiency and reliability of software that
incorporates neural networks, and hence improve people's daily life experiences.
Software developers will benefit from greater flexibility in neural network
design, greater assurance that the neural networks they deploy will meet their
accuracy and resource requirements, and greater understanding of how the neural
network impacts the rest of their software systems. Additionally, the project
will create many educational opportunities through enhanced classroom projects
and creation of research opportunities for undergraduates, broadening the
participation in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the data, code, results,
and artifacts of this project will be made publicly available through the
webpage https://alert.cs.uchicago.edu/. They will be available on-line for a
period of at least five years following the completion of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.