* 1956302
* Development of Catalysts and Ligands for Alkyne Metathesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Semin Lee, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 465,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) are
supporting the research of Dr. Semin Lee of Louisiana State University.
Professor Lee and his coworkers are developing new catalysts for alkyne
metathesis. Alkyne metathesis is a chemical reaction that exchanges the two
halves of carbon-carbon triple bonds. Instead of stitching together small
fragments of molecules one-by-one, alkyne metathesis allows chemists to make
large, uniform molecules from small building blocks in a single step; however,
current state-of-the-art catalysts still have limitations that prevent alkyne
metathesis from being widely used. Dr. Lee and his team are synthesizing new
catalysts, systematically studying the chemical properties that control
metathesis reactions, and creating highly active and user-friendly catalytic
systems. The Lee group is also testing strategies to use alkyne metathesis
catalysts to form nanohoop molecules. These explorations are helping to
accelerate discoveries of new organic materials for electronics and energy
storage. Simultaneously, Professor Lee is developing new virtual reality (VR)
tools for chemistry education and outreach. VR allows students to grab and
manipulate molecules. Professor Lee is implementing VR in his undergraduate and
graduate courses where students can interact with molecules and understand their
three-dimensional nature along with their corresponding function. VR is also
actively being used in K-12 outreach events to bring enthusiasm to young
students by letting them walk inside and explore
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of alkyne metathesis catalysts
with improved functional group tolerance, decreased air and water sensitivity,
and improved substrate generality is critical for the advancement of alkyne
metathesis as a synthetic tool. Dr. Lee and his research group are working
towards this goal by systematically studying ligand effects on molybdenum (Mo)
and tungsten (W) alkylidyne complexes and investigating the reactivity of
cationic alkylidyne complexes. The knowledge generated from these systematic
studies is being used to synthesize alkyne metathesis catalysts with enhanced
activity and stability. The effect of ligands, metals, and substrates on the
formation of proposed catalytic intermediates is being investigated to improve
understanding of the reaction process and to support rational design of improved
systems. New catalysts are being tested against challenging substrates that have
proven to be inactive with current state-of-the-art catalysts. Carefully
designed systems for the synthesis of alkyne nanohoops materials are also being
studied. Catalysts that show low activity with common alkyne metathesis
substrates are being tested as candidates for ring-opening alkyne metathesis
polymerization (ROAMP) to suppress undesired chain transfer side reactions.
These activities are advancing alkyne metathesis catalysis toward broad
synthetic utility and providing a strong training ground for graduate and
undergraduate students in catalytic organometallic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.