* 1956271
* CNS: Core: Medium: Understanding and addressing device-reliability heterogeneity in large-scale distributed storage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Rashmi Vinayak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 986,805.00

This project develops new data protection approaches to reduce both data losses
and cost-inefficiency in large storage systems. Modern data-centers store data
in large collections (10s of thousands) of disk storage devices. To avoid data
loss in the event of a disk failure, each chunk of data is stored redundantly,
such that there are multiple copies or extra code-information that allows data
chunk reconstruction. Previous approaches assume that all of the disks are the
same in terms of their failure rates and aging properties. But, while that was
true for smaller storage systems in the past, it is not true for the large
storage systems underlying today's data-driven world. The result is that some
data is not protected enough and other data is protected too much (wasting
money) - worse, no one really knows which is which. This project develops new
tools for dynamically learning the failure characteristics of different disks,
automatically determining the right levels of redundancy for those
characteristics, and efficiently adapting redundancy levels as circumstances
change in the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By addressing a major flaw in how
storage reliability is designed and managed, this project will make data
protection stronger and less expensive. Both are crucial. Data protection is
crucial, because data is core to the success of data-driven revolutions
happening in medicine, science, politics, business, etc. Losing data hampers
their success. Data storage cost is crucial, because of the massive dollar,
power, and environmental effects of the disks and data-centers used to house and
operate them. For example, early analyses suggest that this project's outcomes
could potentially reduce the number of disks needed by 20%, which would
represent millions fewer devices in U.S. data centers. This project will include
engaging with companies and national labs that operate large storage systems in
order to help move the research results into practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.