* 1956297
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: OneDegree: Foundations and Methods for Imaging in mmWave Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ashutosh Sabharwal, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 916,000.00

The next-generation of wireless network designs are undergoing an interesting
metamorphosis. The traditional focus in wireless has been on network capacity,
and increasing bandwidths. However, with 5G, the limelight is now shared between
the increasing capacity and support for novel applications. The shared focus on
applications in network design is partially fueled by the emergence of new
potential markets, e.g., smart cities, smart homes, drones, augmented
reality/virtual reality (AR/VR) and Internet of Things (IoT). This shift is also
natural as the wireless industry looks for growth, from largely serving a user
on their personal device, to serving their whole environment in the future. This
project looks at 5G and beyond and asks, what are core capabilities that future
wireless networks can leverage, to empower novel applications beyond
communications? The project will demonstrate that wireless network imaging is
such a core capability, which, integrated into the next generation network
designs, could empower many new application domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project with investigators from Rice University and the University
of California-Los Angeles is called ‘One Degree’ to highlight the importance of
reaching the critical angular resolution for imaging using future-generation
wireless communication networks. The technical thrusts of this project are: (a)
development of the foundational theoretical framework to study the joint imaging
and communications on a mmWave (millimeter wave) wireless communications network
and determine the fundamental limits to imaging using these networks, (b)
development of systems and methods to achieve and surpass one degree angular
resolution, (c) fabricate a custom mmWave front-end chipset and demonstrate
imaging using communication networks, and (d) collect a dataset covering smart-
home and smart-city contexts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will enable new
imaging capabilities and become a launchpad for applications such as emergency
services, city-scale informatics, smart-homes, smart-cities and personal
services. The project will follow an Open Experiments policy, sharing (i) the
codebase used to perform experiments, (ii) all generated data and (iii) data
analysis code, following the successful dissemination model of WARP (wireless
open access research platform) nodes and software. The project will also involve
robust education and dissemination that includes the development of new
undergraduate and graduate courses, engaging undergraduate students in research,
following principles of open experiments, and making much of the designs and
datasets obtained publicly available. The project will directly engage
meaningfully with K-12 efforts through both targeted student workshops and K-12
teacher training programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project details,
publications, reports, presentations and datasets will be available at
http://computationalimaging.rice.edu/onedegree for a period of at least 5 years
after project end-date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.