* 1956022
* Dynamics of Surface Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Enrique Pujals, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 229,622.00

In the sciences in general, the phrase “route to chaos” has come to refer to a
metaphor when some physical, biological, economic, or social system transitions
from one exhibiting order to one displaying randomness (or chaos). The goal of
this project is to understand which universal mechanisms explain that
transition, and how one can describe systems that operate in a region between
order and complete chaos, where the complexity is maximal. In other words, the
goal is to understand the processes by which a system evolves from periodic
toward chaotic behavior as one or more parameters governing the behavior of the
system are varied. This has only been understood in low dimensional dynamics
(which are as simple as a system involving one variable). The present project
presents a novel approach that allows us to move away from those limitations.
Moreover, the project brings some perspectives to new advances in mathematics
and science in general, not necessarily in terms of bringing techniques or
theorems, but in terms of ideas and conceptual approaches. The project will also
support the training of graduate students, directly involved in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project presents a
tentative global framework toward describing a large class of area contracting
surface dynamics of the disc with zero and low entropy, inspired partially by
the developments in the one-dimensional theory of interval maps. More precisely,
the project proposes a class of intermediate smooth dynamics between one and
higher dimensions (that includes the Henon family with Jacobian smaller than 1
/4 ) where it could be possible to develop a similar one-dimensional type
approach that could help to understand dynamics with zero or low topological
entropy. In particular, it presents a general framework to understand the
transition from zero entropy to positive entropy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.