* 1956403
* Defects and Doping in Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Christopher Hendon, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2025
* USD 630,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-organic frameworks are a family
of highly crystalline and porous materials, constructed from molecular building
blocks. Most metal-organic frameworks have been assumed to be defect-free
scaffolds that glean their properties from their highly ordered, repeating
chemical structures. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that defects may
play a more important role in determining the properties of these materials than
so far assumed. This award supports research utilizing computational materials
and chemistry techniques to examine the opportunities that emerge from defect
sites in metal-organic frameworks. The PI will employ state-of-the-art
computational methods to examine defects that give rise to increased electronic
conductivity in the scaffolds, which could enable novel energy storage
technologies, as well as defects that create sites to append and perform
catalytic transformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
strengthening the PI's existing outreach program centered around improving
scientific literacy by teaching chemistry through the lens of coffee. In
particular, the PI will (i) create an open-source library of peer-reviewed
coffee-related scientific articles and write single-page summaries of the
articles' key data and learning outcomes, and (ii) organize a seminar tour in
African coffee-producing countries with the purpose of increasing awareness of
the PI's work, recruiting students, and learning from these
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-
organic frameworks are an emergent class of porous, solid-state materials whose
properties are widely thought to be determined by their bulk composition and
topologies. Previous work has shown that electronic structure calculations on
the crystallographic structures are instructive in predicting both photophysical
properties and electronic properties in a wide variety of scaffolds. However, it
is becoming increasingly clear that defects may play a more major role in
determining the properties of these materials than so far assumed. This award
supports computational research aimed at assessing the thermodynamic,
electronic, and photophysical properties of a range of known defective scaffolds
through the application of first principles defect calculations. The research
activities include i) an exploration of the impact of vacancies and
interstitials, and the emergent electronic properties associated with these
defects; ii) examine hydrogenic interstitial-coupled electron transfer reactions
that will enable both n- and p-type doping in the series of known conductive
metal-organic frameworks; and iii) examination of hydrogenic/cationic defects in
insulating metal-organic frameworks as a route to stabilizing exotic oxidation
states through population of the conduction band. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award also supports strengthening the PI's existing outreach program centered
around improving scientific literacy by teaching chemistry through the lens of
coffee. In particular, the PI will (i) create an open-source library of peer-
reviewed coffee-related scientific articles and write single-page summaries of
the articles' key data and learning outcomes, and (ii) organize a seminar tour
in African coffee-producing countries with the purpose of increasing awareness
of the PI's work, recruiting students, and learning from these
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.