* 1956374
* SHF: Medium: Software Engineering for Hardware Errors
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sarita Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Silicon technology underlying the growth in computer performance and
functionality over the last several decades is now reaching fundamental physical
limits. As this happens, computer hardware is becoming increasingly susceptible
to errors. Traditional reliability solutions to avoid such errors rely on
indiscriminate redundancy, which is too expensive for emerging systems. A
promising approach is to rely on software to provide acceptable resiliency to
hardware errors at a much lower cost by using selective redundancy only where
needed. A key obstacle to practical adoption of software-driven solutions is
that some hardware errors may escape the software stack, leading to unacceptable
data corruptions. It is therefore critical to develop analysis techniques that
can identify software regions that are potentially vulnerable to hardware
errors, and low-cost mitigation or hardening techniques that can make such
software regions resilient to data corruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is to develop a principled and scalable approach to resiliency analysis and
hardening for software. The project is based on two observations. First,
resiliency analysis is analogous to the problem of software testing, which seeks
to find software bugs. Second, resiliency hardening is analogous to software
debugging and repair. The work will leverage methods previously used for
software testing and debugging to improve resiliency analysis and hardening for
diverse computer architectures. It will (1) explore new testing-based techniques
to improve the quality and diversity of test inputs used for resiliency
analysis; (2) leverage program-analysis and machine-learning methods to make
resiliency analysis faster and more accurate for diverse computer architectures;
(3) develop formal specifications, optimization strategies, and machine-
learning-based methods to harden software using low-cost checkers; and (4)
develop techniques to apply resiliency solutions in an incremental and
compositional way. The goal is to make the promise of low-cost software-driven
approaches to hardware reliability practical by incorporating resiliency
analysis and hardening within a modern software-development workflow. The
project offers the opportunity for multidisciplinary training of students in the
fields of computer architecture, software testing, program analysis, and machine
learning, as well as broadening participation in computing through increased
recruitment and retention efforts for women and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.