* 1956291
* STTR Phase I:  Stochastic Computing Host Intrusion Detection System (HIDS) for IoT devices
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Kazi Ahmed, SECUTOPIA CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 224,355.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will result from providing a new additional layer of security protection
for Internet of Things (IoT) devices by using a novel hardware-based intrusion
detection system. Security remains a challenge with most IoT devices, mainly due
to the resource-constrained nature of these devices â€“ limited power, computing
power and memory. The proposed approach will provide an additional IoT security
layer by enabling the detection of anomalous behavior in such devices,
encouraging adoption in many new applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project employs Stochastic Computing
(SC) in a hardware-based Host Intrusion Detection System (HIDS) security
solution for IoT devices. Current approaches to IoT security are unable to
provide HIDS capability due to the resource constrained nature of such devices.
As a result, anomalous behavior may go undetected. The proposed approach
exploits two salient properties of SC: (i) low power and silicon area
requirements, and (ii) the inherently probabilistic nature, enabling a HIDS for
IoT devices by using a combination of SC hardware and a Neural Network to
monitor incoming packets for malicious activity. This project will develop,
train and test an SC-based HIDS for industrial drones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.