* 1956154
* New Catalysts to Expand the Scope of Donor/Acceptor Carbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Huw Davies, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Huw M. L. Davies of Emory University.
Professor Davies and his research team are developing new highly active
catalysts for the synthesis of value-added compounds of importance to the
pharmaceutical, agrochemical and materials science industries. These catalysts
are improved versions of catalysts based upon rhodium metal that have been
widely successful and that have new features to improve their function. A
streamlined approach for making these elaborate catalysts is being implemented
and their reactivity is being systematically evaluated. These studies are also
serving as an excellent training environment for undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as postdoctoral researchers. Professor Davies is further
supporting the career development of chemists through the ACS Young Investigator
Symposium and promoting diversity through the establishment of the Network for
Diversity in Chemical Research. Professor Davies and his research group are also
actively engaged in outreach activities to broaden engagement in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dirhodium tetracarboxylate paddlewheel
complexes are highly-active catalysts for carbene transfer and insertion. Due to
the fact that rhodium is a precious metal, the continued optimization of the
reactivity and selectivity of these catalysts represents a critical need to be
able to apply their reactivity to large scale chemical processes. Professor
Davies and his research group are preparing new C4-symmetric dirhodium
tetracarboxylate catalysts with periphery directing groups and/or critical
additives to achieve high activity and unusual site selectivity. These studies
are being directed toward cyclopropanation reactions with donor/acceptor
carbenes in situations with competitive reactivity patterns or where
opportunities for tandem reactivity are available. Professor Davies is following
a robust student-mentoring plan to insure student/advisor focus. Dr. Davies is
also leading several initiatives to enhance the academic research environment
such as building a new model for collaborative research between academia and
industry, organizing world-wide virtual symposia, and organizing special
symposia for Assistant Professors to showcase their research at the national
meetings of the American Chemical Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.