* 1956054
* AF Medium: DNA-based Data Storage and Computing Materials
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Mark Bathe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 900,000.00

The exponential growth of worldwide data coincides with the recent end of
Moore’s Law and therefore calls for alternative, new forms of large-scale data
storage and computation that go beyond conventional silicon-based devices. While
DNA is commonly known as the material that is the blueprint for all life on
earth, as a synthetic material it also offers an extraordinarily dense
information-storage medium and highly parallel computing capabilities. In the
current award, the investigator studies the use of DNA for ultra-high-density
data storage and computing. DNA data files are encapsulated within nanometer-
scale packets to investigate how to enable random-access memory and highly
parallel computation within the same molecular file system. DNA will also be
structured into 2D supra-molecular assemblies to explore spatial patterning for
ultra-dense data storage and retrieval. These data-storage and computing
architectures will be used to mimic neural networks commonly found in
conventional silicon-based computing. Results of this project will lead to
fundamental understanding that will guide next-generation information-storage
and -retrieval systems that far exceed current capabilities of solid-state
devices. Graduate students are being trained in an interdisciplinary manner
integrating computer science, chemistry, and DNA nanotechnology. The
investigator is hosting host under-represented minorities and women from local
and national colleges to help nurture a diverse set of next-generation computer
scientists and engineers. Results of this work are being distributed through
established protocols and open source software tools disseminated
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the present award, DNA nanotechnology and DNA
origami are used for data storage and computing. DNA files are encapsulated
within silica nanoparticles for information encoding and barcoding, offering
both random-access memory and highly parallel computation in solution. In
parallel, 2D DNA origami superstructures are used as self-assembly blocks to
organize and address information stored spatially, with DNA origami serving as
memory blocks labeled with “QR codes” implemented using dyes, nanoparticles, and
quantum dots. Extensive hybridization between single-stranded DNA barcodes and
labels are used in both silica nanoparticles and DNA origami to explore
molecular computing algorithms for associative memory and data sorting.
Associative interaction maps are explored in hybridization space correlated with
associative information. Together, these solution-based and structured 2D DNA
memory systems offer unique opportunities for developing new DNA-based
information storage architectures that mimic neural networks using associative
molecular computation. Results of this award will lead to fundamental principles
of hierarchical DNA-based memory systems for next-generation information storage
and retrieval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.