* 1956200
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Dictionary Attacks on Biometrics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Pawel Korus, New York University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 483,437.00

Biometric authentication, that lets you identify yourself with for example your
fingerprint, your voice, or your face, is a very common authentication mechanism
these days. Most smartphones and a growing number of other devices and systems
feature some form of biometrics. This is partly because they are seen as faster,
easier and sometimes more secure alternatives to passwords. However, recent
studies suggest that the machine learning methods at the core of biometric
authentication systems have serious vulnerabilities. In particular, it is
sometimes possible to use what's called a "dictionary attack", where a set of
existing tokens can be found which together have a high probability of bypassing
the authentication system. In this project, the researchers will study such
attacks on various biometric systems, and also find effective defenses for them.
The project builds on work where the investigators used modern machine learning
approaches to find vulnerabilities in fingerprint and voice authentication. The
methods developed will improve the overall security and reliability of biometric
authentication mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to well-known
spoofing, dictionary attacks do not rely on biometric samples of a targeted
individual, e.g., voice recordings or latent prints, but instead exploit
weaknessess of the specific biometric modality (or its deployment). They allow
targeting of entire populations, and rely on fortuitous matches of common
biometric features. Recent advances in machine learning, and in particular in
generative models such as Generative Adversarial Networks, have made such
attacks possible for biometrics. The goal of this project is to systematically
study the security of biometrics in commonly used unsupervised and mobile
deployments, e.g., in smartphones, home assistants, IoT devices, or voice calls.
The researchers will focus on the newly discovered dictionary attacks on the
fingerprint, voice and face modalities. Investigators will study practical
threat models and propose attack detection and mitigation strategies. The
project will address questions which are focused on understanding this type of
vulnerability and its associated attacks, and how they can best be defended
against:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What are the most practical threat models and
what are the capabilities the attackers need to posess?&lt;br/&gt;- Do the
attack strategies generalize between the modalities?&lt;br/&gt;- Are the
identified "master-examples" universal? Do they transfer between user
populations and authentication systems?&lt;br/&gt;- What is the optimal
mitigation strategy? Is it possible to reliably detect the presented synthetic
content?&lt;br/&gt;- Is it possible to improve the enrollment policy to maximize
security and/or warn the user about higher vulnerability of the enrolled
examples?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.