* 1956389
* Dynamic Charge-Density Waves and Electronic Anomalies of Inorganic Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Vassiliy Lubchenko, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Vassiliy Lubchenko of the University of Houston is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry for theoretical research focused on electronic phenomena in complex,
disordered systems. The astonishing diversity of structures and properties of
solids underlie their use in everyday applications ranging from information
technology to heat storage to metallurgy. Yet making materials with tailored
properties is still somewhat of a trial and error enterprise. It is difficult to
predict how the atoms will arrange in a specific compound, how well this
compound will conduct electricity or respond to an electromagnetic field. The
reason for these predictive difficulties is that quantum-mechanical equations
governing the motion of electrons in atoms (and molecules and materials) are
difficult to solve. Their solution, even if known, are hard to survey. Professor
Lubchenko’s research aims to reduce this complexity by treating electrons not as
separate particles, but as a fluid. In contrast with ordinary liquids, the
electrons can flow even at very low temperatures, as they do in metals.
Lubchenko hypothesizes that slow, wavelike motions of this quantum fluid account
for a puzzling feature of photoemission in sodium and potassium. Experiments
reveal an apparent excess of electrons that should contribute to electric
conduction but, mysteriously, do not do so. The electrons can be forced to stay
put, but only if there is enough pull from the positively charged nuclei. The
electrons thus become localized around the nuclei, while the material becomes an
insulator or semiconductor. Lubchenko and coworkers explore this localized-
electron regime to predict properties of amorphous alloys that may be used in
making the next generation of computer memory and smart optics, among many other
things. A major component of the Lubchenko group's educational and outreach
activities is direct involvement of high school and undergraduate students in
the process of scientific discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much progress has
been recently achieved in rationalizing the structures and electronic spectrum
of simple inorganic compounds whose Born-Oppenheimer vibrational ground state is
unique. There has been much less success understanding the very important class
of solids that exhibits a vast degeneracy of nearly equivalent metastable Born-
Oppenheimer configurations. The microscopic hypothesis of this research is that
multi-electron excitations--such as those giving rise to plasma oscillations at
long wavelengths, can make solids unstable toward the formation of long-lived
charged-density waves (CDW) on short wavelengths. Notably, these density waves
can be aperiodic. If coupled sufficiently strongly to the underlying atomic
lattice, the aperiodic CDWs then lead to the formation of glassy amorphous
semiconductors. Domain walls separating distinct aperiodic low-energy charge
patterns are expected to host special midgap electronic states, which play the
role of electronically active defects. When sufficiently close to each other,
these midgap states contribute to the exponential tail of localized states near
the mobility edge and dominate the electrical conductivity in glassy
semiconductors. In the interesting case of where the CDW-lattice coupling is
intermediate in strength between that found in metallic and intermetallic
compounds, the instability is expected to lead to dynamic disorder so that the
lattice remains ordered but only on the average. If filled, the midgap states
residing on dynamic domain walls could provide a route to high-temperature
superconductivity; no additional effective attraction between electrons is
necessary. To test this hypothesis, Lubchenko and his research group implement a
novel methodology in which one applies carefully chosen spatially varying
external fields to controllably induce aperiodic charge distributions in order
to quantify their stability, degeneracy, and kinetics of their mutual
interconversion. In testing the proposed methodology on alkali metals, they
attempt to resolve a decades old controversy regarding the apparent excess
density of electron states near the Fermi surface revealed by photoemission
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.