* 1956294
* Laplace Eigenfunctions and Unique Continuation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Eugenia Malinnikova, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 297,592.00

The interest in eigenfunctions of the Laplace operator and their zero sets stems
from studies of vibrating membranes. Today, the study of Laplace eigenfunctions
is a fast developing field which lies on the intersection of the theory of
partial differential equations, differential geometry, and spectral theory.
Numerous connections to other areas of mathematics, including algebraic
geometry, ergodic theory and number theory make this field attractive to
researches with various backgrounds. The principal investigator (PI) plans to
continue working on a number of longstanding problems on behavior of Laplace
eigenfunctions on compact manifolds and solutions to elliptic partial
differential equations (PDEs), using local techniques and methods that already
led to a number of interesting results. One of those is called quantitative
unique continuation. The PI's research on quantitative properties of solutions
of elliptic PDEs has numerous applications in other areas of mathematics,
including nodal geometry, geometric measure theory, and mathematical physics. A
number of research problems for current and prospective graduate students are
formulated in the project. The PI is active in disseminating the results
obtained as part of this project through series of lectures and mini-courses.
One of the goals of the project is to support activities that introduce junior
researchers with various backgrounds to the theory of Laplace eigenfunctions.
The PI is committed to encouraging full participation of women, persons with
disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in science, promoting diversity in
academia. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent progress in the understanding of the
behavior of the doubling index of harmonic functions and eigenfunctions of the
Laplace operator led to a proof of Nadirashvili's conjecture and a partial
solution of Yau's conjecture. The PI will continue to collaborate with A.
Logunov on problems related to Yau's conjecture. In particular, they plan to
study the nodal sets of the Dirichlet-Laplace eigenfunctions on domains on
manifolds with smooth Riemannian metric and on surfaces with smooth metric. In
many questions, Laplace eigenfunctions behave as polynomials of a corresponding
power. For example, Donnelly and Fefferman proved that the vanishing order of an
eigenfunction is bounded by a multiple of the square root of the eigenvalue. The
PI and A. Logunov showed that the BMO norm of the logarithm of an eigenfunction
is bounded by the same quantity. The PI will continue to study this analogy; one
of the open problems is to obtain dimension-free Bernstein's inequalities for
eigenfunctions, generalizing results of Donnelly and Fefferman. Local methods
developed to study eigenfunctions are connected to more general problems on the
properties of solutions of second order PDE. The PI plans to continue this
research, first addressing questions of quantitative propagation of smallness
for the gradients of solutions. Another goal of the project is to study the
order of vanishing of solutions to Schrodinger's equation with bounded
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.