* 1956328
* New Methods for Heterocycle Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Carl Lovely, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2024
* USD 383,999.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Carl Lovely, University of Texas-Arlington
to work with undergraduate and graduate students to develop new methods for the
construction of complex organic structures, such as those that might used in
chemical biology or medicinal chemistry studies. In the present research, new
methods and strategies are being invented to allow the assembly of complex
molecular frameworks through tandem reactions in order to increase synthetic
efficiency. Tandem reactions involve the sequencing of two or more chemical
reactions such that the first reaction sets up the second and so on. Such
strategies have potential to increase efficiency by reducing the number of
synthetic steps required in a process, thereby reducing the use of organic
solvent and the number of purification steps required. Plans are outlined to
apply the new methodology to the synthesis of two natural products originally
isolated from marine invertebrates. These natural products are of interest due
to their unusual bicyclic architectures. These challenging target structures
have both inspired the methodology and are seen to have potential for chemical
biology studies Additional benefits which accrue from this project include the
recruitment and participation of under-represented high school, undergraduate
and graduate students. In particular, one project has been specifically designed
with the participation of high school students in mind. In this latter context,
students have the opportunity to do research in organic synthesis that otherwise
would not be available to them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Lovely and his
students develop new methods for the construction of novel heterocyclic
molecules using chemistry known as oxidative dearomatizing spiro-cyclization. In
this research, the dearomatization process is linked with a second chemical
transformation leading to tandem reaction processes. Such sequential
transformations permit the experimentalist to achieve a rapid increase in
molecular complexity in one synthetic operation. Such tactics provide advantages
in terms of synthetic efficiency and reduction in the cost of resources.
Specifically, this work examines the oxidative cyclization of guanidines,
thioureas, and ureas both in terms of the reaction scope but also to provide a
detailed mechanistic understanding of the process. Two natural products have
been identified to test the limits of the proposed chemistry by taking advantage
of the efficiency gains. Both targets are secondary metabolites isolated from
marine invertebrates which have yet to succumb to total synthesis efforts and
may serve as lead compounds in medicinal chemistry investigations. The tandem
reactions being investigated in the course of this work provide rapid access to
the core structural features of these molecules. Broader impacts of this work
include the recruitment and training of the next generation of scientists,
including members of groups that are under-represented in the chemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.