* 1956092
* Regularity, Stability, and Uniqueness Questions for Certain Non-Linear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Vladimir Sverak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 349,482.00

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are at the basis of many mathematical
models used in science and engineering. Examples include the equations for fluid
flows or the equation describing the distribution of stress in various
structures. In practice, the equations are often solved with the use of
computers and a good theoretical understanding of the equations is important for
finding effective algorithms. At present, our theoretical understanding of many
PDEs is incomplete. There is an important difference between linear models (for
which our understanding is better) and non-linear models. In linear models, the
reaction of the system to a disturbance is, roughly speaking, proportional to
the disturbance. In non-linear models, this is not the case, and many of the
mathematical difficulties can be traced to this effect. Linear regimes are often
relevant for small disturbances from equilibria, whereas large disturbances are
often governed by non-linear phenomena. This project will focus on the non-
linear phenomena. In particular, one of the most serious effects in the class of
equations which will be investigated is the formation of singularities and the
related loss of predictive power of the equations. This will be studied in the
context of fundamental equations (such as the equations of incompressible fluid
mechanics) and also for various model equations, which can provide suitable
stepping stones towards making progress on difficult open problems. This project
provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, the project focuses on
the following areas: (i) One-dimensional models exhibiting features of PDEs of
fluid mechanics. These include the De Gregorio model (which can be thought of as
an extension of the Constantin-Lax-Majda model), equations modeling boundary
behavior of 2d systems, and vector-valued Burgers-type equations. In spite of
their simplicity, such models can be a good source of ideas and their improved
understanding can lead to progress on the fundamental equations. In fact, ideas
going back to these models have already proved important in the context of the
full three-dimensional incompressible Euler equations; (ii) Equations arising in
physics and geometry for which we have a satisfactory chance of obtaining a
fairly good understanding. These include the Complex Ginzburg-Landau equation,
the 2d harmonic map heat flow, and some classical non-linear elliptic systems
arising from multi-dimensional variational integrals for vector-valued
functions. (The last theme has connections to non-linear elasticity.) All these
are important equations in their own right and the PI believes that some of the
long-standing open problems related to them can be successfully addressed; (iii)
Approachable aspects of the full equations of the incompressible fluid dynamics
(the Navier-Stokes and Euler equations). This includes investigations of the
solvability of equations describing generalized self-similar singularities,
relations between possible non-uniqueness of the Leray-Hopf solutions and
questions about instabilities, the stability of the double exponential growth
for 2d Euler near the boundaries, and other issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.