* 1956318
* Designing a System for Improved Null Results Tracking: Berkeley, CA - December 2019
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Edward Miguel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 11/30/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides support for a workshop on "Designing a System for Improved
Null Results Tracking," to be held in December 2019 in conjunction with the
Berkeley Initiative for Transparency in the Social Sciences Annual Meeting. The
workshop will focus on the design of a sustainable, integrated, and multi-
stakeholder system for improving the monitoring of and access to outputs from
all funded research. Research projects that yield null findings are less likely
to be published, yet still may serve as a valuable resource to both the public
and the research community. While several mechanisms have begun to emerge to
address this problem, these approaches tend not to be coordinated, and many
institutions lack the capacity to adopt them. This workshop will convene an
interdisciplinary group of research stakeholders to discuss existing and new
approaches for improving the tracking of funded research outputs, with special
consideration for projects that yield null results. The academic community,
policymakers, and the public at large would benefit from more complete access to
research results. Products for the broader community include recordings of live-
streamed presentations, presentation slides, and a report synthesizing the
workshop's proceedings and conclusions.

This workshop will explore integrated approaches for addressing the inter-
related problems of publication bias, questionable research practices, and the
file drawer problem (where unpublished null or unexpected results remain locked
away in researchers' file cabinets) in the social and health sciences. These
problems can lead to incomplete and biased bodies of knowledge. Emphasis will be
placed on striving for simplicity, lowering barriers to uptake of existing and
new approaches, and avoiding high transaction costs for researchers and funders,
as well as on ensuring compatibility with the values of scientific integrity and
public interest. The event will begin with a discussion of design failures in
how science is currently organized in research funding agencies and other
institutions in order to build consensus within the group on priority issues to
be addressed. Subsequent presentations and discussions will center on topics
such as the effectiveness of study registries, the implementation of results
repositories, how the benefits of reporting null results could be increased or
the costs reduced, and strategies for research community monitoring of
unreported results from registered studies. Participants also will deliberate
about how such a system could feasibly be implemented and tested.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.