* 1956032
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Automatic Software Patching against Microarchitectual Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mahmut Kandemir, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Cybersecurity attacks are estimated to cost businesses trillions of dollars in
2019 and microarchitectural attacks are becoming an increasingly important
attack surface. Microarchitectural attacks reveal confidential information by
taking advantage of weaknesses in how hardware manage data to maximize
efficiency. For example, the high-profile Spectre and Meltdown attacks are
microarchitectural attacks that make nearly all modern CPUs exploitable. To
close the root of microarchitectural attacks, new secure hardware designs are
promising in a long term, but they are unlikely to be adopted in any close
future. On the other hand, very few of existing software-based solutions target
Spectre-like attacks or automatically fix vulnerabilities. The project will
develop an application-level toolchain so that the patched applications are
secure on existing commodity operating systems and hardware. The developed
toolchain will significantly strengthen the security of applications currently
vulnerable to microarchitectural attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
investigates an automated approach to detecting and mitigating
microarchitectural attacks for applications running on existing commodity
operating systems and hardware. More specifically, the project leverages novel
language- and compiler-based strategies, which include program analysis
techniques that identify sensitive memory requests and characterize them as a
new concept called differential sets; compiler-level automated patching
techniques for removing differential sets or vulnerabilities when it is possible
to do so; and an end-to-end evaluation of the proposed approach using a variety
of architectures, attack models, and application programs. With these strategies
and techniques, side-channel based microarchitectural attacks can be largely
mitigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.