* 1956367
* RUI: CAS: Nitrate/Nitrite Reduction Utilizing Hemilability and Redox-Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* John Gilbertson, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 261,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry of the National
Science Foundation supports the research project of Professors John Gilbertson
and Timothy Kowalczyk at Western Washington University. Their project focuses on
developing new ways of addressing pollution caused by fertilizers. While
nitrogen-based compounds in fertilizers help crops grow, they can leach into
natural waterways, lakes, and oceans fertilizing blooms of algae that deplete
the oxygen which is required for other plants to live thus causing “dead zones”.
To prevent such dead zones, this research project employes catalysts to remove
these nitrogen-containing fertilizers from the water. The research combines
computer calculations with laboratory experiments to suggest how these compounds
can be converted to less polluting forms. Of particular interest is a new family
of iron-based catalysts that are designed to selectively attack the most
problematic nitrogen compounds, leaving others unaffected. The new catalysts are
being prepared and tested by a team of undergraduate students. This hands-on
training provides the scientific skills necessary for technical careers. The
laboratory training of the undergraduate researchers is complemented by training
in communication and collaboration skills. An extensive set of outreach
activities are included, including the construction of a platform for students
from diverse backgrounds to engage in scientific discussions across multiple
institutional levels. This training facilitates an open dialogue of how research
questions are approached and data interpreted. This work delivers benefits to
the community through its integration with a complementary pair of science and
energy literacy initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxoanions play a vital role as
the building blocks of living systems. For example, nitrite and nitrate are
central to the biogeochemical Nitrogen Cycle. Through human intrusions such as
the overuse of fertilizers, the equilibrium/disequilibrium that has historically
governed this cycle is changing. With support from the Chemical Catalysis
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors John Gilbertson and Timothy
Kowalczyk at Western Washington University are developing catalysts that
integrate hemilability and ligand-based redox activity to study nitrite and
nitrate reduction. By developing a family of modular pyridinediimime (PDI)
ligands with hemilabile Lewis bases and boron-containing Lewis acids in the
secondary coordination sphere, the groups are tuning the sterics, pKa, Acidity
Number, and ligand-based reduction potentials for the production of complexes
that are redox-matched for NOx- reduction. The project supports undergraduate
researchers by providing interdisciplinary scientific and professional
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.