* 1956198
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling Interactions that Drive Water-Osmolyte Interactions in Confinement and Impact Self-Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Bridget Gourley, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 149,857.00

In this collaborative project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms A (CSDM-A) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Nancy
Levinger (Colorado State University) and Bridget Gourley (DePauw University)
along with their research groups are using a combination of magnetic and laser
techniques to shed light on water's dynamical properties when confined in
minuscule structures that are nanometers, or approximately 40 billionths of an
inch, in size. In these minuscule environments, water's molecular behavior does
not match what happens in a glass full of water. Additionally, other molecules
such as sugars, which are often found with water in such tight spaces, radically
influence water’s properties. By creating and characterizing a range of systems,
this work advances the understanding of water's behavior in environments that
are important to processes such as chemical synthesis, environmental
remediation, cellular activity, and beyond. Students involved in this research
program develop expertise at the molecular level while with learning effective
project collaboration skills by working together on an inter-institutional team
of scientists at multiple career stages, undergraduate, graduate, and post-
graduate. To facilitate effective mentoring the project also creates and
assesses a "mentor the mentor" program led by the PIs to guide graduate
researchers as mentors of more novice researchers and thus nurture the
development of the next generation of mentors and scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program employs 1D and 2D NMR along with time-
resolved and steady-state optical spectroscopies to characterize the confined
environments created in reverse micelles and the interactions occurring within
them. Combining data from these tools reveals the interplay of confinement and
water-osmolyte interactions and feed predictive models. Having characterized the
reverse micelle environments that encapsulate osmolytes, results reveal how
these environments affect proton and electron transfer reactions. Additionally,
the project investigates water-osmolyte interactions transitioning from bulk
solution to nanoscopic contexts and explores the impact of osmolytes on reverse
micelle structure, stability, and form. The project seeks to advance knowledge
by developing predictive tools through direct correlation between observed
behaviors and proposed mechanisms to uncover fundamental interactions that exist
in confined aqueous environments. The broader impacts of this experimental
program are two-fold. First, the program provides undergraduate and graduate
students important training in NMR and time-resolved optical spectroscopies as
well as experience working in a multi-institutional collaborative team. The
science reveals details about crowded biological environments where osmolytes
are active and provide predictive models that apply to big ideas like the food,
energy, water nexus, and Rules of Life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.