* 1956395
* Harmonic and Functional Analysis of Wavelet and Frame Expansions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Marcin Bownik, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 210,968.00

This project involves research and education activities in harmonic and
functional analysis concerned with the mathematical theory of multi-dimensional
wavelet and frame expansions. Wavelet and frame theory is not only
mathematically interesting as a subject of study by itself, this area has also
found many applications outside of pure mathematics ranging from applied and
computational harmonic analysis to signal processing and data compression. Some
well-known examples where wavelets are a key tool include the JPEG 2000 digital
image standard and fingerprint compression for data storage. The broader impacts
of this project include education and training of undergraduate and graduate
students in the area of harmonic analysis and
wavelets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to answer some of the most
fundamental questions in wavelet and frame theory. One of the main research
directions of the project is the development of techniques for the construction
of well-localized orthogonal wavelets for large classes of non-isotropic
expanding dilations. A closely related complementary topic is the study of
wavelets for non-expanding dilations. The problem of characterizing dilations
for which there exist minimally supported frequency (MSF) wavelets is connected
to the geometry of numbers; more specifically, to the estimate on the number of
lattice points of dilates of balls. An analogous problem of classifying
dilations for which there exist well-localized wavelets has implications in the
study of non-isotropic function spaces. Another direction of the project is the
construction of frames with certain desired properties, such as prescribed norms
and frame operator. This line of research is closely related to infinite
dimensional generalizations of the Schur-Horn theorem. The problem of
characterizing diagonals of self-adjoint operators not only has implications for
frame theory, it has also been studied extensively in the setting of von Neumann
algebras. Finally, the project involves investigating the breakthrough solution
of the Kadison-Singer problem with the aim of improving its techniques and
obtaining new results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.