* 1956017
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Mining and Leveraging Knowledge Hypercubes for Complex Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Jing Gao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2021
* USD 130,352.00

Knowledge repository refers to a machine-readable structure that stores
knowledge about various entities (e.g., organizations, events, genes), which
facilitates efficient information seeking. In many domains, knowledge varies
with respect to contexts, and a flat structure that is commonly adopted by
existing knowledge repositories cannot capture the complicated knowledge
associated with different contexts. To make knowledge resources more findable,
accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR), this project plans to
conceptualize a new structure, Knowledge Hypercube, for organizing and
retrieving knowledge that could support complex applications in various domains.
A knowledge hybercube organizes knowledge with respect to selected important
dimensions (e.g., time, locations, conditions), and thus it allows people to
easily access knowledge in any context, encapsulate distinctive entities and
facts, and conduct cross-dimensional comparison and inference. This project
impacts how people find and use knowledge, advances knowledge-based data
analytics approaches, and benefits a wide range of domains which have gigantic
literature and unsolved complex tasks by building a bridge between them.
Knowledge hypercubes can also support educational innovation and contributes to
educational tasks such as knowledge tracing. The major objective of this
proposal is to form a paradigm of mining knowledge hybercubes from massive
collection of text documents and leveraging such hybercubes for complex
exploration and prediction tasks. To meet this goal, this project tackles a
series of technical challenges. First, to automatically construct a knowledge
hypercube from massive texts, innovative weakly supervised approaches are
designed to organize text documents based on the hypercube structure, extract
open entity and relationship information and organize cell-specific and cross-
cell knowledge in a multi-dimensional manner. Second, novel refinement
approaches are developed to automatically verify the information quality within
and across cells in knowledge hypercubes by cross-checking within the hypercubes
and with external information. Third, knowledge hypercubes motivate the
development towards new discovery and learning tasks. In particular, the project
introduces an automatic knowledge search pipeline for leveraging knowledge
hypercubes for downstream prediction tasks, and a hypothesis generation approach
for scoring unknown associations between concepts. The planned paradigm is
realized in two specific domains (i.e., biomedical and news events),
demonstrating the power of knowledge hypercubes to enable new insights into
these domains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.