* 1956096
* III: Medium: Table-as-Query: Unifying Data Discovery and Alignment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Renee Miller, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Fueled by advances in information extraction and societal trends that value
institutional openness and transparency, structured data are being produced and
shared at an overwhelming speed. Open data sharing is central to supporting
institutional transparency, but transparency is not achieved if shared data
cannot be found and effectively aligned with other data being studied by data
scientists, journalists, and others. This project will fundamentally contribute
to the new science of open data sharing. The requirements for data discovery and
integration over heterogeneous table repositories containing structured data are
fundamentally different than they are for federated data integration (where for
example, all data within an enterprise is integrated) or data exchange (where
data is exchanged among a small set of autonomous peers, for example, between
two institutions). This project will lay the theoretical foundations of data
discovery (identification, alignment, and integration of tables) within table
repositories. It will contribute both to developing the right conceptual
framework for studying this problem and to designing systems that solve the
table discovery and alignment problems at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today,
solutions for data discovery over massive table repositories are in their
infancy. Some solutions are highly tied to a specific domain. For example,
solutions for finding relevant tables in mass collaboration data (often called
web tables) may assume tables are designed for human consumption with rich,
human-readable attribute names or metadata, and are relatively small (being
designed for display on web pages). Furthermore, solutions often assume that the
data scientists know a lot about what data is available and exactly how they
want to integrate it with known data. These solutions let a user find tables
that join with a specified attribute or union with a query table. But they are
inadequate if the best way to extend a query table is to actually join it on
several attributes with two other tables and then union the extended result with
an existing wider table. This project will develop a more holistic approach to
table discovery that both discovers a set of alignable tables as well as the
best way to integrate (or align) the new data with a query table. In this new
paradigm called "table-as-query", the user does not need to know a priori on
which attributes various tables in a repository are best aligned. This project
promotes a research agenda under which discovery finds not a single table, but a
set of tables that can be combined (aligned) with the query table. The solutions
will include integration choices within the table discovery process, looking for
a set of tables that can best be aligned with a query table and also finding
what the best alignment is. Importantly, the project will not rely on the unique
name assumption, which states that different values refer to different and
unique entities. Real data contains synonyms (two values that refer to the same
entity) and homographs (one value that refers to more than one entity). This
project will define new foundations and mathematical principles for studying
table alignment and discovery. The search space is massive, so the project will
also develop approximate, scalable solutions that can quickly (at interactive
speeds) find a good set of tables and good alignments over massive table
repositories with millions of tables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.