* 1956190
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Panoptes: Next Generation Multi-Perspective Video Delivery at Internet Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ramesh Govindan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The success of streaming video has generated interest in newer forms of multi-
perspective video content, such as those generated by 360-degree cameras, multi-
angle camera arrays, or light-field cameras. The immersive experience provided
by these cameras can enhance user satisfaction in domains including sports,
training (e.g., construction safety), and virtual exploration (e.g., college
walkthroughs, historical sites). With content from these cameras, users do not
just passively consume content, but may interactively traverse the content along
many different paths from a perspective of their choice, with different users
observing different perspectives of the same content. To support this at
Internet-scale is challenging; client players must be able to switch
perspectives with low latency, the perspectives may need to be generated on
demand by video servers, and the infrastructure must support a variety of
devices for capture and consumption of this content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores architectural enhancements, algorithms, and techniques to
deliver multi-perspective video at Internet-scale. It couples delivery
optimization with video coding and human computer interaction. The project will
develop interactivity abstractions by which content publishers can specify the
range of perspectives users are permitted to choose from at each point in the
video. The interactivity specified in a video will (i) drive perspective coding
and novel dynamic perspective generation algorithms; (ii) enable infrastructure
provisioning to meet Content Delivery Network (CDN) storage and cost
constraints; and (iii) will guide adaptive perspective retrieval from CDN
servers or from nearby caches. Finally, the project will explore methods to
predict and guide user behavior to improve delivery quality based on user
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By enabling more responsive and predictable user
experience for multi-perspective video at Internet scale, and by designing
networks that can cope with growth in such video, the project will impact the
media, IT, education, and networking industries. It will convene an Industrial
Advisory Board comprising relevant practitioners and organize workshops to
foster collaborations. The research will not only extensively involve graduate
students, but also undergraduate students from underrepresented communities,
will create new curriculum material, as well as a new undergraduate design
project that involves students ranging from the freshman to senior year with
strong participation from women and underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the project will be available at:
&lt;br/&gt; https://engineering.purdue.edu/~isl/multi-perspective-
video.html&lt;br/&gt;and https://nsl.usc.edu/projects/multi-perspective-
video/&lt;br/&gt;The results will be available throughout the duration of the
project, and for three years after the project ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.