* 1956300
* CAS: Improving the Efficiency of Supported Palladium Catalysts for Methane Complete Combustion Using Monodisperse Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Matteo Cargnello, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Developing catalysts for the complete oxidation of methane is important to avoid
emissions of this powerful greenhouse gas while taking advantage of it as an
energy resource. Recent studies show that removing methane from the atmosphere
could reduce greenhouse gas potential to pre-industrial levels, thus resulting
in atmospheric restoration. Currently, palladium is the best metal to perform
this reaction, but it is not well understood how to improve its activity to make
better use of this expensive metal. In this project, Dr. Cargnello of Stanford
University is developing an understanding of how palladium activates the C-H
bonds in methane and oxidizes it completely to carbon dioxide and water. Using
precisely controlled catalytic materials prepared from colloidal nanocrystals,
Dr. Cargnello is uncovering novel details about the catalytic behavior of
palladium and its optimal utilization. Dr. Cargnello is actively engaged in
efforts to increase diversity in the Stanford School of Engineering through
research experiences with undergraduates, high-school students, and teachers
from diverse backgrounds. These activities, which include trips to high schools
to inform younger students about STEM and chemical engineering opportunities,
have the goal to encourage diverse students to consider careers in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of
the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Cargnello of Stanford University is developing a
fundamental understanding of the chemistry of supported palladium in the
catalytic total methane combustion. Efficient use of palladium catalysts will
help to decrease emissions of this powerful greenhouse gas. Many questions
related to the complex palladium oxidation state chemistry as a function of
reaction conditions, its correlation with support materials, the presence of
promoters, and catalyst stability at high temperature and in the presence of
water remain debated. All these aspects are key to fully understand catalyst
behavior, and to find ways to further increase Pd efficiency and utilization.
The use of precise nanocrystals as building blocks of uniform catalysts is a key
focus in this project in order to identify Pd active phase, oxidation state, and
structure under relevant reaction conditions; understand Pd deactivation; and
how promoting phases change the structure and oxidation state of Pd. The
catalytic studies are supported by collaborative efforts using in-situ and
operando spectroscopy and DFT calculations in collaboration with staff
scientists at SLAC National Laboratory. Dr. Cargnello is actively engaged in
efforts to increase diversity in the School of Engineering and inform younger
generations about STEM and chemical engineering opportunities, to encourage
diverse students to consider a career in the science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.