* 1956123
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: U4U - Taming Uncertainty with Uncertainty-Annotated Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Boris Glavic, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 482,569.00

Uncertainty is prevalent in data analysis, no matter what the size of the data,
the application domain, or type of analysis. Common sources of uncertainty
include missing values, sensor errors, bias, outliers, and many other factors.
Classical deterministic data management does not track uncertainty and, thus
requires data quality issues to be resolved before data is ingested into the
system, which is often not feasible. The net effect is that inherently uncertain
data is being treated as certain. However, if ignored, data uncertainty results
in hard to trace errors, which in turn can have severe real world implications
such as unfounded scientific discoveries, financial damages, or even medical
decisions based on incorrect data. While there exist techniques for managing
incomplete data, these techniques are generally too heavy-weight for real-world
usage and may hide relevant information from users. The goal of this project is
to develop light-weight techniques for managing uncertain data that empower a
wide range of applications to manage uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
methods for managing uncertain data are often computationally expensive and are
only applicable to limited types of queries. The planned research will result in
novel methods for managing uncertain data that bridge the gap between
deterministic and incomplete data management. The foundation of this project are
uncertainty-annotated databases, which enrich data with uncertainty labels and
provide semantics for propagating these labels through queries. The result is a
strict generalization of classical data management that combines the
performance, generality, and ease-of-use of deterministic data management with
the strong correctness guarantees of incomplete database techniques. Achieving
this goal is highly non-trivial, because query evaluation over uncertain data is
intractable, even for relatively simple uncertain data models and restricted
classes of queries. Three main research thrusts will be explored that address
the main challenges in developing such a technique: (i) uncertainty-annotated
databases will be extended with attribute-level annotations and an compact
encoding of an over-approximation of possible answers. This enables the approach
to handle missing data and to deal with non-monotone queries such as queries
with aggregation; (ii) methods to compactly approximating incomplete databases
will be developed to deal with the large or even infinite sets of possible
results produced by queries over uncertain data; (iii) optimized algorithms for
query evaluation over uncertainty-annotated databases will be developed to
address the performance limitations of queries over uncertain data. The planned
work will significantly enhance the state-of-the-art in uncertain data
management by, for the first time, enabling principled uncertainty management
for complex queries at a reasonable cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.