* 1956428
* Excellence in Research - The Impact of Cybersecurity Policies on Employees' Efficiency and Performance Predictability
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Claude Turner, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 592,283.00

This project is to conduct socio-cybersecurity research at a Historically Black
University. The research problem being investigated is how cybersecurity
procedures affect the efficiency of modern organizations. The specific research
questions are: (1) What impact does the implementation of cybersecurity policies
have on employees’ efficiency? and (2) What impact do cybersecurity protocols
within an organization have on the predictability of employees’ responses to
security vulnerabilities? This work is important because increasingly,
cybersecurity is becoming an indelible part of workers’ lives. This modern
workplace reality includes but goes beyond cybersecurity practitioners. Finally,
the socio-cybersecurity project is important because of the relationships that
will be fostered with local organizations within the university’s geographical
research footprint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team uses qualitative in-
depth interviews to gather employees’ opinions about their efficiency and
performance predictability. The interviews are built around a cybersecurity
application that is a simulation of a workplace, which each respondent will
navigate before the in-depth interviews. Multi-site quota sampling is used to
recruit small groups of employees from about several companies across the
Hampton Roads area in Virginia. Content analysis will be used to understand and
disseminate data from the qualitative interviews. Students from organization
courses in sociology, business, and cybersecurity will be recruited to pilot-
test the interview schedule. This project will contribute to the social
organizational theory literature by demonstrating how cybersecurity is both
constrained and shaped by employees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.