* 1956301
* Light Modulation of Charge Transfer-Induced Spin-Transfer Processes in Single Molecules for Quantum Information Science
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Natia Frank, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Natia Frank of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Nevada-Reno is developing chemical complexes that
change color on exposure to light (photochromic). These complexes also exhibit
changes in magnetic properties with light. Functional materials that change
magnetism, color or charge upon application of external stimuli (light, electric
field, or magnetic field) are central to the development of non-volatile memory
technologies for computers, spintronics devices, and sensors for quantum
information science. The materials designed and developed in this research can
be used as "qubits" in Quantum computing, communications, and sensors. In
general, a qubit possesses at least two well-defined states that can be prepared
and addressed independently. Qubits can interact with stimuli to generate an
infinite number of intermediate states leading to exciting new possibilities for
data processing, storage, and sensing at the quantum level. The immediate goal
of this project is the creation of a generalized strategy for molecular qubits
that can be controlled with light under ambient conditions to enable embedded
resistive memory devices and sensors with significantly decreased energy demand.
The research lies at the interface of chemistry, physics, and material science,
providing multidisciplinary training to students in the STEM sciences. The
research project will also serve as a platform for Community Engaged Learning
and the development of modified teaching practices for increasing the success of
diverse groups in the STEM fields. Community-engaged learning activities will
involve research assistantships with structured mentoring activities for middle-
school and high-school students and the development of new teaching strategies
for diverse learners in the undergraduate classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
concept of coupling optically-bistable photochromic ligands to electronically-
bistable metal complexes is a strategy for controlling the electronic structure
and lifetime of optically-gated functional materials. Photochromic spirooxazine
ligands have two electronic states that can be gated optically. When coupled to
an electronically bistable cobalt semiquinone with two ground state electronic
states, a four-state electronic system is generated. This coupling, a
Photoisomerization Induced Spin Charge Excited State (PISCES) process, could
lead to a powerful strategy for optically gating spin states. The electronic
coupling between metal center and photochrome states, however, is complex, and
fundamental studies towards elucidating the primary mechanism of electronic
coupling are central to the expansion of this strategy towards other spin-based
systems. This project will determine the fundamental electronic and structural
factors that govern PISCES processes in a broad class of electronically bistable
metal complexes that can serve as spin-qubits; evaluate the spin dynamics and
decoherence times for optically-gated metal complexes to determine design
principles for this class of spin-based qubits; and determine the effect of
intermolecular interactions on PISCES processes, spin lifetimes and decoherence
in nanostructured thin films and surfaces. The results of this project could
provide fundamental insight into the electronic coupling parameters critical for
the acceleration of low-energy demand sensor and computing applications based on
quantum architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.