* 1956024
* Mechanisms and Application of Dehydro-Diels-Alder Cycloadditions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Kay Brummond, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Kay Brummond at the Department of
Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh. Professor Brummond and her group are
studying dearomative dehydro-Diels-Alder (DDDA) reactions using a combined
experimental and computational approach in collaboration with the group of
Professor Peng Liu. Elucidating details of the bond reorganization that occurs
in these transformations is important so that chemists are better able to
rationally expand the generality of the reaction. This chemistry is also of
great value from an applications standpoint as predictable DDDA chemistry allows
for control of the structural characteristics of the product that underlie the
desirable physical properties of these systems. The findings from these
investigations are being applied to the design of new strategies for preparing
novel compounds of societal importance, in particular, high-performing organic
photovoltaic materials. The collaborative approach is affording the next-
generation of scientific problem-solvers and communicators equipped with a
breadth of experience and chemical expertise to ask the right questions and
provide innovative solutions. Professor Brummond is also combining training and
mentoring of next generation of chemists with a top-down approach to implement
diversity, equity, and inclusivity strategies at the departmental and college
level, to provide a far-reaching and powerful platform for broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The dehydro-Diels–Alder reaction
is a powerful method for preparing highly unsaturated six-membered rings;
however, when these reactions involve the dearomatization of a heteroarene,
harsh conditions and the formation of multiple products compromise their
usefulness. Professor Brummond and her research group are working to improve the
synthetic utility of dearomative dehydro-Diels–Alder (DDDA) reactions by
determining factors that control reactivity and product selectivity for
heteroarenes. Both experimental and computational mechanistic studies are being
performed in tandem to systematically establish electronic and steric trends, as
well as increase computational reliability. Computational studies are being done
in collaboration with the research group of Professor Peng Liu, also at the
University of Pittsburgh. Expansion of the synthetic utility of the DDDA
reaction is also being achieved through the synthesis of novel ladder-type
heteroarene compounds. Convergent methods to design and synthesize high
performing organic photovoltaic materials from these ladder-type conjugated
structures are being developed and will provide valuable alternatives to cross-
coupling approaches. The target selection process is being guided by
computational property predictions performed by an expert in theoretical
modeling and simulation of organo-electronic materials. Professor Brummond is
committed to broadening participation in STEM by increasing diversity, equity,
and inclusivity (DEI) in chemistry specifically and in the natural sciences
using methodology that incorporates both a bottom-up approach, maintaining an
active research group focused on advising and mentoring the next generation of
organic chemists, and a top-down approach, leveraging her position as an
academic leader and associate dean for the Kenneth P. Dietrich School of Arts
and Sciences, to champion evidence-based strategies to change culture, policies,
and practices to close DEI gaps in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.