* 1956431
* Strong Coupling in Microcavities for Enhancing Photostability of High-Performance Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Oksana Ostroverkhova, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,596.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Oksana Ostroverkhova of
Oregon State University is exploring a new route for improving the stability of
carbon-based electronics (organic semiconductors) when they are exposed to
light. Organic semiconductors are of interest due to their low cost and tunable
properties. A broad range of applications, from photovoltaics to three-
dimensional displays, have been demonstrated. Wide commercialization of organic
electronics has been hindered by their relatively low stability when exposed to
common environmental factors such as light and air. In this project, very thin
films of organic semiconductor materials are placed in tiny microcavities, where
they interact with light, creating hybrid light-matter states known as
polaritons. Professor Ostroverkhova and her students are studying the effects of
these polaritons on the speed and outcome of chemical reactions that cause the
organic semiconductors to deteriorate. They are using light-absorption and
theoretical modeling to study how properties of polaritons could be used to slow
down degradation of the organic semiconductor molecules and to promoting self-
healing if degradation does occur. The project integrates fundamental chemistry
and physics with materials design and device technologies and provides
educational resources and infrastructure for students involved in the project.
Graduate and undergraduate students gain experience in the emergent field of
polariton chemistry, and in advanced spectroscopy and numerical modeling
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI carries out a systematic investigation
of how the properties of hybrid light-matter states and of the “dark” states
(due to molecules not coupled to the cavity) control the rates of chemical
reactions responsible for photodegradation and recovery of organic
semiconductors. High-performance organic semiconductor model systems are used to
quantify strong exciton-photon coupling-controlled enhancement of photostability
depending on the photodegradation pathway in non-interacting (“isolated”)
molecules and in molecular aggregates and to establish the feasibility for
cavity-coupled vibrational states to promote reversal of the photodegradation.
The broader impact of this project is in its potential impact on resolving the
stability bottleneck of organic electronic devices and on the development of
polaritonic devices, as well as student training, as mentioned
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.