* 1956071
* Collaborative Research:SHF:Medium:Machine Learning on the Edge for Real-Time Microsecond State Estimation of High-Rate Dynamic Events
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jason Bakos, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2024
* USD 722,248.00

Computer control of dynamic systems from the manufacturing, robotics, and
aviation fields traditionally operate on timescales of 10s or 100s of
milliseconds. For example, an avionics system traveling at 1000 kilometers per
hour and operating at 10 milliseconds per control decision will move three
meters in the time allocated to each control decision. However, emerging
hypersonic, space, and military systems require active control while operating
at extreme velocities or while being subjected to accelerations or decelerations
caused by explosions or high-speed collisions. These applications require
control at timescales on the order of microseconds. Making control decisions for
such systems often requires that the controller estimate the state of the system
from indirect measurements such as vibration. Traditional methods for state
prediction are based on first principles using finite element analysis (FEA),
whose execution time scales as a square of the number of elements. This makes it
impractical to evaluate FEA models at microsecond timescales. Models derived
from machine learning can estimate the state of the system based on pre-curated
datasets and require less workload as compared to an equivalent FEA model. Such
models, when combined with domain-specific processors, could provide equivalent
accuracy with higher throughput than FEA models, making microsecond-scale state
modeling possible. However, there are currently no suitable development
methodologies for systematic generation of machine-learning models at such
extreme performance constraints. The objective of this research is to develop a
structural model compiler that meets a given accuracy constraint, as well as a
corresponding overlay generator on which the generated model meets a given
microsecond-scale latency constraint. This research will advance the fundamental
knowledge and skills required for the real-time decision-making and control of
active structures that experience high-rate dynamic
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two distinct but synergistic
problems: (1) technologies to enable real-time decision-making and control of
active structures that experience dynamic events at the microsecond timescale
and (2) development of tools for optimization and synthesis of domain-specific
processors for trained models. Recent academic and industrial work focusing on
development of specialized architectures for evaluating Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM) models generally yield “one-off” designs tuned to a specific Field
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)--often a server class FPGA--and have rigid,
“baked in” design decisions. This makes it difficult to compare alternative or
competing optimization techniques for a desired target FPGA platform. To solve
this, this project is developing a generalized programmable processor
architecture that incorporates a repertoire of optional features designed to
accelerate specific aspects of LSTMs and support associated model optimizations.
The architecture is both programmable and customizable, allowing it to serve as
a common platform for evaluating different approaches for accelerating LSTM
models. Concurrently, the investigators are developing a set of benchmark
datasets for structural state estimation with accuracy and performance
requirements. The project is also developing useful artifacts for subsequent
research in edge-based machine learning, including a method for comparing
different LSTM model-pruning and compression approaches and comparing different
microarchitecture designs. Code and hardware designs developed from this project
are open-source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.