* 1956170
* Stereoselective Assembly of Oxindole Alkaloid Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Brandon Ashfeld, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2023
* USD 430,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Brandon L. Ashfeld at the University of
Notre Dame. The awarded proposal is focused on the development of new methods
that address critical challenges in the synthesis of complex, high value
molecular targets. The primary objective is to develop a suite of new tools that
enable access to the core molecule scaffolds present in biologically relevant
alkaloid natural products. The overarching strategy focuses on exploiting the
reactivity of a single carbon component attainable from readily available
precursors for accessing a diverse array of related targets. A key aspect of
this proposal is the integration of research findings in the laboratory
introduction of undergraduates and the training of graduate students in
synthetic methods design and development. Undergraduate and graduate students
are more likely to pursue advanced degrees in chemistry and careers in research
and discovery when presented with a target-specific pedagogical approach toward
chemical education. The incorporation of target-based instruction as it pertains
to the molecular assembly of specific chemical functionality, rather than the
traditional reaction-centered lab design prevalent today, is central to the
broader impacts of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the ubiquitous
presence of 5-membered carbocycles and heterocycles in natural products
chemistry and chemical biology, the number of reliable methods for the assembly
of highly substituted rings with flexible site-specific functionalization
capabilities is relatively limited. This project focuses on the development of
new synthetic strategies toward alkaloid frameworks that address several key
long-standing challenges in small molecule construction through the design and
implementation of (4+1)- and (4+3)-cycloadditions. Specific objectives include
the 1) the enantioselective synthesis of the spiropyrrolidine oxindole scaffold
employing a formal (4+1)- cycloaddition; 2) enantioselective formal
(4+3)-cycloaddition synthesis of the cycloheptane oxindole core of the
welwitindolinone alkaloids; and 3) the stereoselective construction of
spirocyclopentenone oxindoles by expanding the architectural diversity of
available vinyl ketenes. Implementation of this design enables access to various
polycyclic scaffolds bearing a central 5- or 7-membered ring. Toward that end,
this project addresses challenges associated with the 1) convergent assembly of
both 5- and 7-membered rings with the flexibility to provide carbo- and
N-heterocyclic frameworks, 2) construction of a key stereogenic carbon with
proximal functionality for subsequent manipulations, and 3) control of relative
and absolute stereochemistry. The prevalence of these ring frameworks in
translationally relevant targets highlights the scientific broader impacts of
this work in chemical biology and therapeutics development. Additionally, the
long-range significance of this study is its impact on C–C and C–N bond assembly
in fields such as process flow chemistry and bioorthogonal reaction development.
The synthetic methods developed form the basis for a cohesive pedagogical
approach to laboratory instruction that will broadly impact STEM education
efforts at all levels. By emphasizing target analysis, rather than reaction
introduction, a cohesiveness between comprehension at the conceptual level and
application to the synthesis of complex molecules is to be
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.