* 1956435
* SaTC: Frontiers: Collaborative: Protecting Personal Data Flow on the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Konstantinos Psounis, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,005,985.00

Personal data collection typically starts on user devices, with the data then
shared with service providers and trackers, obtained by malicious actors, and/or
used for surveillance. The services enabled by this data come at the expense of
privacy, security, transparency, and fairness, for individuals and society as a
whole. Increased public awareness has led to landmark legislation on data
protection, such as the EUâ€™s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the
California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA). Policymakers need to be further informed
by technology, however, to formulate relevant and enforceable policies, and end-
users still need tools to protect themselves. This project seeks to protect
personal information, by improving the transparency and control of data flow on
the Internet, using a multidisciplinary approach that combines methodologies
from computer science (theory, network measurement, security) with policy and
economics, and crosses multiple application domains (web, mobile, and Internet-
of-Things). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conceptual frameworks are developed for
personal information flow on the Internet, as well as systems for monitoring and
mediation. Existing systems are improved for measuring the tracking and
discrimination of personal information, and for explicitly controlling privacy-
utility tradeoffs. To provide long-term privacy-by-design alternatives, the
project pursues verifiable IoT architectures seeking to decentralize the
advertising ecosystem and eliminate intermediaries. The project likewise
leverages technology to inform policy specification and to provide tools to
audit and enforce policies. The broader impacts of the project include: (1)
informing policymakers, nonprofit advocates, and industry players through
interactions with relevant stakeholders; (2) training next-generation graduate
and undergraduate students jointly in technology and policy; and (3) broadening
participation of women, underrepresented minorities, and community college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.