* 1956223
* RUI: Photoacidity in bioactive, natural coumarins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Mark Muyskens, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 220,888.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Mark Muyskens of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Calvin University, and his team of undergraduate
students, are investigating the properties of a broad class of bio-protective
natural substances known as coumarins. Widely found in plants, coumarins have
been shown to have antiviral, antifungal, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and
antibacterial properties, some of which may be linked to their proton donating
ability, more commonly known as acidity, and their interaction with light.
Planned research includes a combination of computational and experimental
studies. The main goal of this project is to measure the acidity of a selected
group of hydroxycoumarins in their electronic ground and excited states. Ground
states are the resting state for a molecule; excited states are produced by
absorption of a photon of light and are short-lived. Some types of coumarins are
photoacids, meaning that they become much stronger acids once they absorb light.
These substances can show pH-dependent fluorescence, a process in which excited
states re-emit a photon of light. The mechanisms by which coumarins react with
light, the structure-property relationships, and the extent to which we can use
computer models to understand and predict coumarin acidity are expected products
of this investigation. Results of this research have the potential to explain
the beneficial role of coumarins in plants, and possibly extend that role also
to humans. Coumarins also have potential applications as biosensors to reveal
what is happening inside living cells. The project is well suited to provide
research opportunities for undergraduate students. Outreach activities to high
school and middle school students, particularly supporting students from groups
underrepresented in chemical fields, are also part of the project activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this project are to measure
the ground state and excited state acidity of a representative group of
hydroxycoumarins. These results will be used to create a structure-activity
relationship between acidity and photoluminescence function of the coumarin. The
project involves a comprehensive study using steady-state and time-resolved
fluorescence techniques to determine the photoacid properties of the selected
coumarins, which comprise three groups: mono-hydroxycoumarins, di-
hydroxycoumarins and coumarins structurally similar to the natural substance
scopoletin. Full characterization of a photoacid involves determining both the
ground state and excited state acidity. A novel aspect of the project is the
approach to determine experimentally the excited state acid properties using
fluorescence spectroscopy. Furthermore, time-resolved fluorescence provides
direct observation of the photodynamics of excited state molecules as well as a
means to determine excited state rate constants for the proton transfer process.
Additional products of this study are the fluorescence quantum yield and excited
state lifetime measurements for the target compounds. The experimental
observations coupled with computational modeling using density functional theory
offer a more thorough understanding of the photoacid and fluorescence
characteristics of coumarins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.