* 1956308
* I-Corps:  Mitigating Scaling in Membrane Distillation used for High-Salinity Wastewater Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2020,09/30/2020
* Shihong Lin, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the improved
capability to manage wastewater. It is crucial to develop technologies that can
reliably and efficiently treat the large volume of high-salinity brine produced
daily around the world; currently, the most common treatment strategies suffer
from high costs and detrimental environmental outcomes. The aim is to identify
technology gaps that motivate the establishment of targeted treatment strategies
leveraging both efficient operational design and sustainable energy sources for
reduced wastewater management costs. Such technology may be commercially
attractive to industrial facilities with regulatory and economic concerns. This
project will work toward the development of commercially viable products that
can sustainably address water scarcity while maintaining satisfactory
environmental stewardship.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project involves
the technological advancement of membrane distillation (MD), a thermal
desalination process with the capability of harnessing low-grade waste heat to
treat hypersaline brine. This advantage has led MD to be actively explored as a
promising technology for brine management and zero-liquid discharge systems.
However, a major challenge is membrane scaling, or mineral crystal
formation/deposition on the membrane surface. Membrane scaling results in
process failure in the form of membrane blockage and/or decreased salt
rejection. A new technology combines superhydrophobic membranes and periodic air
purging, as neither solution is sufficient alone for long-term scaling
mitigation. This project will inform the technology roadmap for advancing MD
toward brine treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.