* 1956161
* CAS: Molecular Catalysts to Control Dinitrogen Reduction and Ammonia Oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Michael Mock, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 475,653.00

The Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the
Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division, both of the National
Science Foundation, support this project led by Professor Michael Mock of
Montana State University. Professor Mock leads an effort to develop fuels that
are derived from nitrogen in the air and ammonia that is produced from that
nitrogen. The overarching goal is to explore new systems for energy storage. The
focus is on the synthesis and analysis of new metal catalysts for the
interconversion of nitrogen gas and ammonia. The new catalysts are based on
ruthenium, nickel, iron, and chromium. Compounds consisting of these metals are
proposed to exhibit novel behavior that facilitates the interconversion of
nitrogen and ammonia. Of specific interest are strategies for the attachment and
removal of hydrogen atoms. One approach involves creating chemical relays that
carry the hydrogen from the metal to the nitrogen. The chemical synthesis of
these relays is a specialty of Professor Mock. In addition to the research,
Professor Mock is developing outreach activities to engage students at area
schools, teaching them about energy technologies. He also is recruiting Native
American undergraduate students from Montana Tribal Colleges to work in his
laboratory. By providing hands-on experience in chemistry and catalysis to
Native Americans, the project is strengthening the technical workforce in the
United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Michael Mock of Montana State
University is leading an effort to develop a nitrogen-based cycle to store
energy in N-H bonds by synthesizing new molecular catalysts for the fundamental
processes involved in the interconversion of dinitrogen (N2) and ammonia (NH3).
The goal of this research is the development of molecular catalytic systems for
N2 reduction and NH3 oxidation with a common strategy of delivery of H-atoms to
N2 and and the removal of H-atoms from NH3 ligands. This project seeks to
understand the reaction mechanisms of these processes by characterizing metal-
NxHy intermediates, and measuring thermodynamic N-H bond strengths to advance
catalyst design. The proposed work on catalytic N2 reduction schemes uses
chemically robust chromium complexes. In the development of NH3 oxidation
catalysts, the use of Ru and Ni-based platforms is advancing the goal of
understanding homolytic N–H bond cleavage and N–N coupling steps en route to N2
formation. In addition to this research, Professor Mock is developing science
outreach activities to engage students at area schools and Tribal Colleges about
alternative forms of energy and new chemical technologies that have a positive
impact on the environment and society. Professor Mock is recruiting Native
American undergraduate students to his lab from Montana Tribal Colleges through
summer internships to gain hands-on experience in chemistry and
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.