* 1956353
* RUI: The Role of Engineered Ligands in Putative Homogeneous Catalysis: Supporting a Homogeneous Catalyst or Modulating Nanoparticle Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Margaret Scheuermann, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 04/30/2024
* USD 230,000.00

Emerging technologies such as the ability to convert carbon dioxide (CO2) into
useful chemicals and the ability to use oxygen from the air as a reagent in
chemical synthesis rely on catalysts that can speed up reaction rates and
control which products are formed (selectivity). Catalysts can change structure
and properties during a chemical reaction. The initial state of the catalyst may
be known however, in general, far less is known about how catalysts might change
over time under working conditions. Professor Margaret Scheuermann of Western
Washington University is identifying and investigating catalysts structure while
the catalyst is working. The team led by Professor Scheuermann is using both
existing and newly developed techniques to characterize the resultant structures
and understand their catalytic properties. The findings are giving insight into
the role and significance of catalyst structure. The undergraduates and masters
level students participating in this project are developing research skills that
they will apply later as members of the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms B (CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Margaret
Scheuermann of Western Washington University is working to identify putative
homogeneous catalytic systems in which nanoparticles are formed, characterize
the particles, and attempt to discern whether the particles are an inactive
decomposition product, a pre-catalyst/off-cycle species, or an active catalyst.
The studies are focused on easily reduced late metals with highly engineered
polydentate ligands that are known precatalysts for biomass deoxygenation, CO2
hydrogenation/formate dehydrogenation, and aerobic oxidation reactions. In
addition to employing established tests for identifying and assessing
nanoparticles in putative homogeneous catalysis, the Scheuermann group is
developing new tests based on centrifugal forces and non-reactive polymers to
gain insight as to whether the observed catalysis is best explained by solution
chemistry (molecular species or small clusters), surfaces (bulk solid or
nanoparticles), or a combination of the two.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.