* 1956095
* CNS Core: Medium: Bringing the Spatial Web to Life
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Srinivasan Seshan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2024
* USD 907,318.00

The future of the Web lies in integration of Web content with the real-world
through technologies such as augmented-reality. This overlay of virtual content
on top of the physical world, called the Spatial Web, holds promise for
dramatically changing many applications. For example, imagine being able to
access an individual’s home page by looking at them, seeing directions from a
mapping application shown overlaid on the actual roads, or seeing control
interfaces for your appliances simply by looking at them. The Spatial Web will
impact applications from navigation, to engineering, education and more.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the vision is promising, the reality is that Spatial
Web applications are currently difficult to create. Early applications such as
Google Maps AR interface are monolithic designs with a single goal. A broad
range of new tools and infrastructure are needed to make the Spatial Web "real"
and to make it easy for developers to create and publish Spatial Web content and
applications. The goal of this project is to develop a coherent architecture for
the Spatial Web. This includes tools and algorithms for each step in the process
of generating a Spatial Web view for the user. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research directly addresses the key challenges associated with creating
Spatial Web applications today. For example, the PIs plan to develop novel
localization and scene understanding tools to help accurately position the user
and the objects in their view. The planned research will look at reducing
deployment costs and accommodating greater heterogeneity in localization
frameworks. The PIs also plan to design a system for spatial content management
to simplify the process of finding relevant spatial content and propagating
content updates to clients. Key challenges the PI address in this lookup system
include scalably handling diverse spatial queries, enabling administrative
control and management of Spatial Web lookups, and providing a low-latency
publish-subscribe interface to enable real-time discovery and update of in-view
Spatial Web content. Finally, the PIs plan to develop content encoding and
transmission protocols that are particularly well-suited to the low-latency
requirements of the Spatial Web. This includes new video codec and video
transmission schemes that are optimized for low-latency interaction, designs for
congestion control protocols that minimize queuing delay in environments with
cross-traffic, and new QoE metrics to evaluate the performance of Spatial Web
content delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.