* 1956023
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: MEDIUM: RUI: Optics Without Borders
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Katherine Hall, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 133,279.00

The Internet is critical to every aspect of life, connecting businesses,
organizations, and people domestically and internationally, providing access to
vast amounts of information, and enabling advanced services like telework,
telehealth and tele-education. Today’s Internet network infrastructure consists
of routers produced by multiple equipment vendors that collaboratively work
together to deliver connectivity between any two points in the world. This
interoperable network architecture is both critical to an efficient, effective
Internet and a factor in enabling the cost-per-bit of information to decrease
even as overall average bandwidth-per-connection has increased dramatically.
However, the currently deployed fiber optic networks that underlie the Internet
do not share this ‘open’ network architecture, requiring expensive equipment at
network boundaries. By extending the open networking approach to the optical
layer so that optical signals can successfully traverse different fiber spans,
networks and equipment vendor domains, it is expected that we can significantly
increase the pace of innovation, decrease costs and improve the nation's
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two
key contributions towards an open optical networking (OON) architecture to
enable seamless optical connections across multiple domains: (a) the definition,
investigation, and experimental validation of new telemetric techniques based on
coherent transceivers, whose objective is to improve the ability of network
controllers to accurately estimate the transmission performance of an optical
signal in a multi-vendor and multi-domain fiber network infrastructure; and (b)
the design, development, validation, and dissemination of an open-source real-
time fiber network infrastructure emulator that takes advantage of the new
telemetric technology to demonstrate the scalability and efficiency of both
existing and newly developed Software Defined Network (SDN) controllers, while
taking into account the interaction across multiple layers (fiber, Ethernet, IP)
and changing characteristics of the fiber network infrastructure due to
mechanical stress, aging, and other relevant factors. The emulator mimics the
behavior of a fiber network and its optical equipment, thus enabling researchers
to conduct experimental work on OON without the burden of acquiring, setting up,
and maintaining expensive optical equipment. It is also useful as a planning
tool for new experimental testbed deployments or connections that span more than
one domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.