* 1956338
* SCISIPBIO: A data-science approach to evaluating the likelihood of fraud and error in published studies
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Luis Amaral, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Scientific literature servers several important roles. Within the sciences it
can inform future research, can pave the way toward new discoveries, and guide
the future plans of individual scientists and how they spend their own time and
careers. Outside of the sciences, scientific literature too serves several
roles, such as informing policies or guiding individual judicial decisions. For
all of these reasons, maintaining the integrity of the scientific literature is
of uttermost importance for scientists, the broad public, and ultimately the
publicâ€™s perception of individual scientific fields. Yet, identifying non-
trustworthy scientific literature even remains difficult for scientists and
editors of scientific journals. This project seeks to identify suspicious
scientific manuscripts before they are publicized, using a data-scientific
approach in which we capture many distinct traits of scientific manuscripts and
their content, as well as information about the authors. The outcome of the
project will include a programmatic and web-based interface that allowed third
parties such as policy makers and scientific journals to scan manuscripts for
signs of scientific fraud and error. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus on the biomedical sciences. The system beneath this interface includes 81
distinct databases that have been aggregated, annotated (e.g., with the chemical
and biological properties of included genes), and linked through publication
metadata (e.g., references, authorship, funding). These data will be matched
with a database on fraudulent and erroneous publications (using retractionwatch
and a manually curated database). Features of fraudulent and non-fraudulent
publications will be conditioned on these databases, with additional features
based on network-properties of genes and authors. The project will employ
distinct machine learning approaches, such as Gradient Boosting and auto-
learners, whose performance will be evaluated out-of-sample. Forth, to improve
interpretability, and better understand scientific fraud and error, and possibly
improve the robustness of models, the project will regularize and simplify the
models to reduce their predictive capabilities to a small set of the
information. Lastly, the project will create a REST-based interface that will
allow the import from custom manuscripts. The proposed work is unique for
conditioning manuscripts on highly distinct properties of manuscripts including
content and world-leading training data. This will provide a data-driven tool
for policy makers and scientific editors to identify suspicious manuscripts
before they enter the published scientific record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.