* 1956229
* CNS Core: Medium: Collaborative Research: Generalized Caching-As-A-Service
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Giri Narasimhan, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2024
* USD 649,131.00

Caching has been a consistent tool of designers of high-performance, scalable
computing systems, but it has been deployed in so many ways that it can be
difficiult to standardize and scale in cloud systems. This project elevates the
use of caching in cloud-scale storage system to a "first-class citizen" by
designing and implementing generalized Caching-as-a-Service (CaaS). CaaS defines
transformative technology along four complementary dimensions. First, it defines
a new abstraction and architecture for storage caches whereby storage stacks can
easily embed lightweight CaaS clients within a distributed compute
infrastructure. Second, CaaS formulates and theoretically analyzes distributed
caching algorithms that operate within the CaaS service such that individual
CaaS server nodes cooperate towards achieving globally optimal caching
decisions. Third, the distributed CaaS clients and servers are co-designed to
achieve strict durability and fault-tolerance in their implementations. And
finally, all of the CaaS advancements are driven by insights generated from a
detailed whole-system simulator that models the diverse cache devices, network
configurations, and application demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CaaS project
supports a broad spectrum of applications that run in the private and public
clouds. The CaaS project showcases these improvements via use cases in three
important computing paradigms: Cloud, Big Data, and Deep Learning. The findings
from the CaaS project create new educational content and research opportunities
for undergraduates, Masters, and PhD students via exposition and involvement of
these student groups within classroom projects and laboratory work. The outreach
activities focus on the recruitment of under-represented students from minority
groups in Computer Science for participation in the project. The outcomes of the
CaaS project include open source software and public dissemination of research
findings which help transition of the new technologies to
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.