* 1956387
* Ultrafast Dynamics of Highly Excited Molecules in the Condensed Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Christopher Elles, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2024
* USD 485,331.00

This project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) program in the Division of Chemistry, supports Professor Christopher
Elles and a group of graduate and undergraduate research students at the
University of Kansas in their quest to better understand, and even control, the
behavior of molecules excited by light. The research uses sophisticated laser
techniques to energize molecules twice in rapid succession in order to cause new
reactions that would not otherwise occur. These experiments reveal new
information about the way in which molecules react in any type of light-
activated reaction. Learning how to control chemical reactions with a sequence
of laser pulses may also enable the development of new materials and
technologies that take advantage of the motions of individual molecules,
including color-changing molecules that can be used as molecular switches or
motors. The project provides advanced technical training for graduate and
undergraduate research students, as well as curriculum development opportunities
for aspiring high school science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
examines the dynamics of molecules excited above the first electronically
excited state. Molecules in these higher-lying states typically have very short
lifetimes that are difficult to probe experimentally, and challenging to
calculate using theory. However, accessing the higher-lying states through
sequential excitation opens new reaction pathways that are not possible via
direct excitation from the equilibrium ground-state geometry. In other words,
allowing a molecule to evolve on one potential energy surface before re-exciting
to a higher state provides an opportunity to selectively control the reaction
path of the molecule. The experimental approach uses a combination of ultrafast
spectroscopy techniques, including three-pulse transient absorption (pump-
repump-probe, PReP) measurements and excited-state resonance Raman scattering
(or femtosecond stimulated Raman scattering, FSRS). The PReP measurements
monitor the evolution of highly excited molecules directly, whereas the FSRS
measurements probe the topology of higher-lying potential energy surfaces based
on mode-specific resonance enhancements of the Raman scattering signal. These
measurements provide important benchmarks for theory, while simultaneously
pushing the limits of experimental ultrafast spectroscopy. The broader impacts
of the work include a deeper understanding of fundamental reaction dynamics,
development of ultrafast spectroscopy methods for probing chemical reactions,
and an educational outreach program that exposes aspiring science teachers to
cutting-edge research topics that they will use to develop classroom
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.