* 1956087
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Reearch: Bio-behavioral data analytics to enable personalized training of veterans for the future workforce
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Sharon Lynn Chu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 89,534.00

This project promotes fair and ethical treatment of veterans in the future job
landscape by providing the empirical knowledge needed to remove implicit bias
and misconceptions against veterans and prepare veterans for obtaining and
maintaining competitive positions in the future workforce. Despite their strong
work ethic and dedication, many veterans in the U.S still face major barriers to
participating in the civilian workforce. After separation from duty, service
members often participate in a week-long transition assistance program that, at
best, can be described as a convenient “one-size-fits-all” solution. Research
studying the limitations of the veteran population in entering this dynamically
changing job market is scarce and does not provide a full understanding of the
challenges faced by the veteran population as well as their train of thought
during the time of the job interview. This project gathers empirical evidence to
understand veterans’ common feelings, thoughts, and potential weaknesses in
social effectiveness skills during the civilian job interviews. The project
further provides a preliminary assistive technology enabled by artificial
intelligence for promoting veterans’ interview skills in a tailored and
inclusive manner, ultimately preparing them for the future workforce and
broadening their participation in fields where they are traditionally
underrepresented, such as computing. In addition to interview training, through
effective partnerships with industry, this work creates educational materials
for promoting unexplored strengths of the veteran population, such as
commitment, reliability, and sense of duty, to the potential employers, thereby
changing the job hiring culture and providing veterans with more opportunities
in the future job landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the
above goals through a collaboration between computational and behavioral
sciences for acquiring new insights into veterans’ experiences during civilian
interviews and designing novel technologies for supporting veterans in this
task. The research work will be carried out with three technical aims. The first
aim is on data collection through focus group discussions and real-life
interviews of veterans with industry representatives to identify challenging
encounters during the interview. Data include behavioral reactions,
physiological reactivity, and subjective assessments of both the interviewer and
interviewee, which are examined in association with the interview setting and
are further triangulated. The second aim will explore quantifiable measures of
interviewees’ moment-to-moment stress based on their vocalizations, visual
expressions, and physiological reactivity. These quantifiable measures are
employed for the preliminary design of training interventions that can assist
veterans on coping with stress during the job interview training. The third aim
will examine the interviewee’s ability to engage with the interviewer. In
particular, the researchers will develop new methods in natural language
processing and affective computing for detecting overly formal conversational
language specific to the military, as well as degradation in social aspects of
the interaction from acoustic and visual cues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.