* 1956274
* Increasing Student Enrollment, Education, and Employment in Chemical Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Tracy Holbrook, Cape Fear Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2024
* USD 470,415.00

Chemical technicians have vital roles in the manufacture and improvement of many
consumer products, ranging from shampoos, cereal, and engine oil, to new
medicines. They work in industrial facilities such as chemical and
pharmaceutical manufacturing plants, environmental laboratories, forensic
chemistry labs, and the food and beverage industry. These technicians are
typically trained in chemical technology programs. Despite the essential roles
of chemical technicians in the national workforce, many people are unaware of
either the career possibilities in chemical technology or the chemical
technology education programs across the nation. This project plans to
strengthen the Colleges’ Associate of Applied Science in Chemical Technology
program so that it is more visible and accessible to students, including
students from groups that are underrepresented in STEM, veterans, and students
with General Education Development credentials. The project also intends to
educate local employers, high school teachers, and high school students about
the chemical technology field and its opportunities. To achieve these goals, the
project plans to develop new partnerships and collaborations, prepare
educational materials and approaches that explain the roles of chemical
technicians in science and society, increase interest in Associate of Applied
Science degrees, and clarify the need for more skilled technical workers.
Expected outcomes include an increase in STEM teacher awareness of the chemical
technology field and educational pathways, a larger number of students who have
experiences in the chemical technology laboratory and its career paths, and
expanded hiring of graduates with Associate of Applied Science in Chemical
Technology graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance the
recruitment efforts of the chemical technology program, to incorporate STEM
teaching practices that maximize student learning in this advanced technology
trade, and to educate the public about this high-demand advanced technology
field. Activities supported by the project will focus on serving potential
students and career influencers, such as teachers, faculty, counselors, and
administrators. Project activities include: (1) implementing a summer STEM
teacher academy to provide educators with experiences in chemical laboratory
sciences and the career possibilities for chemical technology graduates; (2)
hosting an annual high school student academy where students can use advanced
analytical equipment and learn about the chemical technology profession; (3)
establishing a new work-based learning agreement that will allow Cape Fear
Community College’s Chemical Technology laboratory to serve as an on-boarding
facility for employers, thus fast-tracking student employment after graduation;
and (4) hiring a liaison who will focus on student recruitment, student
retention, and employer awareness throughout the state of North Carolina. These
activities are expected to support the project plan of recruitment, enrollment,
employment of students into the chemical technology workforce. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.