* 1956110
* SaTC: CORE: Small: A Practical Approach to Study Security in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Hamid Bahrami, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 532,000.00

With the fast growth of the information technology sector, it is expected that
the security challenges associated with generation, storage and transmission of
data become even more pervasive than before. In the case of data transmission,
this calls for more sophisticated security schemes for the current and future
communication networks. This project will develop a comprehensive framework for
design of cross-layer security schemes that can significantly enhance the
secrecy in communication systems. It fosters collaboration in traditionally
isolated areas of science including communications and networks, cryptography,
information theory and signal processing. The proposed framework will address
the diverse security requirements of future networks and is expected to be of
interest of academic community as well as the industry. Besides these societal
and technical contributions, this project will also integrate research and
education activities by promoting interdisciplinary undergraduate research
opportunities via a number of unique initiatives and enhancing the
undergraduate- and graduate-level course offerings. The education and outreach
activities will additionally broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups and female students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a collaboration of
three experts in wireless communications, network information theory, and signal
processing, the overall objective of the proposed research project is to
investigate the mutual impact of security measures considered in physical and
application layers, leading to a higher level of collaboration and coordination
between these layers to achieve secrecy in communication. The specific aims of
the project include the following: 1) to investigate the interaction between
cryptographic hardness and transmission rate. The impact of error-prone
ciphertext to cryptography and its interaction with physical layer security via
the transmission rate will be investigated. As a result of this study, the
detailed connection between the encryption hardness and transmission rate can be
characterized, and the transmission rate above the secrecy rate can be achieved
when some security guarantees are provided by the encryption; 2) to investigate
efficient encryption-aware physical layer security designs by studying the
impact of the encryption on physical layer security. The fundamental limits on
the transmission rate under the aid of encryption are first studied to optimize
physical layer security. Encryption-aware code designs for secrecy are then
investigated under the aid of wiretap coding when encryption is present to
increase the secrecy, and 3) to investigate the joint design of physical layer
security and encryption schemes by establishing coordination between them. The
extension to wireless networks with multiple users and adversaries will also be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.