* 1956233
* Excellence In Research: Spatial and temporal mechanisms of gene expression regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Robert Meller, Morehouse School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2024
* USD 717,880.00

This project investigates how the expression of genes that are involved in nerve
cell development are controlled by a protein called TRIM2. To enable the brain
cells to develop properly, developmental gene expression in neurons is tightly
regulated as neurons grow. One way that neurons regulate which genes get
expressed is via RNA-binding proteins like TRIM2, which has been discovered only
recently. The experiments in this project will reveal the exact mechanism(s)
that TRIM2 uses to regulate gene expression, taking advantage of novel
technologies based on induced pluripotent stem cells. These techniques allow the
development of specific types of immature neurons to be followed in cell culture
dishes, and facilitate manipulative experiments that will elucidate both the
detailed molecular mechanisms that TRIM2 uses to regulate gene expression, and
what consequences these have for neural function. By addressing these “how”
questions, the scientific understanding of the ways in which nerve cells and
brains develop, as well as identifying potential targets for better controlling
these processes to remediate the effects abnormal development or disease will be
furthered. This research will also offer recruitment and training opportunities
for minority students in the sciences, by providing projects for both
undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Neurons have a
complex structure-function relationship, achieved through a tight spatial and
temporal regulation of gene expression during brain development. Previous work
by the PI suggested that TRIM2, an E3ligase, may also function as an RNA binding
protein that regulates RNA expression and degradation. The mechanism(s) that
TRIM2 uses to bind to neuronal RNA will be characterized in detail, including an
analysis of the key RNA structures targeted by TRIM2, and the regulation of RNA
degradation via the interaction between TRIM2 with Argonaut2 protein
(characterized using an immunoprecipitation approach). TRIM2 binding to RNA will
be measured using RIP-seq methodology, and data will be analyzed using
bioinformatics approaches. The binding of RNAs to TRIM2 will be measured during
neuronal development, and changes to gene expression following TRIM2 depletion
will be determined. These studies will simultaneously measure RNA levels and
TRIM2 binding to RNA at different developmental periods in neurons. Finally,
protein measurements using microscopic imaging and electrophysiological
recordings will be used to document the effects of TRIM2 on neuronal function.
The result of this study will be a comprehensive understanding of how TRIM2
proteins regulate neuronal function and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.