* 1956163
* RI: Medium:  Robust Models and Physical Interactions for Managing Specialty Crops
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* George Kantor, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,199,924.00

This grant supports research into developing robots that can reliably and
robustly interact with plants to assist in the managing and harvesting of
specialty crops. Managing specialty crops, such as fruits and nuts, requires a
considerable amount of dexterity and skill. To maximize yields, these crops need
to be monitored and pruned regularly throughout the year before being harvested.
These tasks are labor intensive and not amenable to automation via the
traditional mechanization methods used for broadacre crops such as corn and
soybeans. An increasing labor shortage is thus threatening the US specialty crop
industry. Intelligent automation presents a promising approach to addressing
this issue, with robots performing the uncomfortable and dangerous farm work.
However, performing such complex tasks quickly and reliably in unstructured
environments is beyond the capabilities of current robots. In this project, a
team of researchers will develop a framework for robots to reliably model and
manipulate specialty crops in a robust manner. New perception algorithms will
allow robots to use vision and touch to identify the different parts of the
plants and their connections. New controllers and planning algorithms will allow
robots to reach deep into the canopies of plants to reliably prune, push aside,
or harvest specific parts of the plants. The developed methods will not only
provide support for automating the farming of specialty crops, but also
techniques for creating more accurate models of these plants for long-term
monitoring and phenotyping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of researchers will
address the challenges of managing and harvesting specialty crops by advancing
the state of the art in modeling and manipulating flexible objects. The
researchers will develop perception and multi-layer modeling techniques to
capture the scenesâ€™ 3D geometry and physical properties. The resulting models
will capture the physical connections within the scenes as well as model the
uncertainty for these high-occlusion environments. The team will create
algorithms for planning and executing safe interactions with the cluttered and
constrained environments. The research will also include the development of
interactive perception methods for improving the scene models based on
experiences from interacting with the specialty crops. Research contributions to
perception, planning, and modeling will all be extensively evaluated on real
robots both in the lab and in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.