* 1956429
* RESEARCH-PGR: Variants and Recombinants without Meiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Luca Comai, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,700,989.00

During tissue culture, plant genomes undergo frequent unexpected changes
resulting in plants with different characteristics, called somaclonal variants.
At lower frequency, similar variants called sports arise during normal growth.
These new variants can have great economic value, but relatively little is known
of the causes, nature and evolutionary significance of these phenomena. This
project will investigate these changes in potato. The methods suitable to
analyze these genomic changes will be applicable to other crops, and will be
made available to the scientific and plant breeding community. Societal impact
is expected along two lines. First, this project will address a largely ignored
potential source of variation likely to affect leading economic species. Second,
the project entails several outreach activities, with two objectives: 1)
Familiarize young students in underrepresented communities with science studies
and careers and 2) Train advanced students and professionals in genomic
approaches applicable to plant breeding. These objectives will be achieved
through a combination of publishing in outreach journals, provision of
international workshops, and production of learning
videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of this project is to understand
the mechanisms and outcomes of genome instability and restructuring. The central
hypothesis is that instability, while often deleterious, can also reshape the
genome in ways that are less disruptive and potentially adaptive, such as by
causing change or loss of heterozygosity, and dosage variation. Elucidating the
causes, mechanisms, and consequences of these changes will help clarify their
role in natural and artificial selection, and inform prediction, identification
and, if appropriate, exploitation of these changes. The work will focus on the
autotetraploid potato genome, in which we have documented extensive genomic
changes in tissue culture regenerated potatoes, ranging from aneuploidy to
indels, extreme rearrangements, but also more subtle changes in heterozygosity
consistent with homologous DNA repair. Analysis of variation in potato suggests
that genome instability varies according to environment and that it can occur
during normal growth. The specific aims are to: i) Characterize the molecular
patterns associated with somaclonal variation in potato. By examining resulting
rearrangements, hypotheses on potential mechanisms, such as homologous vs.
nonhomologous repair of dsDNA breaks, will be tested, ii) Study molecular
patterns associated with differentiation of potato clones. Genomic analysis of
clonally propagated potato will test the hypothesis that somatic homologous
recombination results in variation and, iii) Investigate relation of dsDNA
breaks to loss of heterozygosity. This objective will leverage induced and
spontaneous loss of heterozygosity models to test possible mechanisms of dsDNA
break repair, such as mitotic crossover and break-induced
recombination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.