* 1956313
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Data-Efficient Uncovering of Rare Design Failures for Reliability-Critical Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Peng Li, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 632,900.00

While the proliferation of electronics has been driven by computing and consumer
applications for a long time, integrated circuits (ICs) presently undergo
accelerated integration into healthcare, transportation, robotics, and
autonomous systems. In addition to provision of prescribed functionalities of
sensing, computing, and processing, these ICs must meet stringent reliability
specifications in order to safeguard performance and safety of the whole
mission-critical system where deployed. Circuits designed to be fail-safe by
design exhibit low occurrences of failure. However, having a sign of no failure
under typical verification and test procedures yields no guarantee for meeting a
given near-zero or extremely-low failure specification. On the other hand,
exhaustiveness may never be achieved by brute-force failure detection, which
results in an unacceptably high cost in simulation and testing. This project
will develop efficient machine-learning techniques for extremely-rare circuit-
failure detection without needing large amounts of expensive simulation or test
data. The proposed techniques will enable cost-effective verification and test
of reliability-critical ICs and mission-critical systems in general. The
research undertaken will also enable the two groups at UC Santa Barbara and UT
Dallas to educate and train undergraduate and graduate students, including women
and underrepresented groups, thus expanding the and contributing to the much
needed US technological workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is believed that
extracting critical failure information via machine learning within practical
limits of available measurement or simulation data can go a long way towards
extremely rare failure detection. This project centers on developing an active-
learning framework that intelligently samples in the high-dimensional space of
complex interacting design parameters, manufacturing variations, and operating
conditions, achieving the goal of data-efficient detection of rare circuit
failures. The targeted active-learning framework will be supported by the
development of machine-learning model foundations and robust learning methods
that can scale to high-dimensional parameter spaces. The key objective of this
project is to make extremely-rare failure discovery and identification of the
underlying failure mechanisms practically viable by extracting the maximum
amount of useful information possible from a small amount of available data. The
proposed extremely-rare failure discovery work will be broadly applicable to
verification and failure analysis of analog, mixed-signal, radio-frequency, and
memory circuits with stringent failure specifications and many other types of
mission-critical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.