* 1956015
* CDS&amp;E: Ab Initio Ultrafast Dynamics of Spin, Valley and Charge in Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yuan Ping, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 494,590.00

This grant is being funded by the Condensed-Matter and Materials Theory program
in the Division of Materials Research and by the Chemical Theory, Models, and
Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The promise of quantum computers to perform
calculations beyond the reach of any current or conceivable non-quantum computer
has made them one of the nation's highest research priorities. This award
supports computational research and education on the motion of electrons in
quantum materials. Several recently-discovered materials exhibit the potential
to store quantum information in individual electrons that may hold the key to
the next generation of quantum computers and quantum communication. Realizing
the full potential of these materials requires precise understanding of how long
quantum information can be stored in electron spins and how it disappears
eventually by interacting with the vibrations of atoms in the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop a computational
methodology to simulate quantum electron motion on large supercomputers. They
will use this technique to predict how electron spin changes over times ranging
from femtoseconds to microseconds in several promising materials, such as lead
halide perovskites, containing heavy atoms that couple spin to the movement of
electrons. Electrons in transition-metal dichalcogenides, another alternative
for storing quantum information, can be found in multiple so-called "valleys;"
the investigators will also study how electron valley and electron spin couple.
For each of these materials, they will simulate the interaction of these quantum
states with extremely short laser pulses to interpret experimental measurements
of spin and valley dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will also support
the team's effort in increasing participation and representation of women in
STEM disciplines, especially in the physical sciences. By integrating
simulations into intuitive visualizations using augmented reality, they will
make electron dynamics understandable to undergraduate and high school students.
Finally, this project will strengthen the research infrastructure at UCSC, a
Hispanic Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to predict
quantitatively quantum dynamics of electrons with spin, valley, or other
internal degrees of freedom, entirely from first principles. The research team
will develop a novel computational methodology and associated massively-parallel
open-source software rapidly to evolve density matrices of quantum materials in
a Lindbladian formulation, with ab initio treatment of electron-electron,
electron-phonon, and electron-photon interactions. This will facilitate
calculation of both coherent dynamics and dephasing of spin or valley
polarization, along with their experimental signatures in ultrafast
spectroscopy. Using this technique, they will investigate spin dynamics in
systems with strong spin-orbit coupling and Rashba splitting such as lead halide
perovskites and ferroelectric oxides, and valley dynamics in layered transition
metal dichalcogenides. This fundamentally new predictive capability will
facilitate quantitative analysis of ultrafast optical and free-electron laser
measurements with linear and circular polarization, and accurate predictions of
spin relaxation of quantum materials. This will be critical for the design and
discovery of new material platforms for spintronics, valleytronics and quantum
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will arm the materials
research community with first-principles quantum dynamics methods in open-source
software. These will include a hierarchy of methods that keep track of different
levels of coherence, with corresponding computational requirements ranging from
a small computer cluster to future exascale supercomputers. It will thereby
deliver a key computational technique necessary for predicting coherent and
incoherent ultrafast dynamics in quantum materials, extending significantly
beyond the capabilities of existing first-principles methods. The work funded in
this project responds directly to one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas, the Quantum Leap,
by facilitating quantitative simulation of spin relaxation and carrier dynamics
critical for quantum information science. The educational activities associated
with this project aim to increase participation and representation of women in
STEM disciplines, especially in the physical sciences. It will expand the reach
of materials simulations to K-12 education through the platform of augmented
reality. This project will also strengthen the research infrastructure at UCSC,
a Hispanic Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.