* 1956248
* Assessment of the Performance of the Ground and Facilities at Wellington Port during Three Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Jonathan Bray, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 480,382.00

Ports are critical economic assets and their resilience is necessary for the
security of our Nation. Many ports are in seismically active areas, which could
be damaged and lose operational readiness after an earthquake. Research on
liquefaction effects on ports is vitally important in the U.S. where the effects
of liquefaction like those observed at Wellington Port, New Zealand after the
2016 Kaikoura earthquake could kill people and cripple commerce. As widely used
liquefaction evaluation procedures are largely empirically based, it is crucial
that well-documented, insightful liquefaction case histories be investigated
thoroughly. There remain several important issues to explore such as gravel and
silt liquefaction and their effects on port facilities. The rich Wellington Port
dataset provides an exceptional opportunity to advance the understanding of soil
liquefaction effects, to develop more robust simplified procedures, and to
evaluate the capabilities of advanced models and simulations to discern the
seismic performance of critical port facilities. Wellington Port provides the
opportunity for an integrated study of port facilities at a degree of detail and
level of complexity that could not be performed in the U.S. due to security
restrictions. The similarity of its liquefaction hazards and infrastructure with
those in the U.S. means that the research findings will be directly transferable
to the U.S. Lessons learned will be incorporated in recommendations for
assessing the effects of liquefaction on port facilities built on reclaimed
land. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simplified liquefaction evaluation procedures
provide useful insights, but they cannot explain the different levels of
liquefaction-induced ground and facility damage during the 2016 Kaikoura
earthquake at Wellington Port. The effects of this event and the less damaging
2013 Cook Strait and Lake Grassmere earthquakes warrant further study.
Performance-based earthquake engineering requires analytical tools that can
discern varying levels of seismic performance. These earthquakes, with their
excellent ground motion recordings, their well-documented performance of port
facilities, and subsequent fieldwork to characterize the soil conditions, which
includes gravel that liquefied, provide an exceptional opportunity to advance
understanding. Documenting and learning from field case histories of gravel
liquefaction are especially important, as few of these cases exist. The research
goals are to: a) investigate liquefaction triggering of the Thorndon fill with
up to 70% gravel-size material; b) investigate the lack of liquefaction
manifestation at silty soil sites at the port; c) develop a new probabilistic
method for estimating post-liquefaction volumetric settlement; d) develop and
back-analyze case histories of port facilities undergoing different levels of
liquefaction-induced ground failure; and e) transfer knowledge. These goals are
realized through a research plan that: (1) develops and interprets well-
documented case histories of ground performance for three soil conditions at the
port: gravel fill, silty soil, and sand fill; (2) combines the Portâ€™s lidar data
with other case history data to develop a new probabilistic method for
estimating volumetric reconsolidation ground settlement, which assesses
uncertainty; (3) develops and back-analyzes seven well-documented case histories
of port facility performance to evaluate the importance of soil-structure-
interaction effects for wharves and buildings; and (4) performs outreach
activities and develops guidance. The excellent case histories of ground and
structural performance at Wellington Port provide an exceptional opportunity to
develop new methods that capture the observed differing levels of performance
during the earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.