* 1956386
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: A Theoretical Foundation For Practical Communication with Feedback
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Victoria Kostina, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 412,838.00

Many electronic communication systems are bidirectional: they can transmit
information in both directions. At any given time, however, the system may only
be actively transmitting information in one direction. In this case, the reverse
link, which would otherwise be idle, can be used to facilitate transmission in
the forward direction. While this fact has long been recognized, it is not well
understood how to best employ feedback to maximize the rate and minimize
complexity for the forward link. This project will develop practical schemes
that improve communication system performance by using feedback links and
mathematically characterizing optimal methods for using feedback links. The
improved understanding of how to use feedback should improve wireless
communication technologies for cellular systems and the internet of things. The
project will broaden participation in computing by offering research
opportunities to women undergraduates in electrical engineering, with the goal
of increasing the number of women who attend graduate programs in the field. It
will also develop a publicly-accessible service that provides channels "in the
cloud" for digital communication courses and research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, research in information and coding
theory has focused on idealized communication scenarios with either perfect
feedback or none at all. Many practical systems, however, have feedback links
that are available but imperfect. This project will examine how to best use
communication channels with a limited amount of feedback to achieve fast and
reliable transmission of information. The project will provide clear theoretical
guidance about how much feedback information is useful and how the transmitter
should use feedback most effectively to adapt its encoding strategy. The project
will provide bounds and approximations on the communication rates and delays
achievable with a limited number of feedback transmissions. Leveraging a novel
view of feedback coding as a form of joint source-channel coding, the project
will address open questions concerning the second-order coding rate and
"moderate deviations" performance with feedback. Finally, the project will
explore how to improve delay-reliability tradeoffs achievable with feedback in
the scenario where an information source, such as a sensor, produces information
continuously, by combining the new information with the old information to
encode immediately instead of waiting to buffer long blocks of data to encode
with traditional block codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.