* 8600768
* Implementation and Verification of a Multi-Embayment Model  for Tsunami Generation and Propagation
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1987,04/30/1990
* Gerald Hebenstreit, SAI La Jolla
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 04/30/1990
* USD 116,937.00

This research program will implement and test a numerical finite- difference
model capable of simulating the generation of tsunamis (seismic sea waves) by
submarine earthquakes and the resulting propagation of the waves to and across
coastlines in threatened areas. This model evolved from extensive experience
with two existing numerical models: SURGE which simulates the generation and
propagation of tsunamis onto the continental shelf, and SURGE II, which
simulates the propagation of long waves into shallow coastal waters and, if
approprlate, onto dry land. The extensive data set obtained during the March
l985 tsunami in Chile has been used to test and validate the model. Historical
perspective has shown that most tsunamis pose their greatest threat to coastal
areas within 5-6 hours travel time from the source. Implementation of this model
allows simulations of both historical and potential events to be carried out as
a single, coupled simulation. The model will provide a valuable threat-
assessment tool in areas close to existing seismic gaps in the Pacific. The
principal investigator is recognized for his accomplishments in tsunami
research. He has the capability and institutional facilities available to
successful complete the research program proposed.