* 8603003
* U.S.-Sierra Leone:  Cooperative Research on Molecular       Theories of Solubility
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,08/30/1989
* Witold Brostow, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/30/1989
* USD 1,222.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Witold K. Brostow, Department of
Materials Engineering, Drexel University, to pursue with Dr. Daniel Ate're'
Jonah, Professor, Department of Mathematics, Fourah Bay College, University of
Sierra Leone, for a period of 24 months, a program of research on molecular
theories of solubility. The research will deal with the the statistical
mechanics of solubility of gases in liquids and in amorphous solids, solubility
of solids and liquids in supercritical fluids, and vapor-liquid equilibria of
dilute systems. Professor Jonah has already developed the first version of the
theory of dilute solutions and solubility, while Dr. Brostow has made
experimental observations on vapor-liquid equilibria of highly dilute solutions
and has developed equations for isobaric expansivity and isothermal
compressivity which are required to make the theory usable. The research is
expected to lead to a better understanding of solubility and would be useful in
industry for improving efficiency of separation and purification of materials
and also for better protecting amorphous polymers from the effects of gas
solubility on their properties. This project is relevant to the objectives of
the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in
developing countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
The U.S. and Sierra Leonian collaborators are highly respected scientists with
extensive research experience and productive publication records in the field of
the proposal.