* 8604144
* Theoretical and Experimental Study of Multiplicity Features of Distributed Parameter Chemically Reacting Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1986,11/30/1989
* Dan Luss, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1989
* USD 206,848.00

The proposed work is the logical extension of this PI's previous work on
analyzing multiplicity features in nonlinear chemically reacting systems. His
previous work dealt with lumped parameter systems whereas in this project he is
planning to use recently developed mathematical techniques to look at more
complex distributed parameter problems. Problems associated with steady-state
multiplicity are encountered mainly in catalytic reactors used to carry out
exothermic chemical reactions. The efficient utilization, operation and control
of industrial reactors requires knowledge of all their behavioral features, such
as all the possible steady states. The proposed analysis will provide a
systematic approach to finding all the qualitative features of distributed
parameter systems in which the interaction between the dispersion and chemical
kinetics may lead to multiple steady state. This could guide the experimentalist
in finding new and more profitable states and eneable the rational development
or more reliable and safe control and start-up policies. The methodology
developed in this work will be useful also in other areas in which the
interaction between diffusion and chemical kinetics can lead to steady-state
multiplicity such as combusion, chemical vapor deposition, high performance
ceramic materials and design of corrosion resistant alloys. Many chemical and
physical systems may reach different steady states under the sam operating
conditions. A common feature of all these systems is the occurence of nonlinear
flux-force relations and some feedback (communication) mechanism. The feedback
in chemical systems may be caused by an auto- accelerating or self-inhibitory
reaction step or feedback is due to changes in either the physical properties or
reaction rate with conversion. The main difficulty in analyzing and predicting
the multiplicity features of practical systems, in which several reactions occur
simultaneously, is that the governing equations are highly nonlinear and contain
a very large number of parameters. Thus, it is extremely difficult, and often
practically impossible, to determine the multiplicity features from a parametric
study in the multi-dimensional parameter space, without having suitable
theoretical guidance. These mathematical difficulties have restricted most
studies to limiting cases in which only a single reaction occurs, even though
most practical problems associated with steady-state multiplicity are
encountered in systems in which several reactions occur simultaneously, and are
due to the "taking over" by an unwanted reaction. The theoretical work will
center around modeling intra - as well as interpractical temperature gradients
in individual catalyst pellets (thus introducing distributed parameter analysis)
as well as modeling of the multiplicity features of packed bed tubular reactors.
The experimental work will be used to verify these models. This information will
enable a safer and more reliable design of control and start-up policies. The PI
is one of the leaders in this area and the facilities are excellent. A three
year continuous grant is recommended at $73,340 out of FY 86 $70,537 out of FY
87 funds, and $69,966 out of FY 88 funds.