* 8606388
* Analysis of ULF Pulsation Data from Ground and Satellite    Magnetometers Using a Multiuser Microcomputer System
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1986,11/30/1988
* Mark Engebretson, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Joelee Joyce
* 11/30/1988
* USD 39,600.00

This project provides computer equipment for the analysis of geomagnetic
pulsations observed in magnetometer data from various satellite and ground-based
observatories. The instrumentation will alleviate a significant limitation of
current efforts by providing a small, multiuser computer system compatible with
those currently in wide use in this field. The principal investigator has
collaborated with The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in
analysis of satellite magnetometer data. He is developing ultra-low frequency
(ULF) wave display and analysis software for the magnetometer data from several
operating satellites as well as future missions. Past and current work at
Augsburg College, in collaboration with scientists at several institutions, has
resulted in a variety of contributions to the understanding of ULF pulsations in
the earth's magnetosphere, and contributes to the education and research
experience of undergraduates who later pursue graduate study and/or careers in
science and engineering. The major application of this effort (waveform
analysis) is particularly well suited to undergraduate student research.
Applications include reduction and analysis of data obtained from the South
Pole, and participation in the Space Physics Analysis Network. This project
continues a strong undergraduate research program, increases its productivity,
and enables additional qualified students to participate.