* 8606926
* Coding and Attention in Conditional Discriminations
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Peter Urcuioli, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 11/30/1990
* USD 97,626.00

The ability to discriminate between and to selectively attend to different
stimulus events are fundamental properties of adaptive behavior. The mechanisms
underlying the important processes of attention and discrimination learning are
discovered by studying how animals respond to different stimuli that signal
other, biologically important events. Although external events have typically
been used in research in this area, experimental psychologists have recently
begun to study how internal stimuli or "codes" are also involved in these
processes. In this project, Dr. Urcuioli will examine the role of two types of
internal stimuli in attention and discrimination: the feedback arising from an
animal's own behavior (response codes), and the expectancy of future rewarding
events (expectancy codes). The general procedure for most of the experiments
will be to present animals with one of two possible visual stimuli, followed
shortly thereafter by two different choice alternatives, on each trial. One
alternative will be designated "correct" following one initial stimulus, and the
other alternative will be correct following the remaining initial stimulus.
Response and expectancy codes will be generated by requiring the animals either
to respond differently to the two initial stimuli, or by correlating these
visual events with different outcomes following each choice alternative. Later,
the animals will be tested to determine whether or not their choices are being
cued by the response or expectancy codes and, if so, how their attention to
these internal events affects their attention to the redundant visual stimuli
present at the beginning of each trial. This research project is important to
our understanding of the internal, cognitive processes of non-human animals, and
will provide data relevant to the question of whether or not the mechanisms of
selective attention and discrimination are similar for internal as well as
external stimulus events.