* 8606405
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Heterokaryosis and Nu-   clear-plastid Interactions in Red Algae
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Lynda Goff, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1990
* USD 19,726.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Lynda J. Goff, Associate Professor of
Biology, Crown College, University of California, Santa Cruz, to pursue with Dr.
In Kyu Lee, Associate Professor of Botany, Seoul National University, for a
period of 24 months, a program of research using the red algal model system
Griffithsia to produce heterokaryons to investigate two major problems. The
first investigation will examine the phenotypic effect of varying relative
nuclear numbers of two different genotypes in the products of heterokaryon
fusion. The second will determine if genetically different plastids can coexist
in a common heterokaryon. Heterokaryosis is defined as the coexistence and
coexpression of genetically different nuclei in a common cytoplasm. It occurs in
various fungal groups either upon the fusion of two genetically different nuclei
and the subsequent migration of a nucleus from one cell to another, or by the
spontaneous mutation of one or more nuclei within the cytoplasm of a
multinucleate cell. This project is pioneering research which should have great
significance to an understanding of the genetics of red algae. At present there
is considerable interest in red algae because of their economic potential as
sources of complex carbohydrates such as agar, agarose, and carrageenan. In
addition, the inter- and intraspecific crosses of Griffithsia that will be
undertaken should provide extremely useful information on the speciation that
has occurred within this genus, throughout its Pacific geographic range. Both
collaborators are highly respected scientists who have extensive research
experience and productive publication records in the field of the proposal. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.