* 8608860
* Thermoplastic Matrix Fiber Composite Materials:  A Small    Machine for Die-Less Forming of Large Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1987,04/30/1993
* Alan Miller, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin I. Sewell
* 04/30/1993
* USD 682,333.00

This proposal is to develop a new approach to the manufacture of thermoplastic
matrix continuous-fiber composite materials by means of computer-controlled
rollers which form an initially flat composite laminate into a complex shaped
component. As the flat plate moves through the machine, only that region of the
component which lies within the machine is hot and is being formed; all other
regions are at room temperature and are rigid. Because of this, the envisioned
forming machine can be much smaller than the component it is shaping. This
approach eliminates the use of fixed dies which are employed in the current
manufacture of this material. The proposed research plan includes initial
forming experiments, process model development, sensor and control strategy
development, design and building of a prototype forming machine, and
demonstration trials with the prototype machine. The initial forming experiments
will verify the concept in a bench test setup and will explore roller operation
and control, determine forming limits, gain insight into the appropriate forming
temperature, and gain experience with sensors. The process model will enable the
integration of design and manufacturing for these components and will also be
used for process control. The sensor development work is necessary to assure
proper fiber alignment in the formed component. This new concept could lead to
die-less forming of thermoplastic matrix fiber composite materials which would
reduce costs through lower tooling costs and shorter lead times. Initial
application is expected to be in fabrication of aerospace structures.