* 8609366
* Multitracers to Predict Paleoproductivity in the California Current System from Sediment and Sediment Trap Materials
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1987,09/30/1990
* Robert Collier, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 09/30/1990
* USD 642,029.00

Long-term sediment trap deployment provide an opportunity to examine the
fidelity of deep-sea sediments as recorders of near- surface oceanic processes.
Such studies are important because a fundamental assumption of paleoceanographic
research is that the micropaleontologic and sediment chemistry record can be
used to examine changes in sea surface conditions over long geologic time
scales. The present recommended award will support a multitracer study of the
relation of "imput" and "preservation" in marine sediments. The use of stable
isotope, geochemical, and micropaleontologic criteria should allow an accurate
assessment of differences between deposited sediments and the initial surface
water input. The field phase of the project will deploy an array of sediment
traps in the California Current system which has strong seasonal gradients in
net productivity and surface oceanography. Analyses on the sediment trap
material and surface sediments will be used to develop a set of independent
proxies for net productivity. Components most likely to provide this information
include: biogenous, calcareous, and siliceous microfossils; barite and bio-
limiting trace elements such as copper and zinc; and organic matter and certain
of its nitrogenous compounds including iodine, bromine, and phosphorous. Such
analyses should allow an accurate definition of those signal carriers most
highly correlated to net biologic productivity. The principal investigators are
highly qualified to undertake the field and analysis portion of the project and
have successfully completed previous sediment trap projects. Funding is strongly
recommended at the following levels: FY87 = $224,750; FY88 = $229,615; FY89 =
$201,299.