* 8609356
* Development of a Comprehensive Model of Problem Solving in  Classical Genetics
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Michael Smith, Mercer University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 10/31/1990
* USD 207,848.00

The purpose of this project is to extend an ongoing research program which
seeks to understand the nature of problem solving in classical genetics.
Previous research by the Principal Investigator has demonstrated numerous
distinctions between successful and unsuccessful problem solvers on a variety of
moderately difficult genetics problems. The proposed research will supplement
and extend work with difficult genetics problems. It will also supplement and
extend this data by analyzing the video taped interviews of a broad range of
subjects as they attempt to solve "real-world" genetics problems such as those
requiring the analysis of pedigrees or of non-idealized experimental data. The
problem representation study of Chi, Feltovich, and Glaser (1981) will also be
essentially replicated in an effort to obtain preliminary data regarding
planning. During these studies and an additional longitudinal study of four
subjects, special emphasis will be placed on identifying potential developmental
patterns. Based on these findings, a computer program is to be generated which
will model the genetics problem-solving performance of subjects from a variety
of levels of expertise. This project addresses the Research Program's goals for
advancing the understanding of the development of problem-solving abilities in a
specific subject matter domain (genetics/biology) in a manner that has
significant implications for developing more effective instruction. The
Principal Investigator is a young researcher who is well-qualified to conduct
this research. In carrying out the computer modelling phase of the project, he
will collaborate with Wyllis Bandler, a computer scientist at Florida State
University.