* 8610033
* Thermodynamics of the Kraft Causticizing Reaction
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1986,10/31/1989
* Joseph Genco, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1989
* USD 100,226.00

The causticizing reaction plays a crucial role in the chemical recovery cycle of
the Kraft pulping process used by most of the paper industry. Kraft recovery
operations include concentration of spent pulping liquor, burning to recover
energy and chemicals, smelt formation, smelt dissolution, causticizing, white
liquor clarification, calcium carbonate thickening, and mud washing. This
proposal is part of the PI's work to improve the many aspects of the Kraft
process in an attempt to make it more amenable to control. Improved process
control should decrease capital and operating cost for the process and increase
productivity. Causticizing converts an aqueous solution of sodium carbonate and
sodium sulfide (green liquor) into caustic solution (white liquor) and lime mud
(CaCO (s)). The product caustic solution is used in the digestion process to
delignify wood and other vegetable matter. The objective of the proposed
research is to obtain experimental data and estimate parameters required to
verify a thermodynamic model of the causticizing reaction. The problem is to
determine when equilibrium has been attained and to improve the approach to
equilibrium. The causticizing efficiency is a maximum at equilibrium. Increases
in productivity and decreased operating and captital costs would result if the
causticizing efficiency can be improved. This proposal is aimed at defining an
expression for the equilibrium conversion. The data will be directly applicable
to processing wood and other vegetable matter into pulp by the Kraft and Soda
processes. In addition, the data can be applied to chemical processes wherever
causticizing reactions are used; for example, the production of caustic soda.