* 8611404
* Computational Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/1987,03/31/1991
* Paul Woodward, University of Minnesota Saint Paul
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 03/31/1991
* USD 690,000.00

The Principal Investigator plans to carry out a broad program of basic research
in computational astrophysics to study the dynamics and evolution of galaxies.
The program consists of a major project which has an underlying applied
mathematical framework. This framework consists of a group of very powerful
numerical techniques called piecewise-parabolic methods (PPM) which permit rapid
and accurate solution of partial differential equations on supercomputers. An
essential part of the overall program is the continued development of these
powerful techniques driven by demanding applications on the world's largest and
fastest computers. The research area to which these methods will be applied is
the dynamics and evolution of galaxies. In this area, computer simulations offer
the hope of dealing with the formidable difficulties presented by highly complex
and nonlinear fluid flows. Stellar disks of galaxies are treated as fluids in a
four-dimensional phase space. The goal of the work is to obtain new insights
into the physical phenomena involved. Preliminary results demonstrate the
promise of the proposed computational approach in realizing this goal. The new
methods of calculating using supercomputers will let one make realistic models
of galaxies. The eventual goal is to understand the physical processes taking
place in galaxies. Dr. Woodward is a very capable scientist who has considerable
expertise in using supercomputers. He will work closely with postdoctoral
associates and graduate and undergraduate students in carrying out the research.
New numerical codes and algorithms will be developed. It is important that new
scientists be trained in supercomputer techniques.