* 8611654
* Cooperative Research on Geochemistry of the Klang River     Estuary, Malaysia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Bruce Nelson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1990
* USD 24,752.00

This proposal requests funds for continuation, for a period of 24 months, the
cooperative research by Dr. Bruce W. Nelson, Professor of Environmental
Sciences, University of Virginia, and Dr. Zelina Ibrahim, Department of
Environmental Sciences, Universiti Pertanian Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia, on
the geochemistry of the Klang River estuary, begun under NSF Grant No.
INT8411319. Their study will provide new kinds of information on a tropical
estuarine system and the processes that govern element behavior in estuaries.
The research will include a study of the behavior of silica and trace metals in
the freshwater-saltwater mixing zone. Previous research results show that a
limited range of pollutants is concentrated in the sediments of the estuary. An
attempt will be made to determine if these pollutants are easily incorporated
into the food chain, reach the sea, and are factors in marine pollution. The
role of adsorption and desorption of silica as a function of salinity in the
mixing zone and transport to the sea also will be studied. The U.S. and
Malaysian collaborators are highly respected scientists whose past collaboration
has resulted in a number of publications. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and
their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual benefit.