* 8611953
* Computer Aided Design for Casting and Solidification        Technology (CADCAST)
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* Robert Pehlke, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 11/30/1990
* USD 487,781.00

The overall goal of this proposal is the development of computer aided design
and control methodology for the metal casting process. This proposal continues
previous research which made successful progress towards this overall goal. The
specific objectives of the research in this proposal are to complete the
development of a computer software package to simulate solidification of metal
castings and to improve the utility of the package for control of the process.
The computer simulation package will aid in the design of the casting and of the
casting manufacturing process. New research will investigate the use of acoustic
emission sensing for monitoring and control of the casting process and casting
quality. In addition, experimental data will be developed for use in the
software package, investigation will be made of metal-mold wall dilation for
predicting the relationship between mold pattern geometry and the resulting
casting geometry, and high efficiency computational techniques will be
investigated. The results of the proposed research should provide useful
methodology and software for an important U.S. industry, i.e., the foundry
industry, and should contribute to improve efficiency and quality in castings
manufacturing. The work complements joint research to be conducted at another
university (University of Alabama).