* 8611267
* Dynamic Response of an Axially-Loaded Pile:  A Theoretical  and Experimental Investigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1986,11/30/1989
* Ronald Pak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dianne McCormick
* 11/30/1989
* USD 154,357.00

This research program addresses the dynamic response of a finite deformable pile
embedded in a half space under harmonic axial loading. The problem will be
formulated to yield a Fredholm integral equation of the second kind which can be
solved with suitable Green's functions. The analytical results will be verified
by performing scale model experiments in a centrifuge with overconsolidated clay
and dry cohesionless sand. Because of the needs in the design of structures to
accomodate dynamic loading due to causes other than earthquakes such as wind and
machine loads, detailed knowledge of the structural response is necessary for
both safty and economic reasons. While dynamic analysis of the structure is
reasonably well established, the dynamic interaction between the soil and the
foundation system is still open to question. The centrifuge experimental program
has a potential to provide the necessary data base for the calibration and
translation of the theoretical analysis into direct engineering applications. In
addition, the investigation will provide an opportunity to examine closely the
suitability of various proposed techniques on dynamic centrifuge modeling, which
is still very much in its infancy. The experience gained in this investigation
will reinforce and expand the current knowledge and technology on the
applications of the centrifuge technique to important areas of soil dynamics.