* 8611490
* Large Elastic Deformation of Moderately Thick, Orthotropic  Shells of Revolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1986,08/31/1989
* Larry Taber, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* La Tanya Darby
* 08/31/1989
* USD 195,816.00

This research develops asymptotic solutions to the equations governing
axisymmetric deformation of incompressible shells of revolution including: 1.
Large displacements, 2. Materials non-linearity;3. Transverse shear deformation;
and 4. Polar orthotropy. Boundary layer behavior will be examined for the
specific problems of clamped circular plates, circular cylinders, and spherical
caps composed of materials with rubber-like and biological tissues. The
asymptotic analysis will be validated by developing direct numberical slutions
of the governing equations. Large deformation of axisymmetric shells of
revolution has attracted the attention of the mechanics community in the past 5
years because of the growing importance in the design of low-weight structures
and the potential applications in biomechanics. In many applications, the shell
materials are orthotropic, incompressible and non-linear (i.e. heart, arteries,
reinforced rubber and composite materials). The solution involving shell
displacements and stresses is difficult because of the combined effects of
materials non-linearity, anisotropy and transverse shear deformation. The
constitutive relations to be developed in this study are coupled to accommodate
both bending and stretching which occurs with large deformations and asymmetric
lamination of reinforced materials.