* 8611335
* Non-Gaussian Probability Densities for Nonlinear Systems    Under Random Parametric Excitations:  Experimental Investi- gation
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1986,09/01/1987
* Raouf Ibrahim, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 09/01/1987
* USD 1,965.00

In the discipline of nonlinear mechanics, much is known about the theory of
deterministic systems. Phenomena such as internal resonance and catastrophic
deformation of elastic systems have been demonstrated both theoretically and
experimentally. However, the existence and mechanism of these phenomena in
random vibration have not yet been verified experimentally. This project
conducts a series of experimental investigations to measure the random response
statistics and stability boundaries of a number of dynamical models. In a
previous grant, the PI has developed a non-Gaussian closure scheme for nonlinear
systems under random parametric excitations. In this project, the theoretically
predicted results (from the aforementioned theory) will be compared to the
measured results in order to verify the theory. The models selected for
experiment are a liquid sloshing in a tank, a cantilever beam, and an
autoparametric vibration absorber. These models have received extensive
experimental and analytical investigations under harmonic excitations and are
appropriate models for this project. The proposed experimental work will be very
valuable in providing more insight ot the random behavior of non-linear systems.
The Principal Investigator has been a major contributor to nonlinear dynamics
for several years. He is well-qualified to implement this project. An award is
recommended.