* 8611277
* Equipment Grant for Renovation and Upgrading of the         Earthquake Simulator Capability
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1986,05/31/1990
* Vitelmo Bertero, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/1990
* USD 465,000.00

This award provides funds for an equipment grant to renovate and improve the
capabilities of the earthquake simulator (shaking table) facilities at the
Richmond Station University of California, Berkeley. The simulator was
constructed in 1972, it is one of the largest such facilities in the United
States and has been in use virtually continuously since its construction for
research performed by faculty members at Berkeley and other Universities
throughout the U.S. and by engineers from consulting companies, industrial
corporations and government agencies. It continues to be used on a full-time
basis, but it suffers repeated break-downs and is clearly in serious need of
renovation. In recognition of this need the State of California has recently
allocated $230,000 for renovation of this and related facilities, and this
proposal requests complementary funding from the National Science Foundation to
restore the shaking table facility to a current state-of-the-art capability.
Specifically funds are requested to provide a new and improved control system
for the shaking table, new data acquisition facilities, a micro-wave link
between the data acquisition facilities at the simulator facility and the
computer network on the Berkeley campus and a feasibility study to explore the
possibility of adding an additional component of motion to the table so that
tests can he performed under three-dimensional earthquake shaking conditions.
The earthquake simulator at Berkeley is a major research resource in the U.S.
and is depended on to conduct shaking tests of structural assemblages and
complete systems required to advance the knowledge of earthquake behavior of
structures. It is extremely important to maintain this facility at a state-of-
the-art level of operation. An award is strongly recommended.