* 8611474
* Visible Molecular Lasers - REU Supplement
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1987,06/30/1992
* James Eden, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 06/30/1992
* USD 282,640.00

This research program is a continuation of experimental work in laser physics
supported under NSF grant ECS-8411743. Its goals are the development of new and
efficient sources of tunable coherent radiation in the visible and ultraviolet
spectral regions, and a better understanding of the fundamental processes
occurring in existing and potential new sources. One experiment is designed to
demonstrate an optically-pumped, continuous HgBr, HgI or PbI laser in the
visible. The electrical or optical dissociation of HgBr2, HgI2 or PbI2 would be
followed by optically exciting (with a CW UV laser or an arc lamp) the B state
from the ground state. Measuring the threshold pumping power for this laser and
investigating the use of isotopically-enriched metal-halide salts to enhance the
small-signal gain are two of the primary initial goals of this research. Also
proposed are studies to examine the feasibility of a quasi-CW Iodine Fluoride
(IF) laser pumped by excitation transfer from the lowest metastable state of N2
or CO. Electron beam-produced metastable molecules would be mixed with I2 and F2
in a cylindrical nozzle arrangement and the presence of gain detected with a CW
dye laser. Microwave probing experiments will investigate the limitations posed
by excited state collisions on energy loading of the active medium.