* 8611512
* The Magnetization of Marine Sediments: A Search for Fossil  Biogenic Magnetite
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1990
* Heinz Lowenstam, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 05/31/1990
* USD 114,000.00

In the past two decades, natural remanent magnetization carried by marine
sediments and sedimentary rocks has been used extensively to monitor the history
of the geomagnetic field and to constrain motion of crustal plates. But the
origin of the magnetic minerals contributing to observed remanent magnetization
is only now being resolved. Recent work suggests that crystals of magnetite
precipitated by magnetotactic bacteria and perhaps other magnetotactic
microorganisms contribute a large fraction to magnetization of marine sediments.
Techniques now exist to extract these particles and identify them with
transmission electron microscopy. Intact 'magnetofossil' chains are found in
some DSDP sediments, and other biogenic magnetites have been extracted from
Early Cambrian limestone. Continued study of bacterial magnetofossils may
contribute to a better understanding of the process of fine-particle diagenesis
as well as direct measurements of rock-magnetic effects of interparticle
interaction. Bacterial magnetofossils may also provide an independent method of
measuring the paleointensity of the geomagnetic field as recorded by marine
sediments, and might also be useful indicators of primary magnetic remanence.
Precipitation of magnetite in bacteria appears to be an oxygen-requiring
process, so knowledge of their distribution in time and space may place
constraints on the history of free oxygen at the Earth's surface.