* 8611854
* International Decade of Hazard Reduction:  Planning         Activities--Phase 2
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1986,12/31/1987
* Abram Bernstein, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
* J. Eleonora Sabadell
* 12/31/1987
* USD 20,000.00

This work will serve as the bases on which the development and implementation of
the International Decade of Hazards Reduction will rest. It consists of four
phases, the first of which has already taken place. During the second phase four
main activities will be undertaken: 1. Completing the revision, editing,
publication, and dissemination of the prospetus drafted during Phase I.
Collecting and compiling responses to this document. 2. Initiating a study to
assess the extent of and the reasons for the present worldwide underutilization
of technologies for reducing natural hazards losses. 3. Seeking the input of the
international investment and development communities, and tying them together
with the technical and research communities to better understand the diverse
objectives these organizations pursue in hazards reduction. 4. Organizing an
international workshop to discuss how the International Decade will be organized
and carried out, and how highly targeted research can bring about a worldwide
decrease in losses from geophysical hazards. The phase II of this project will
have a duration of eight months. The P.I.s are highly capable to carry it out,
thus, an award is recommended. 8616067 WEIRICH An integrated, field based
project will be carried out to: a) continuously monitor subaqueous debris and
torpidity flows for temperature, density, velocity and travel distance in a
reservoir environment; b) study flow conversions of debris flows to turbidity
currents, specifically by means of hydraulic jumps, and the role of bottom
geometry in such conversions; c) correlate the characteristics of the flow with
the nature of the sediment deposition/erosion processes, the bottom geometry,
and other parameters governing the transport processes. The work will be
conducted in conjunction with a project jointly funded by the U.S. Forest
Service, the Los Angeles County Fire Department, and the L.A. Flood Control
District, in which oontrolled fires, pollutant and smoke effects, sediment
yields and debris flows emanating from the burned areas are being studied. The
site is the Lodi Canyon and Puddingstone Diversion Reservoir located in the San
Gabriel Mountains near Los Angeles, that has long hydrologic and sediment
records, detailed geologic and geomorphic data available, a single sediment
input source, a reservoir of manageable size, and other convenient
characteristics and conditions. The results from this work will help increase
the accuracy of predictions of the movement patterns and incidence of subaqueous
debris and turbidity flows; the determination of threshold conditions; the
probable travel distance of such events; an assessment of both, the ability of
subaqueous hydraulic jumps to control the deposition of sediments, and the
possible engineered use of these jumps to control the location of sediment
during major flood events. The P.I. is highly capable to carry out this work,
thus, an award is recommended. The grant is for one lump sum and a duration of
two years.