* 8611860
* In-Plane Seismic Resistance of Two-Story Concrete Masonry   Walls with Openings
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Richard Klingner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1991
* USD 187,024.00

Masonry construction comprises a large portion of building construction in the
U.S. and the world. Reinforced masonry construction use is increasing in
moderate to higher seismic zones because of its apparent features of economy,
fire safety, architectural flexibility and ease of construction. The present
state of masonry structural analysis and design and materials construction
technologies does not enable an accurate prediction of building behavior under
lateral loads such as seismic loads. In the U.S., masonry buildings are designed
and built with methods, codes and standards that rely upon a mixture of working
stress methods, empirical rules, and questionable methods for determining
allowable stress values. Masonry is also a complex building material because of
the large number of design and construction variable which influence the final
product configuration and its response under seismic loads. In order to describe
the seismic response of masonry buildings it is necessary to develop the
fundamental knowledge base to determine basic design methodologies consistent
with safety and economic requirements. This research will investigate the in-
plane seismic resistance of two- story concrete masonry walls with openings. The
research project forms a transition between in-plane investigations on single-
story panels and investigations on three-story walls and on a five-story
structure. The investigation will consider the effect of floor-wall joints, the
effect of wall openings, and the effect of floor elements. The project is
primarily experimental where the specimens will be constructed in the laboratory
and tested under combinations of vertical and in-plane lateral loads. The
results will be used as input to establish material limit state design
methodologies to resist seismic loadings. The principal investigator is highly
qualified to conduct this research project and institution provides excellent
facilities. An award is recommended for the first year of this two-year research
project. This research project will be coordinated with the U.S.-Japan
Coordinated Program for Masonry Building Research and the Technical Coordinated
Committee for Masonry Research Program (TCCMAR).