* 8612987
* Quantitative Studies of Bacterial Chemotaxis:  Relationship to Cell Growth Optimization and Metabolic Preferences
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Douglas Lauffenburger, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 01/31/1991
* USD 357,401.00

Bacteria in natural habitats are continually changing environmental conditions.
In order to maximize their growth and survival, they need to optimize the
metabolic response to these varying conditions. Their primary behavioral
responses are to modify their own metabolism and to change their location by
migration. Migration is the quickest mode of response available to them.
Chemotaxis, or the biased movement of cells in the direction of a chemical
gradient favorable to their survival, is a phenomena found to be ubiquitous
among a variety of motile bacteria. Basic scientific understanding of the
biochemical mechanisms underlying chemotaxis has increased tremendously over the
past two decades. However, the implications of chemotaxis for applications of
biotechnological importance have largely been neglected. The PIs propose a set
of combined experimental and theoretical studies intended to address two major
questions relevant to microbial population behavior in biological and
biotechnological applications. l.) How does the chemotactic response to nutrient
attractants change as cell growth conditions are varied, and how is this related
to optimization of cell growth in a non-mixed environment? 2.) What is the net
cell movement response to multiple, perhaps conflicting, chemotactic stimuli,
and how does this depend on cell metabolic preferences? The experimental work
will include measurements of bacterial motility using two quantitative assays of
the PIs' own design. The theoretical work will involve analysis of the effects
of the experimentally observed chemotactic responses on population growth.
Fundamental insights gained from these investigation may have implications on a
number of important areas, such as microbial population dynamics in non-mixed
systems, cell separations, biosensor and the monitoring of cell metabolic
states. The PIs are considered to be extremely well qualified to carry out the
proposed research and I recommend that this proposal be funded for three years
in accordance with the adjusted revised budget submitted with this proposal.