* 8612969
* Protein Engineering Beta-Lactamases as Affinity Ligands
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1987,07/31/1990
* Henry Yee-Neen Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 07/31/1990
* USD 206,685.00

The overall objective of the proposed research is to develop an alternative
whole fermentation broth bioseparation scheme based on immobilized affinity
adsorbents. Beba-lactam antibiotics (e.g penicillin) have been chosen as model
bioproducts representing small molecular weight compounds. The overall objective
can be divided into the following specific objectives: l.) To protein engineer
and design specific affinity ligands such as beta-lactamases for non-destructive
but reversible binding of beta- lactam antibiotics. 2.) To evaluate the
feasibility of using various protein-engineered ligands to separate the chosen
bioproducts and to develop the selection criteria. 3.) To examine the effect of
various bead design parameters and reactor configurations of the bioproduct
adsorption using immobilized affinity adsorbent beads. This is a joint US-Japan
collaborative research project between the University of Michigan and Osaka
University. Genetic engineering is to be carried out at Osaka and process
engineering is to be carried on at the University of Michigan. The investigators
will travel to the other laboratories once a year in order to coordinate and
cross-fertilize the research efforts. This proposal requests funds for the US
efforts. The Japanese part is to be funded by an appropriate agency in Japan.
The investigators are considered to be capable of carrying out the proposed
research. This proposal also meets NSF objectives for international cooperation
and proposed objectives for cross-disciplinary research of the Biotechnology
Program. I, therefore, recommend that this proposal be funded for two years in
accordance with the submitted budget.