* 8612605
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Fundamental Solutions ofthe Nonlinear Conservation Laws of Oil Reservoir Simulation (Applied Mathematics)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* James Glimm, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1989
* USD 24,000.00

Professor James Glimm and a group of U.S. researchers will conduct cooperative
research with a group of Brazilian researchers under the leadership of Professor
Dan Marchesin of the Pontificia Universidade Catolica of Rio de Janeiro. The
investigators plan to pursue two basic scientific goals: to understand the
nature of the fundamental solutions for the nonlinear partial differential
equations representing conservation laws; and to devise an algorithm for the
construction of these fundamental solutions and implement it as a computer
program for systems with two dependent variables. This program will be used to
perform highly accurate simulations of fluid flow in enhanced oil recovery. To
optimize the recovery of hydrocarbons under several exploitation schemes, oil
reservoir engineers use computer simulation to model the recovery process. The
reservoir flow is described by a system of partial differential equations
governing flow through a porous medium. Different phases or components of the
fluid lead to discontinuities and numerical simulation of these flows often
involves the solution of a system of conservation laws. At present there does
not exist a body of theory or of numerical methods for solutions of these so-
called Riemann problems in the large, and it is this need that the investigators
plan to address. The collaborators have made substantial contributions to
solving the Riemann problem for many systems of conservation laws and utilizing
the solutions in applications. The theory and the computer programs to be
developed in this joint work have broad potential application to gas dynamics,
to combustion theory, to elastic and visco-elastic solids, and to high energy
physics and astrophysics -- in fact, to any physical situation described by
nonlinear conservation laws.