* 8612866
* Studies of Electrogenerative Processes of Promise
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1986,09/30/1990
* S Langer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/1990
* USD 257,760.00

The goal of the proposed research is to investigate electrogenerative processes
for use in pollution control and synthetic chemical production form non-
petroleum feedstocks. The PI plans to study: (1) Electrogenerative reduction of
nitric oxide in concentrated and dilute gas streams under a variety of
conditions; also the reduction of 2-methyl-2-nitro-1 propanol in an aqueous
electrolyte. (2) The oxidation of ethanol and related compounds both in the gas
phase and dissolved in liquid electrolytes. (3) The use of electrochemical
methods to study nitric oxide reduction in the presence of special adsorbates.
Some aspects of kinetics in operating cells and catalysis associated with the
processes proposed here. The operation of electrogenerative cells of improved
design together with the incorporation of experimental packed bed electrodes
into electrogenerative systems. Interest in electrogenerative nitric oxide
reduction stems from two important possibilities. One is that there appear to be
a number of factors indicating that electrogenerative reduction of nitric oxide
could be developed to replace the present industrial heterogeneous catalytic
process in preparing hydroxylamine; another is that selective electrogenerative
reduction or a related electrochemical process might be developed to become
suitable for removal of NOx from the tail gas of nitric acid production or
effluents from stationary power plants. Since more than 5,000,000 tons of NOx
(mostly NO originally) are produced in stationary power plants in the United
States each year the possibilities for making chemicals through reduction of
oxides of nitrogen are impressive. The nitrogen oxides originate from nitrogen
compounds in the fuel feed or the reaction of nitrogen and oxygen at elevated
temperatures to form NO. Fuel pre- treatment to remove nitrogen compounds is
common while controlled burning minimizes nitric oxide formation in combustion
and limits the temperatures of combustion. The development of an electrochemical
means for removing NOx from effluents and recovering a significant portion of
the nitrogenous material as useful chemicals could alter the view and procedures
in power plant combustion. One possibility for pollution abatement with respect
to NOx then would be controlled removal of sulfur dioxide at some stage without
restricting NOx formation during combustion at power plants, followed by
effluent feed to a selective electrochemical cell where NOx could be reduced and
removed.