* 8612783
* Partial Support:  Building Research Board Study on Science  and Technology to Meet the Challenge of International Com-  petition in the Construction Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1987,02/28/1989
* John Eberhard, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
* William Hakala
* 02/28/1989
* USD 50,000.00

The construction industry is America's largest industry. Currently it performs
more than $300 million of work per year ard employs 5.5 million workers. These
workers combined with the suppliers of materials, machinery, insurance, and
designs account for 17 percent of the work force. Construction has comprised 55
to 65 percent of the nation's capital investment. The U.S. construction industry
has suffered setbacks abroad. International construction markets have shrunk and
U.S. share in those smaller markets has decreased. At the same time the U.S.
construction industry suffers from severe under investment in research and
technology development, with an estimated investment of only .39% of gross
receipts, much below those of other U.S. industries, and substantially less than
the construction industry of those countries with which we might be expected to
compete. In discussion with the NationaI Academy of Engineering (NAE) there has
developed a suggestion that the Building Research Board (BRB) organize and
conduct a study of science and technology opportunities for the U.S.
construction industry to meet the challenge of foreign competition at home and
abroad. In the spirit of the NAE Technological Leadership Program, the proposed
study will parallel a number of previous studies organized by the NAE on U.S.
industry competition--involving automobiles, electronics, steel, textiles,
machine tools, pharmaceuticals, civil aviation manufacturing. A committee of
approximately 15 leaders in the construction field will be established,
representing academic, industry and government participants in decision-making
positions. The committee, which will meet four times in the course fo the first
year will be supported by BRB staff and consultants in preparation of their
report, which will include recommendations for industrial response, and for
university research activity. Funds are also provided for by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, the International Development Cooperation Agency, the National
Academy of Engineering and the BRB Advanced Building Technology Council. An
award for partial support is recommended.