* 8612920
* Vapor Absorption of Semivolatile Organic Compounds to Atmospheric Particulate Matter
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Terry Bidleman, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 07/31/1990
* USD 190,200.00

To evaluate the sources, sinks, chemistry, and transport of organic compounds in
the troposphere, one must define the distribution of several manmade and natural
compounds between the gaseous and condensed phases. Currently there is little
quantitative information available about the phase distribution of semivolatile
organic compounds present in the atmosphere. The vapor/particle distribution of
compounds has an important influence on their atmospheric lifetimes and the
chemical reactions they undergo. Direct measurement of the phase distribution of
semivolatile compounds in the atmosphere is a challenging analytical problem
that requires additional research. In this project the distribution of
semivolatile organic compounds (SOC) between the vapor phase and atmospheric
particulate matter is to be determined through field and laboratory experiments.
The objectives of this study are to: (1) determine the partitioning behavior of
different classes of semi-volatile compounds; (2) test the hypothesis that the
SOC liquid-phase vapor pressure largely controls adsorption to atmospheric
particular matter; (3) investigate the influence of SOC molecular shape on
adsorption; and (4) distinguish "exchangeable" and "non-exchangeable" SOC on
particles. High volume air samples are to be collected in summer and winter
using a glass fiber filter backed up by an adsorbent trap. Samples will be
analyzed by chromatographic procedures. Vapor-particle partition coefficients
are to be calculated from the SOC concentrations on the adsorbent trap and
filter and the total suspended particle concentration. Field and laboratory
estimates of heats of adsorption will be made. Estimates of the "non-
exchangeable" fraction of SOC will be made by analyzing filters after stripping
with SOC-free air.