* 8612476
* Response of Reinforced Masonry Building Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Daniel Abrams, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1990
* USD 206,852.00

Masonry construction comprises a large portion of building construction in the
U.S. and the world. Reinforced masonry construction use is increasing in
moderate to higher seismic zones because of its apparent features of economy,
fire safety, architectural flexibility and ease of construction. The present
state of masonry structural analysis and design, and materials and construction
technologies does not enable an accurate prediction of building behavior under
lateral loads such as seismic loads. In the U.S., masonry buildings are designed
and built with methods, codes and standards that rely upon a mixture of working
stress methods, empirical rules, and questionable methods for determining
allowable stress values. Masonry is also a complex building material because of
the large number of design and construction variables which influenoe the final
product configuration and its response under seismic loads. In order to describe
the seismic response of masonry buildings it is necessary to develop the
fundamental knowledge base to determine basic design methodologies consistent
with safety and economic requirements. This research project will investigate
the dynamic response of a reinforced masonry building system with a known force-
deflection hysteresis. It will focus on the interdependence of the softening of
reinforced concrete masonry structures and the sequence of destructive
earthquake motions. Three identical test structures will be fabricated at one-
quarter scale, and subjected to static and dynamic lateral forces. Numerical
procedures will be used to help interpret measurements. The results of this
research project will be used to assess the use of scale models for predicting
the behavior of full scale reinforced masonry structures by making comparisons
with previous full scale research results. This will influence the design
practice. The principal investigator is highly qualified to conduct the work and
the institution provides excellent support facilities. An award is recommended
for the first year of this two-year complete research project.