* 8613867
* Cretaceous Volcanic Sequences and Jurassic(?) Crust in the  Western Pacific:  A Seismic Reflection Study
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1987,09/30/1991
* Roger Larson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 09/30/1991
* USD 203,627.00

This project is a field and laboratory study of the geologic history, tectonics
and structure of the oldest part of the Pacific seafloor. The field program in
the west central Pacific Ocean is using multichannel seismic techniques to
determine the depth and nature of the deep crustal layers. The relationship of
the original bedrock to an overlying sequence of Cretaceous volcanic strata is
being resolved. The Cretaceous volcanic strata have masked the deep layers in
previous studies, however, this project will use a powerful tuned source array
and a 96-channel seismic streamer to penetrate to the basement. Modern data
processing techniques will reveal the stratigraphic and structural relationships
in the Nauru, Central-Pacific and Mariana Basins. The nature and extent of the
deep-water Cretaceous volcanic complexes and the relationship to the surrounding
island, atolls and guyots of similar age will be determined. The study is
providing regional data for a potential ODP drilling leg in the early 1990's and
is being coordinated with a second field program by French scientists. The two
projects will meet all requirements for the drilling program to evaluate
specific drilling locations. Dr. T. Shipley (Univ. Texas) and Dr. R. Larson
(Univ. Rhode Island) are collaborating on this study. Together they form a very
strong research team with expertise in all aspects of the work. This includes
field operations, seismic data analysis and regional geologic interpretations.