* 8613324
* Measurement of Helium Isotopes and Tritium in the South     Atlantic Ventilation Experiment (PROJECT SAVE)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1987,06/30/1992
* William Jenkins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/1992
* USD 1,172,003.00

Two campaigns to measure transient tracers in the Atlantic Ocean (TTO/NAS and
TTO/Equatorial) were funded by NSF during the period from 1980 to 1985. A
complete data base for modelling this ocean basin would include a South Atlantic
Study to: 1.Determine CO2 transports and their influence on world climate,
2.Constrain models of major ocean currents in this area, and 3.Confirm an
observed 5-fold increase in the addition rate of new carbon to the thermocline.
Eight components of such a study (SAVE) will be performed by investigators from
LDGO, Princeton, University of Washington, WHOI, and SIO. The track record of
these scientists is well established by successful completion of previous
studies in the Equatorial and North Atlantic. They will provide physical and
chemical expertise which will be directed toward a cooperative effort to reach
the goals of the geochemical study. This component has the objective of
providing large-scale distributions of He-3 and H-3 to assess ventilation
mechanisms in the South Atlantic. About 2400 samples will be collected from
surface, thermocline, intermediate, and bottom waters with highest sampling
intensity in the upper layers. Dating of water masses from H-3/He-3 ratios will
be made and interpreted along with other hydrographic and anthropogenic data
from SAVE.