* 8613298
* A Knowledge Engineering Approach to Analysis and Evaluation of Vertical Construction Schedules
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1987,06/15/1987
* C. William Ibbs, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* William Hakala
* 06/15/1987
* USD 49,765.00

Computerized project management systems are widely acknowledged as deficient
planning aids. Specifically, their inability to collect and interpret
qualitative and subjective project data requires construction managers to
interpret such information largely unassisted. Research in the field of
Artificial Intelligence, which has been proven to be successful in many other
fields, holds promise for providing such assistance in construction schedule
analysis. The proposed knowledge engineering research project will extract,
formalized, articulate (1) empirical and judgmental knowledge about construction
network analysis and (2) traditional project management theory to develop a
prototype intelligent assistant. This research advances the state-of-the-art by
formalizing an amorphous mass of construction knowledge and by automating some
of the tasks that senior project managers now know how to do well. The
methodology utilized is stepwise simple and aimed at first and foremost
extracting knowledge. The methodology also dispenses measureable milestones to
provide a way to verify progess. While the results of this research will
indicate that many of routine, and tedious operations can be automated, the
principal goal is to establish that knowledge-based decision- support systems
can allow project managers to become pro-active rather than re-active. The
investigator has a strong background in project planning and control and the
research team is geared to conduct the work. The budget is appropriate and the
institutional resources are appropriate. An award is recommended for the first
year of a two-year grant.