* 8613484
* Design for the Operability and Controllability of Chemical  Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Warren Seider, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/1991
* USD 434,800.00

In most chemical process designs, the designer begins by analyzing simple
structures using approximate models. Gradually as the design evolves, more
detailed models are used to explain more complex interactions which can make the
difference in the success of a design. These complex phenomena are often the
reason that a new design has the potential to be more effective; for example,
more energy or more cost efficient. However, models of more complex interactions
usually have a richer solution space; that is, they exhibit more solutions for a
given set of specifications. The number and stability of the solutions varies
with the specifications and with the parameters of the model. In process design,
problems can arise when algorithms converge on a solution that is not physically
correct. In the design stage, experimental data often are not available and the
designer may continue to work based on a wrong solution. The Principal
Investigator proposes to create a prototype software environment to permit
experimentation with the design of control structures for complex systems. The
PI will develop new techniques for solving both steady state and dynamic
simulation problems to demonstrate the utility of these techniques in the design
of chemical processes. Emphasis will be placed on the analytical and algorithmic
methods that rationalize the design process.