* 8613322
* Oceanic Uptake of Carbon Dioxide and its Transport          via the South Atlantic Ventilation
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1987,06/30/1992
* Taro Takahashi, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing grant
* Nicholas F. Anderson
* 06/30/1992
* USD 706,470.00

Two campaigns to measure transient tracers in the Atlantic Ocean (TTO/NAS and
TTO/Equatorial) were funded by NSF during the period from 1980 to 1985. A
complete data base for modelling this ocean basin would include a South Atlantic
Study to: 1.Determine CO2 transports and their influence on world climate,
2.Constrain models of major ocean currents in this area, and 3.Confirm an
observed 5-fold increase in the addition rate of new carbon to the thermocline.
Eight components of such a study will be performed by investigators from LDGO,
Princeton, University of Washington, WHOI, and SIO. The track record of these
scientists is well established by successful completion of previous studies in
the Equatorial and North Atlantic. They will provide physical and chemical
expertise which will be directed toward a cooperative effort to reach the goals
of the geochemical study. This component is aimed at improving our understanding
of the dynamic transport of CO2 by Antarctic water masses formed in zones of
different climates. Previous investigations showed that a prominent circumpolar
CO2 sink zone is located in a latitudinal range of 40 degrees S - 50 degrees S,
and that it is closely associated with the zone of confluence of the warm
Subtropical water with the cold Subantarctic water. This zone accounts for about
40% of the global oceanic uptake flux for CO2. The low pCO2 values in the
surface water of this zone are attributed mainly to the effect of cooling of the
warm Subtropical gyre waters and to the mixing of the cooled water with the
high-pCO. and high-nutrient Antarctic waters. Photosynthetic utilization of CO2
further reduces the surface water pCO2 value. In the vicinity of this confluence
zone, an effective overturning of the water column down to about 500 meters is
induced mainly by cooling of the high-salinity Subtropical waters. This process
would transport the CO2 taken up by the surface water of this CO2 sink zone into
the South Atlantic thermocline. One of the major objectives of the proposed
investigation is to estimate the rate of this transport using the tracer and CO2
data obtained during the experiment.