* 8613053
* High Speed High Power Milling
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1987,03/31/1989
* Jiri Tlusty, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* K. (Cheena) Srinivasan
* 03/31/1989
* USD 392,750.00

This proposal is to conduct research on high speed high power milling (HSHP
Milling) in the following three interrelated parts: Sensing of Milling Cutter
Breakage, Dynamics of HSHP Milling, and Design of HSHP Spindles. This proposal
is based on recommendations resulting from a prior NSF grant. In the part on
Sensing of Milling Cutter Breakage the algorithm developed and tested in the
prior grant will be used which is based on sampling of the cutting force,
synchronized with the cutter teeth and generating first differences of averages
per tooth. Breakage is clearly recognized by this method and the breakage is
distinguished from changes due to milling transients like entry into a cut. In
the current proposal an accelerometer signal will be used to reconstruct the
force through simulation and reverse transfer across the spindle dynamics. This
indirect force measurement approach is necessary because the cutter tooth
frequency in high speed milling is beyond the dynamic response capability of
direct force measuring dynamometers. In the part on Dynamics of HSHP Milling the
procedures developed in the prior grant and aimed at determining the most
dynamically stable spindle speed will be automated in the current proposal by
means of sensors and calibration cuts so that the optimum speed for various
operations and tools will be automatically adjusted. In the part on Design of
HSHP Spindles research on damping in pairs of angular contact bearings will be
conducted in order to include this important aspect in the optimization of
spindle dynamics. The proposed research is necessary for the development of HSHP
milling into a practical process. Solutions to the three problems being
addressed are not available, these being cutter breakage detection, automatic
adjustment to the most stable speed, and design of dynamically rigid high speed
high power spindles. HSHP milling has application to milling of industrial
components where large amounts of metal has to be removed, for example pocketing
operations on aircraft structural panels, face milling of steel parts in Army
arsenals, and milling of cast iron stamping dies for automotive parts.