* 8613492
* Increasing Roll Life for Steel Rolling Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1987,03/31/1989
* Ampere Tseng, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 03/31/1989
* USD 67,340.00

This proposal is to study the cooling systems used in hot steel mills with the
goal of improving productivity of the steel rolling process by increasing roll
life and by reducing coolant consumption. The research consists of an
experimental portion to obtain reliable heat transfer coefficient values and a
modeling portion to simulate the heating, cooling and mechanical response of
rolls during the rolling process. An instrumented apparatus has been developed
which resembles the cooling systems used in steel mills and will be employed to
accurately measure the heat transfer characteristics of various roll-cooling
designs. This experimentally determined heat transfer coefficient data will be
utilized for input to the numerical simulation portion of this research. The
proposed study will provide a basic understanding of the influence of roll
cooling on the resulting thermal and mechanical responses of the rolls and seek
alternative cooling designs which reduce roll wear or spalling caused by the
thermal fatigue stress. The results could be used to develop cooling design
guidelines to increase roll life and to reduce coolant consumption. Results of
this research could lead to improved productivity in steel rolling processes and
should contribute fundamental information on the basic heat transfer mechanisms.
The investigator is well qualified to perform this work successfully, having
worked extensively in this research area.