* 8613432
* Research Conference Proposal:  "Foundations of Computer     Aided Process Operations" July 5-10, 1987 - Park City, Utah
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1987,12/31/1987
* Gintaras Reklaitis, Cache Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/1987
* USD 25,100.00

The present status of the chemical process industries indicates that rather than
build many new chemical plants in the near future, more attention will be
focused on the operation, improvement, and modification of existing plants, many
of them of older design and of a multiproduct and/or batch nature. The stimuli
for such growing concerns with operational issues are numerous and include: 1.
heightened international competition for traditional markets resulting in
increased emphasis on product cost and quality; 2. the availability of low cost
computer technology, communications networks, and electronic instrumentation; 3.
rapid progress in new methodologies such as expert systems, robotics, database
techniques, and sophisticated man-machine interfaces; 4. the well-publicized
efforts towards automation and computerized planning and operation in the
discrete parts manufacturing industries. 5. recent international focus on safe
operation of manufacturing facilities, especially those handling or processing
hazardous materials. However, in spite of the rising prominence of plant
operations as a subject for discussion and management concern, computer aided
plant operation has not yet been given a high level of attention by the chemical
engineering research community, either in industry or in academia. The academic
training of chemical engineers continues to emphasize design at the almost toatl
exclusion of operations. The purpose of this conference is to redress this
situation by providing a forum for an in-depth review of the problems and needs
in this new area of chemical engineering research and application and to thus
stimulate research activity and encourage the introduction of operations issues
in academic programs. This conference will be the first research conference
focused specifically on the applications of computers and computer technology to
chemical process operations. The attendees will meet for one week to assess the
current status and future directions of computer integrated process operations.
The overall plan is a program arranged into eight themes: process data
acquisition and interfaces, process safety, operations planning, maintenance
planning, process simulation, process optimization, plant networks and data
bases, and expert systems in plant operations.