* 8613299
* Simplified Implementation of Digital Signal Processors Basedon Delta Modulation Encoding
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1987,09/30/1990
* F. Hill, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/1990
* USD 122,477.00

This research continues an investigation in the area of new unconventional
structures for digital signal processing. Instead of a conventional analog-to-
digital converter, which produces a sampled signal output, the present research
considers using the output of a delta modulator. While the sample rate must be
increased considerably, digital filtering can then be performed without any
multiplications, which has the potential to simplify the implementation in VLSI
hardware and also lower chip-area requirements. Previous work of the
investigators has been concerned with FIR structures. This work is concerned
with IIR filters and adaptive filters which are designed based on the new
approach. The investigators are exploring the relation of their work to the
sigma-delta modulator studied in A/D conversion and the variety of processor
implementations that can result as the decimation rate is varied in that
approach. This grant continues on-going research concerned with novel approaches
to digital signal processing. The digital filters that are the concern of this
research have wide application in military, consumer, and medical equipment. The
filters are both fixed and adaptive and are generally used to separate out
desired signals from undesired signals and noise. This research is concerned
with the simplifications of the algorithmic requirements on the VLSI hardware
that are possible when a novel high-speed analog sampling is performed.