* 8613509
* Probability Design of Diaphragms and Intercomponent Connection Systems in Light Frame Wood Buildings
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1987,08/31/1990
* Rafik Itani, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/1990
* USD 126,886.00

Although more light-frame wood buildings are erected in the United States than
any other type of construction, their design is oversimplified and does not
reflect modern developments in structural analysis and wood science. The
proposed research is aimed at developing both a prototype of methodology for a
probability-based design and the data needed for application of the methodology
to typical (baseline) diaphragms, bending components, and connections among
components. The research plan calls for using the probability density functions
for material and joint properties to simulate samples of systems of components
and component connections. The simulated systems will be analyzed to obtain the
parameters limiting performance, such as ultimate load and critical deflections.
Thus, sets of probability density functions will be generated that can be
compared to external loading spectra for assessing the probability of exceeding
design limits. Results will be incorporated into the design methodology
developed as another task of the proposed research. The data will be useful in
calibrating the code for future wood building systems. The methodology will be
presented in a form ready for evaluation by practicing engineers and builders.
The research to be conducted is a cooperative effort of research teams at Oregon
State University (OSU) and Washington State University (WSU). The principal
investigators of the two teams have a history of successful cooperation in the
past four years and are currently coordinating parallel investigations that were
awarded as cooperative projects by the National Science Foundation.