* 8613314
* Design Sensitivity Analysis and Optimization of Nonlinear   Response of Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Jasbir Arora, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 01/31/1990
* USD 188,997.00

Problem of design sensitivity analysis and optimization of nonlinear response of
structures has become quite important in practical applications. When large
displacements, rotations and strains are included in the formulation, a more
accurate response of the structure is predicted. This can lead to substantially
different optimal designs, as shown by optimizing small scale structural design
problems. In some cases, optimum design obtained with linear structural analysis
capability can be dangerous, if the structure becomes geometrically nonlinear.
Catastrophic failure of the structure can occur. In other cases, the structure
may be overdesigned without consideration of geometric nonlinearities because it
may actually become stiffer with the inclusion of large displacement effects.
Design sensitivity analysis is a necessary step towards optimization. Research
to develop theory and numerical algorithms for design sensitivity analysis and
optimization of nonlinear response is proposed. Full range of nonlinearities
geometric as well as material will be considered. Static as well as dynamic
response applications will be considered. Large displacement, rotation and
strain formulations will be used. Linear and nonlinear material models will be
included. Formulation of the optimal design problem with nonlinear response will
be developed, i.e., particular attention will be paid to incorporate the yield
conditions and nonlinear buckling load constraints. Design sensitivity analysis
to include unloading of the system (history dependent respones) will be
developed. Possible discontinuities in gradients will be investigated. Theory of
design sensitivity analysis of nonlinear buckling load will be developed.
Computational algorithms will be developed and integrated into available modern
optimization methods. They will be demonstrated on a set of carefully selected
structural design problems. The methods of design sensitivity analysis developed
in the research can be used in the existing nonlinear analysis computer
programs. Potential areas of application include: building systems, earthquake-
resistant structures, automotive structures, and aircraft and aerospace
structures.