* 8613483
* A Workshop on Advanced Comfort Systems for the Work         Environment in Building, Spring of l988, Troy, N.Y.
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Walter Kroner, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* William Hakala
* 02/28/1989
* USD 39,738.00

Advance Comfort Systems (ACS) are technologies which can dynamically respond to
climate fluctuations and occupant variations with purpose of providing quantum
improvements in environmental qualities, human productivity, and whole building
performance. Of particular interest are intelligent envelope systems and task
comfort systems including materials, controls, and technological developments
related to advance comfort systems. Many researchers from a broad range of
disciplines related to comfort technologies and advanced comfort systems have
been isolated from each other and lack a common data base and a forum for
interchange. A two day workshop on "Advanced Comfort Systems for the Work
Enviromment in Buildings" is proposed. The workshop is planned for the Spring of
1988, and its major goal is to provide a forum in which national and
international leaders in advanced comfort systems can present, demonstrate and
discuss these early developments and results, and also to formulate a
comprehensive research agenda. The specific objectives are: (1) To establish a
broad understanding of the theories and practices of advanced comfort systems
and their interrelationship; (2) to further converge these diverse fields of
research and fragmented date base; (3) to develop an inclusive approach to
research and the potential affect of such advanced systems on the construction
industry and the occupants in the work environment; (4) to develop a public
agenda for research issues and priorities in this area; and, (5) to formulate a
strategy for continuum interchange and research implementation. The workshop
will be organized by Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's Center for Architectural
Research and School of Engineering in collaboration with an interdisciplinary
group of research and practice- based professionals actively concerned with
major advances and innovations in building comfort systems. Leaders from
industry, universities, and research laboratories from the U.S., Japan, and
Europe will be invited to the workshop. A comprehensive workshop report will he
prepared for appropriate distribution. The Principal Investigator has had direct
experience in both the proposed research area and in organizing and sponsoring
conferences. The institutional support is very appropriate and the budget is
modest for effort. An award is recommended.