* 8613981
* 13C and 15N Natural Abundance in Southern Ocean Biota: An   Investigation of Biogeochemistry and Trophic Structure
* O/D,OPP
* 03/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Greg Rau, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 02/28/1991
* USD 190,000.00

The analysis of stable isotope ratios in organisms and in the environment is an
important method for investigating the structure of food webs and the nature of
biogeochemical pathways. Plankton in the Southern Ocean adjacent to Antarctica
have the lowest 13C/12C ratios yet found for pelagic organisms. Despite some
previous research this depletion of 13C in Antarctic plankton has not been
satisfactorily explained. The answer to this question is important because this
isotopic anomaly is an unambiguous indication that carbon biogeochemistry in the
Southern Ocean must in some way be markedly different from the rest of the
present ocean. The 13C depletion in Antarctic plankton could also have a direct
bearing on the paleoceanographic interpretation of similar depletions found in
the marine sedimentary record. Rau and his collaborators propose to measure
13C/12C and 15N/14N ratios in biota and particulate organic matter in the
southern Atlantic Ocean, Drake Passage, Scotia Sea and Weddell Sea. The carbon
isotopic measurements will address the problems mentioned above; the nitrogen
isotopic measurements will provide further information on the nature of the food
web and will facilitate the testing of hypotheses concerning the causes of the
variations in isotopic abundances. The results of this project will directly
complement the work of other scientists in the ongoing Antarctic Marine
Ecosystem Research in the Ice Edge Zone (AMERIEZ) project and address an area of
research recommended for special attention by the Polar Research Board.