* 8613208
* Application of Mathematical Programming Concepts to         Structural System Reliability
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1987,07/31/1989
* Ross Corotis, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Ken Chong
* 07/31/1989
* USD 165,004.00

The research is to explore, adapt, and demonstrate the use of mathematical
programming techniques for structural system reliability assessment - involving
kinematic model search techniques, generalized multiparameter loading,
extensions of basic approach, and characterization of polyhedral hypersurfaces.
This project utilizes the analogy between structural analysis and mathematical
programming in computing structural system reliability. Primary consideration is
given to ductile frames with plastic collapse mechanisms, allowing extensive use
of linear programming techniques. The kinematic approach to structural limit
analysis has been shown previously to be expressible in a linear programming
format, a feature that has been ueed for identifying the critical mode of
failure. This research extends these concepts through the application of
powerful mathematical programming techniques to the system reliabilities, and
the combined system safety. The primal/dual linear programming analogy is
applied to analyze structural systems by the static, or kinematic duality
approach. Multiobjective programming is also investigated for generalized
multiparameter loading. This research opens a new direction in the reliability
analysis of seletively large structural systems. It can provide a practical tool
for the probabilistic analysis of complex structures and the development of
probability-based design criteria. Results of the work will be of importance in
all branches of structural design includig buildings, bridges, offshore
platforms, reactors and ships.