* 8613707
* Japan-United States Cooperative Study of the Relationship   Between Sediment Physical Properties and Subduction         Processes in the Nankai Trough
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1987,09/30/1989
* Eduard Douze, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 09/30/1989
* USD 178,678.00

This project is a field and laboratory study of the relationship between the
sediment physical properties and subduction processes in the Nankai trough in
the western Pacific. The study is providing important new data on the processes
that control the formation of geological structures in the sediments of active
continent margins. The primary technique for the field program is advanced
multichannel seismic reflection data acquisition including expanding spread
profiles that require two ship operations. The R/V MOORE of the University of
Texas will be used together with the R/V TANSEA MASU of Japan. The data will be
jointly analyzed and define variations in physical properties with time and
increasing deformation of the sediments. The project will also provide the
detailed control needed to site a future ODP drilling deep hole for calibration
of the seismic data and direct measurements of the geology and fluid content of
the sediments. Dr. G. Moore (Univ. Tulsa) and Dr. T. Shipley (Univ. Texas) are
collaborating on this study with the Japanese. Together with Dr. D. Karig
(Cornell) and their co-investigators, they form a very strong research team with
experience in all components of the work. This includes field operations,
seismic data analysis, continental margin geology and tectonics, and physical
property measurements.