* 8613129
* Modeling Lightly Congested Queuing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Carlos Daganzo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 12/31/1988
* USD 59,345.00

In many industries there are situations which require a storage or a lining up
of vehicles or people before an action can be taken. An example, is the
processing of customers or goods at various locations and in different
industries, in order to reduce costs and congestion. This project will
investigate the development of a mathematical model for lightly congested
systems, using ports as a case study. Because of the complexity of the concept,
approximations will be investigated analytically and with computer simulations.
The researcher is qualified to perform this research activity. The project is
recommended for an award. This is a one time award for twelve months. 8660297
STEWART The aging and subsequent deterioration of concrete structures is
becoming a major concern for governmental agencies and private owners of these
types of structures. The question of whether to strengthen or demolish is of
prime economic importance. In order to determine the in- situ strength of the
concrete, nondestructive evaluation equipment is required. Currently, there is
no reliable equipment which can determine the strength of individual structural
members of concrete. This project will investigate the possibilities of using a
sonic wave spectral analysis method to evaluate the strength of the concrete.
The benefits to be derived from a successful completion of this investigation
are: enabling engineers to provide better advice to owners on whether to
rehabilitate or demolish a building or bridge; allowing accurate evaluation of
the strength properties of pre-cast components produced from a manufacturing
process; and identifying the state of deterioration for a determination of the
remaining life of the structure. This award is Phase I of the 1986 Small
Business Innovation Research Program.