* 8613440
* Effects of Cyclic Fatigue Loading on Partially Prestressed  Beams - Phase 2
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Antoine Naaman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/28/1990
* USD 176,328.00

This is the second of a two-part research investigation of the behavior and
modeling of partially prestressed concrete beams subjected to cyclic fatigue
loading. Partially prestressed beams are defined here as concrete beams
reinforced with a combination of prestressed and non- prestressed reinforcement,
designed to allow cracking under full service load (dead plus live load). The
following aspects of fatigue will be investigated: the fatigue life of the
members, cracking and crack width increases under fatigue, and deflection and
deflection increases with the number of cycles of loading. The first phase of
the research dealt with rectangular sections tested under constant amplitude
fatigue loading. The second phase deals with T sections under variable amplitude
fatigue loading simulating real live loads on bridges. The research comprises an
experimental and an analytical program. The experimental variables include three
levels of reinforcement and, for each, four levels of partial prestressing which
include the two boundaries of full reinforcing and full prestressing. The total
experimental program and the measurements to be recorded are designed to provide
a comprehensive data base on cracking deflections, and their increases with
cyclic fatigue loading. The analytical program to predict crack widths and
deflections under fatigue is designed to generate rational models that remain
valid at the boundaries, represented by fully reinforced and fully prestressed
concrete.