* 8613584
* Procedures and Categories in a Theory of Social Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Eliot Smith, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 11/30/1990
* USD 171,083.00

Approaching Social Cognition (ASC) is a new theory of social cognition
concerning the social knowledge and cognitive processes that people use to
understand and act in the social world. The theory is based on the framework of
J. R. Anderson's ACT theory of memory and cognitive processes, but includes a
number of extensions, including moods and emotions, our attitudes, opinions, and
preferences, how we come to know other people as well as ourselves, and how we
produce social behavior. This research includes six experiments that will test
and extend various aspects of the theory . Three studies will investigate
processes of social cognition, in particular how they increase in speed and
become automatic with practice. One experiment will indicate how consistent the
practice needs to be in order to increase the efficiency of processes; a second,
whether individual differences in personality may be due to differences in
people's cognitive processes; and a third, whether the complex relationships
between people's verbally expressed attitudes and their actual behavior may be
understood by viewing attitudes as cognitive processes. Two studies investigate
the nature of organized knowledge and its use in understanding new social
experiences. One experiment looks at the possibility that information about
particular past experiences may be stored in memory and may influence the
perceiver's reactions to similar new experiences, as an alternative to the
conventional view that only abstract summaries of past experiences are stored
and used. A second experiment examines the relationship between knowledge about
categories of people (such as racial, occupational or gender categories) and
stereotyping in person perception. Finally, a sixth will use computer simulation
to investigate whether the various parts of the ASC theory can work together to
generate realistic predictions concerning social behavior, and whether those
predictions match actual observations of human behavior in experimental
situations.