* 8613315
* Robust Control of Multivariable Systems Subject to          Structured Real Parameter Variations
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/1987,04/30/1991
* S. Bhattacharyya, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/1991
* USD 128,000.00

This research deals with the problem of analysis, synthesis and design of
control systems when the plant is subject to perturbations of a set of real
physical parameters. This type of model occurs in robotics, chemical processes,
aircraft control, large space structures and many other engineering systems.
Such plants are called structured real parameter (SRP) plants. For linear time-
invariant multivariable SRP systems the following problems will be considered:
(1) determination of a robustness measure for a given controller. One candidate
for such a measure is the size (radius) of the stability hypersphere in
parameter space. The theory and computational algorithm for determining this
radius will be investigated. (2) The development of a procedure for the sythesis
of a controller that robustifies, i.e. maintains closed loop stability of the
system against a given set of ranges of plant parameter excursions. This
requires a generalization and the development of a sythesis version of the type
of results developed by Kharitonov. (3) The development of design procedures for
maximal robustness by choosing the free controller parameters to maximize the
robustness measure. (4) The formulation and solution of the problem of trading
off robustness against deviations from the desired response measured suitably
and optimized over the controller parameters.