* 8613327
* REU: Dissolved Gaseous Tracers in the South Atlantic Vent   Experiment:  Chlorofluoromethanes, Krypton-85 and Argon-39
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1987,12/31/1994
* David Chipman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/1994
* USD 1,414,784.00

Two campaigns to measure transient tracers in the Atlantic Ocean (TTO/NAS and
TTO/Equatorial) were funded by NSF during the period from 1980 to 1985. A
complete data base for modelling this ocean basin would include a South Atlantic
Study to: 1.Determine CO2 transports and their influence on world climate,
2.Constrain models of major ocean currents in this area, and 3.Confirm an
observed 5-fold increase in the addition rate of new carbon to the thermocline.
Eight components of such a study (SAVE) will be performed by investigators from
LDGO, Princeton, University of Washington, WHOI, and SIO. The track record of
these scientists is well established by successful completion of previous
studies in the Equatorial and North Atlantic. They will provide physical and
chemical expertise which will be directed toward a cooperative effort to reach
the goals of the geochemical study. This component is aimed at using dissolved
gaseous tracers to determine rates of thermocline ventilation, rates and
pathways of spreading Antarctic Intermediate Water, rates and paths of Deep and
Bottom Water spreading, and rates of cross-equatorial exchange. From a knowledge
of the extent of equilibration of dissolved gases in the formation area with the
atmosphere, the spreading rates can be determined from a simple box model.
Expenses necessary for coordinating the entire project and disseminating the
results as data reports and scientific publications are also invluded in this
component.