* 8614425
* Collaborative Research: A Phylogenetic Analysis of Behavior and Morphology in Anabantid Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Rudolph Miller, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 11/30/1990
* USD 48,000.00

Behavior is an important aspect of an organism's evolutionary history. It
dictates when and where mating will occur, if and how offspring will be
nurtured, the types of food eaten, and the habitats lived in. Can researchers
use behavioral characteristics to determine anything about the relationships
between species? Some researchers argue that the closely-related species exhibit
quite similar behaviors, while more distantly- related forms display radically
different behaviors. In this sense, behavior would be a good (though untested)
tool for constructing phylogenies. However, many other researchers state that
behavior would not be a good indicator of genealogical relationships because it
is plastic, labile, and easily modified. There have been many instances of
behavioral modifications between species that have, for example, led to
speciation. The proposed study will evaluate the phylogenetic content of
behavioral data by comparing nuptial and agonistic behaviors exhibited by a
group of African fishes against a more traditional phylogeny generated for these
fishes from anatomical characteristics. These fish were chosen for study because
numerous prior studies have been based upon them, and because of the rich
repertoire of behaviors these fishes display. The results of the research will
be of considerable interest to behavioralists, systematists, evolutionary
biologists, and psychologists interested in the question of 'nature vs.
nurture.'