* 8614691
* Quasistellar Object Samples and the Redshift Distribution   for Redshifts between 1.8 and 4
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Cyril Hazard, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pol C. Delosreyes
* 01/31/1991
* USD 102,400.00

The basic aim of this research is to investigate the nature and evolution of
quasars or quasi-stellar objects (QSOs) and active galactic nuclei. The
observations will be used to study the history and evolution of the Universe.
These types of investigations have been hampered up to now by the lack of
sufficiently large QSO samples. There is particularly a lack of knowledge of the
density and properties of QSOs with redshifts greater than 3. The aim of one
project is to complete a QSO sample, which is already essentially complete, for
redshifts between 1.8 and 3.3 based on United Kingdom Schmidt Telescope (UKST)
objective prism plates. A total of more than 90 QSOs have already been confirmed
in this region and there is spectra available of the QSOs. Studies will be
carried out of samples selected from broad band color surveys to complete the
survey for redshifts greater than 1.8. Observations will also be completed of
identified radio sources from a Very Large Array (VLA) radio telescope survey in
the same region. High priority will be given to a survey for QSOs with redshifts
greater than 3.3. Objective prism plates in an area of about 140 square degrees
of sky will be used. In the central 30 square degrees of this region four QSOs
have already been found with redshifts between 3.3 and 3.67. Attempts will be
made to observe redshifts greater than 4. Dr. Hazard is a well-known expert in
the study of quasi-stellar objects. He has not previously had a grant from the
Foundation. Dr. Hazard has been very instrumental in helping others find high
redshift quasars. The results of the research will be very important to our
knowledge of quasars. In particular, since very large redshifts imply very great
distances, the light from the quasars was emitted billions of years ago. If
there is a maximum redshift for quasars, the results of the research will
provide a clue to when the quasars were formed.