* 8614766
* A Computer Based Method To Measure 3-D Displacements and    Strains in Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1987,07/31/1989
* Cesar Sciammarella, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 07/31/1989
* USD 167,301.00

The design and maintenance of structures requires the help of sensor technology
to measure the parameters that control their integrity. Although important
advances have been made in the area of sensors, measurements are limited to
point determination or to two dimensional geometries. A very successful approach
to integrate optical techniques that measure structural properties and current
computer technology has been carried out. The developed techniques yield full
field analysis and have been applied to important technical problems. However
these methods are limited to two dimensional geometries. A very important step
in their application to in-service structures is to add three dimensional
capabilities. In the proposed work the experience so far accumulated in this
area will be utilized: a. to develop 3-D techniques to measure displacements and
strains in structures; b. to achieve real time or quasi-real time operation; c.
to apply these developments to structures. These new technologies will have
considerable potential in increasing the range of application of optical
techniques to include monitoring the integrity of in-service structures. In
addition structures and their components may be analyzed in testing stands under
load representative of the service conditions. Results of the successfully
completed research are likely to stimulate engineering research activities by
reducing drastically time required to evaluate experimental data and to test
their reliability, and by enabling the researcher to pay more attention to
underlying theoretical issues.