* 8614665
* Asymmetric Induction in Organocopper Conjugate Addition     Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1987,08/31/1991
* R. Karl Dieter, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 08/31/1991
* USD 138,600.00

This investigation will develop general, efficient methods for effecting
asymmetric induction in organocopper conjugate addition reactions and formally
equivalent SN2' substitution reactions. The project has four specific goals.
First, several potentially effective chiral non-transferable ligands, suggested
by the preliminary study, will be synthesized and examined. These include a
chiral bicyclic ı3.3.0! octahydrocyclopentaıb!pyrrole ring system and a chiral
binaphthyl amido ligand that may provide an electronic basis for the asymmetric
induction. Second, mechanistic studies involving 1H, 13C, and 7Li NMR
experiments and molecular weight determinations will be undertaken to probe the
structures and compositions of the various cuprate reagents. Third, methods
involving chiral transferable ligands that can be readily transformed into a
variety of substituents by facile functional group manipulations will be
examined. Fourth, methods involving readily prepared chiral substrates and their
reactions with organocopper reagents in conjugate addition and SN2' substitution
reactions will be explored. These methods involve chiral alpha, beta-unsaturated
hydrazones and allylic acetals. This research was initiated at Boston University
and then transferred to Clemson University. It will lead to the development of
new, efficient methods for synthesizing natural products. It has resulted in
nine publications.