* 8614974
* Simulation Modeling of the Interaction Between Commerical   Building HVAC and Lighting Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Edward Sowell, California State University-Fullerton
* Standard Grant
* William Hakala
* 08/31/1989
* USD 87,195.00

A mathematical model of the transport of lighting energy in buildings in the
nonsteady state will be developed. This model will then be implemented as a
system of computer programs that can be used to study the dynamic effects of
lighting systems on building thermal and luminous enmvironments. In particular,
these programs will allow study of complex interactions among lamp fixtures,
ballasts, ventilation system, furnishings, and elements of the room enclosure
accounting for combined modes of radiative, convective and conductive heat
transfer. The programs will also allow study of illumination produced at various
points in the room, including effects of lamp temperature on luminous output.
This work will be done in conjunction with ongoing research projects at the
National Bureau of Standard (NBS) and at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL).
The NBS project is experimental in nature, employing a full-scale test room. The
computer models developed in the work proposed here will be validated using the
NBS experimental results, and used to extend the experimental findings to a
wider class of buildings and lighting systems. The LBL project endeavors ot
create a software Kernel System for generalized building simulation models. The
work proposed herein will serve as a test case for the LBL system by
implementing the lighting system models using elements of the prototype Kernel
System, as well as with conventional programming techniques. The significance of
this work is its potential impact on the energy usage by the heating, air-
conditioning and lighting systems in buildings, while maintaining the quality of
living conditions and the work environment. This potential will be realized
through modifications to present design practices made possible by expected
results of this work.