* 8614614
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Properties, Transforma-  tion Characteristics and Shape Memory Behavior of Grain Re- fined Copper-Zinc-Aluminum Alloys
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* C. Marvin Wayman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1990
* USD 19,198.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. C. M. Wayman, Professor of
Metallurgy, University of Illinois, to pursue with Dr. Myung-Chul Shin, Head,
Precision Metals Research Laboratory, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the
properties, transformation characteristics, and shape memory behavior of grain-
refined copper-zinc-aluminum alloys. These alloys are typically brasses,
containing about 70% copper, by weight, and 2-8% aluminum. They demonstrate the
shape memory effect through which an alloy deformed at some lower temperature
completely recovers its initial undeformed shape upon heating to a higher
temperature. The research will involve the application of grain refinement
techniques such as zirconium doping to reduce grain size so as to improve
formability and resistance to fatigue. Transmission and analytical electron
microscopy will be used to examine presumably zirconium-rich second phase
particles within the grains and along grain boundaries, while the chemical
composition of the particles will be determined by analytical electron
microscopy microanalysis. The degree of coherency, strain fields, and other
mechanical aspects of the particles will be determined using transmission
electron microscopy. Macroscopic aspects of the research will include
characterization of the alloys in terms of grain size versus fatigue,
transformation temperatures, and the extent of shape memory in the grain refined
alloys. This research is important because of the broad range of interest in the
applications of shape memory alloys to controls, fasteners, electronic systems,
medical prosthetics, actuators, and other devices for transportation, computers,
machinery, agriculture, energy, building, and other manufacturing groups. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
The U.S. and Korean collaborators are highly respected scientists with extensive
research experience and productive publication records in the field of the
proposal.