* 8614788
* Assembly and Stability of Microtubules from Antarctic Fish  at Low Temperatures
* O/D,OPP
* 10/15/1987,03/31/1991
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/1991
* USD 348,592.00

Cytoplasmic microtubules are filamentous, sub-cellar organelles that participate
in a variety of important functions in eukaryotic organisms. They play critical
roles in cell division, in nerve growth and regeneration, in cell shape
determination, in the processes of cytoplasmic transport, and in protein and
hormone secretions. Thus, an understanding of the mechanism and regulation of
microtubule assembly may lead to new theraputic regimens for the treatment of
cancer, central nervous injury, and other diseases. Study of the abundant cold-
stable microtubules present in the tissues of Antarctic fish should lead to a
greater understanding of the mechanism and regulation of microtubule assembly in
both cold-blooded and warm-blooded organisms. The long range goal of Detrich's
research is defining the adaptations that are responsible for the assembly of
stability and function of cold-stable microtubule proteins. The specific
objectives of the present award are four-fold: 1) Determining the structural
domains of antarctic fish tubulins that are necessary for microtubule assembly
at low temperature. 2) Characterizing the structural domains of tubulins and
microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) that are involved in the MAP - enhanced
assembly of cold-stable microtubules. 3) Sequencing portions of the Alpha and
Beta tubulins that are essential for microtubule assembly at low temperatures.
4) Cloning and sequencing tubulin genes from an antarctic fish. Research will be
done mainly on two antarctic cods, Notothenia gibberifrons and N. corricepts
neglecta, and an ice fish, Chaenocephalus aceratus. Field work will be done at
Palmer Station.