* 8615302
* Characterizing Trade-Offs Between Sensitivity and           Optimality:  The Tolerance Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/1987,10/31/1988
* Richard Wendell, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/1988
* USD 28,999.00

The primary focus of this research is on linear programming sensitivity
analysis. The approach being proposed is called the "tolerance approach" and the
basic idea is to be able to tell the decision maker that a given solution will
be optimal as long as each objective function coefficient is within a certain
maximum tolerance percentage of its nominal value. The approach can exploit a
priori information on ranges of variability of the coefficients to yield larger
maximum tolerance percentages. This research will generalize the tolerance
approach to characterize trade-offs between optimality and sensitivity of a
solution. More specifically, the project will address the following points: to
characterize trade-offs between optimality and sensitivity of a solution and to
develop efficient algorithms to calculate such trade-offs for general linear
programming problems; to streamline these results to network problems; and to
investigate possible extensions of the results to nonlinear, integer, and
multiple objective programming problems. This research concerns the trade-offs
between sensitivity and optimality of a solution in linear programming. Both
theoretical justification and efficient algorithms will be derived to
characterize and compute the trade-offs. The results will be specialized for
network problems and possible extensions to multiple objective programming
problems will be investigated. It is expected that the research will yield
valuable information which can be used by decision-makers in implementing
solutions of large optimization problems.