* 8615163
* Tropospheric HOx Experimental Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1987,02/28/1993
* Robert O'Brien, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1993
* USD 600,000.00

In the past dozen years atmospheric scientists have determined that the
hydroxyl radical (OH) apparently plays a pivotal role in controlling the trace
chemical composition of the lower atmosphere (troposphere). Hydroxyl radicals (a
pair) are produced when an ozone molecule (O ) is decomposed by ultraviolet
light to form an 3 energetic oxygen atom which then reacts with a water
molecule. It is believed that the hydroxyl radical is the primary species
responsible for converting a number of water insoluble reduced chemical
compounds (e.g. methane, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide,
ammonia and others) into condensable and/or water soluble oxidized species. It
is this oxidation by OH which permits these compounds to be cleansed from the
atmosphere by precipitation or the gradual settling of small solid and liquid
particles. Our understanding of the atmospheric photochemical oxidation process
has been developed primarily by laboratory and computer modeling studies. To
date it has not been possible to evaluate the completeness of the theory of
tropospheric photochemical cycles. To test this theory requires making direct
atmospheric measurements of OH and its relationships to the compounds believed
to be responsible for its creation and destruction. The detection of the
hydroxyl radical in the ambient atmosphere has been a primary objective of
atmospheric chemists for the past several years. The difficulty in measuring
this species results from its exceedingly low concentration in the atmosphere.
Theory predicts OH to be in concentrations one million to a hundred million
times smaller than ozone, its parent compound (which itself has a tropospheric
concentration of less than one part in ten million). The techniques presently
available for measuring OH are not sufficiently sensitive to make the necessary
measuremetns in the atmosphere to study the chemistry of this important species.
This research is aimed at constructing and testing a portable instrument for the
simultaneous determination of tropospheric OH and the hydroperoxyl radical (HO )
in clean air at ground level. 2 Initial tests will be carried out in the
vicinity of Portland and then at the Oregon coast. Field measurements will
determine the diurnal variation of OH and HO in the marine boundary layer at 45
2 degrees north latitude. Perturbation experiments will be carried out to
determine the in situ kinetic response of OH and HO to changes 2 in light
intensity. The observations will be interpreted with tropospheric models. In
addition to providing an initial examination of fast photochemistry and
providing data of value to atmospheric chemists, these experiments will enable
the instrument to be ready for intercomparison with other OH and HO measuring
devices and for 2 participation in field tests of the fast photochemistry of the
troposphere.