* 8615314
* Evolution of Aromatic Biosynthesis and Regulation in        Prokaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1987,04/30/1989
* Roy Jensen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/30/1989
* USD 100,000.00

Dr. Jensen proposes to utilize the cataloging of oligonucleotide sequence. The
strong conservation of ribosomal RNA through evolutionary time is the basis for
assembly of a credible phylogenetic tree for prokaryotes. Slow changes in rRNA
can be quantitated in the form of SAB values by oligonucleotide cataloging, thus
providing an evolutionary scale against which the evolution of other gene-
product systems can be measured. It is possible now for the first time to
reconstruct in prokaryotes the events in the evolution of biochemical-pathway
arrangement and biochemical-pathway regulation. We propose to obtain data that
will permit such evolutionary deductions to be made with respect to the pathway
for biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids. This will be carried out in a large
but manageable division of prokaryotes, the "purple" bacteria. Data already
obtained allow construction of a working model for deductions about the
evolution of (i) tyrosine-pathway cofactor specificity, (ii) DAHP synthase
isozymes, (iii) the phenylalanine pathway and its regulation, and (iv) the
tyrosine pathway and its regulation. As new cataloging data identify brance
positions on the tree where gaps limit interpretations, we will proceed with
analysis of these organisms. At shallow levels of divergence, rRNA/DNA
hybridization will probably be more appropriate for identification of
evolutionary points of divergence in correlation with fine-tuned instances of
recent biochemical change.