* 8615938
* Analysis of the Traffic of Membrane Proteins in B Cells
* BIO,DCB
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* Yair Argon, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 11/30/1988
* USD 35,000.00

The overall goals of this research are to understand the B cell machinery that
directs immunoglobulin (Ig) to its destination, either as a plasma membrane
protein or as a secretory product. Previous results indicate that two stages in
the transport of newly synthesized membrane and secreted Ig are sensitive to the
protonophore, CCCP. The first stage seems to be entry of Ig into the Golgi
complex and the second stage corresponds to transport between the trans-Golgi
and the cell surface. The first CCCP-sensitive stage is indistinguishable
biochemically from the stage of Ig processing in which several non-secreting
myeloma mutants are arrested. The two current goals of this project are: 1) to
clarify the mechanism of action of CCCP on intracellular Ig transport. Effects
of CCCP on ion fluxes through the plasma membrane, on the pH of organelles
involved in protein traffic, and on cellular ATP levels will be measured and
compared with its effects on the turnover of non- secreted Ig. 2) to determine
the intracellular sites where non- secreted Ig is arrested in several mutant
cell lines. Available biochemical data suggest that Ig in all these mutants
fails to reach the mid-Golgi compartment, but biochemical approaches cannot
provide further resolution. Immunocytochemistry at the EM level, using immuno-
gold staining on ultrathin frozen sections, will be used to localize the sites
of accumulation of Ig in the mutants and in CCCP blocked cells. The results of
this research should increase our understanding of the regulation of the
intracellular pathway of newly synthesized antibody molecules. These experiments
will also provide new information concerning the mechanism of action of the
chemical agent, CCCP, which has been widely used as a tool in studies of
cellular metabolism and secretion.