* 8615080
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Magnetic Resonance in     Concentrated Spin Glasses
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* S. Bhagat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 01/31/1989
* USD 11,950.00

This proposal concerns research on the dynamics of spins in alloys which become
spin glasses at low temperatures. An understanding of the spin glass state, and
how the system gets to it, can be expected to provide crucial underpinning to
the comprehension of such widely diverse phenomena as processing of information
in the brain, development of particular strains in a species, and optimization
of multichannel comunications. This research will be conducted at the University
of Maryland, College Park, by Dr. S.M. Bhagat and Liao Shaobin, a researcher
from the Department of Physics, Beijing University. This research started under
the auspices of the Chinese-American Cooperative Basic Research Program in
atomic molecules and condensed matter, a program of the American Physical
Society. In this proposal, the scientists will study the resonant absorption of
microwaves as a function of the applied magnetic field. The characteristics of
the resonance will be interpreted to reveal the dynamic response of spins, the
correlation between spins and the onset of internal magnetic fields contingent
on the approach to the spin glass state. It is expected that a careful
delineation of the spin dynamics will provide necessary information for
determining a complete theory of correlations among spins in randomized systems.