* 8615313
* A New Radome for the Five College Radio Astronomy           Observatory 14 Meter Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Frederic Schloerb, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 10/31/1990
* USD 250,000.00

This award provides partial funding to upgrade the spaceframe and radome
membrane enclosing the Five College Radio Astronomy Observatory (FCRAO) 14-meter
telescope. Matching funds are being provided by Massachusetts. Improvements of
the panel alignment, pointing, and environmental systems during the past 3 years
have resulted in an antenna capable of efficient operation at wavelengths as
short as 1.1 mm. Weather statistics, measured attenuation data, and observing
experience support the utility of the Quabbin site for short millimeter
(mm)-wavelength observation for 4 months of the year. Under the direction of the
respected Principal Investigator, the replacement of the present radome-membrane
fabric with a woven teflon laminate, which has recently become available, will
result in a dramatic improvement in system efficiencies at wavelengths < 2 mm
and 7 mm, as well as a significant improvement in the 3 mm window. Together with
the state-of-the art receivers available or under development at FCRAO, the
fully upgraded system will offer angular resolution and sensitivity at short
millimeter wavelengths that are competitive with facilities operated or planned
by other countries. Technological applications of this project are also
significant. Metal spaceframe radomes are widely used to protect communication
systems and radars in both civilian and military applications around the world.
The radome proposed here would be the first of its type, a real innovation for
short millimeter-wavelength and sub-millimeter systems. In addition, its
installation at FCRAO will provide an important improvement in the astronomical
"testbed" for the development of rugged, versatile, state-of-the-art electronics
for use at these wavelengths, and in the training of graduate students in this
technology.