* 8615863
* Development of a System for In-Process Characterization of  Properties and Forming Characteristics of Copper Alloy      Strip
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1991
* William Thompson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 04/30/1991
* USD 428,499.00

This proposal is to develop and demonstrate a system for in- process
characterization of a signature representing the properties and thus the
stamping and forming characteristics of copper alloy strip. The development will
be accomplished by combined application of three techniques (acoustic, eddy
current, and X-ray diffraction) for non-intrusive characterization of
polycrystalline metal alloys. These non-contact techniques were specifically
selected for their complimentary nature and real time capabilities. Selection
was the result of a prior NSF grant. Each of the techniques selected for the
combined measurements is sensitive to different sets of characteristics and thus
will provide a sensitive system for measuring interdependent changes in these
characteristics. The three techniques will accomplish interrogation of different
volumes of the subject material due to the various depth of probing offered by
the teamed system. An experimental approach will be employed to develop and
demonstrate the system. Relations will be developed relating the teamed
signature to the mechanical properties and stamping and forming characteristics
of the copper alloy strip. Electronic copper alloy strip was selected as the
class of materials and the fabrication of switches and contacts as the forming
process on which to focus. The methodology developed by this work for combining
various measurements should have generic value and permit application to other
materials and processes. The combined application of the three measurement
techniques is novel. This research should lead to in-process measurement of
properties and fabrication characteristics of wrought metallic alloys which
should result in significant improvement in productivity and quality.