* 8615092
* Noise Properties and Time Response of Superlattice and      Conventional Avalanche Photodiodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1991
* Bahaa Saleh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 12/31/1991
* USD 257,400.00

In a lightwave communications system imparting information on a lightbeam and
transmitting it, for instance through a fiber, is one aspect. A second and
equally important aspect is the extraction of the information at the receiving
end. This must be done so as to have little distortion in the reproduction of
the original information. Of importance in doing this is increasing the strength
of (amplifying) the received signal after it has been converted from light back
to an electrical signal. Otherwise the overall signal strength would be too
feeble to complete with random electrical signals (noise) contributed from the
overall receiving process. A second approach would be to amplify the incoming
optical signal rather than the converted electrical signal, however, for the
moment at least it appears more favorable to amplify electrically. The reason is
two-fold: inherent noise added in the amplification process, and the
amplification magnitude that can be produced. On both accounts, electrical
amplification is superior up to the present. The present proposal deals with the
important aspects of electrical amplification of optical information with a
minimum of accompanying noise. New artificially taylored electronic materials
promise to provide better performance than more conventional natural materials.
Understanding the noise generation, the materials design, and amplification
processes are crucial and are the central topics of the present effort.