* 8615524
* Industry/University Cooperative Research: Adsorption of     Modified Surfactants from Aqueous Solution
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 06/30/1990
* USD 276,000.00

RESEARCH SUMMARY: Adsorption of surfactants from aqueous solution is an
important but complex phenomenon due to the influence of factors including
surfactant structure (functional groups, chain length, branching), solid
mineralogy and morphological heterogeneity and solution properties. Absorption
(loss) of surfactants is investigated here by studying their interactions with
minerals, dissolved mineral species, polymers, oils and alcohols. In order to
understand the absorption phenomenon, in the previous grant, other key
properties such as zeta potential, wettability, CMC, mineral dissolution and
surfactant chromatographic separation were monitored. It was shown that when
soluble and semisoluble solids are present, there will be not only alterations
of the solids due to surface precipitaiton but also depletion of surfactants due
to bulk precipitation. A major process responsible for surfactant loss has been
identified to be, in addition to electrostatic and hemimicellar absorption,
surfactant precipitation particularly in solutions containing metal ions. It
appears now that surfactants can be suitably modified to tolerate such hostile
environments. Particular emphasis is being placed on ethoxylated surfactants
since they can be manipulated to yield desired interfacial tension and salt
tolerance. The PI has already obtained total inhibition of precipitaton with
certain ethoxylated sulfonates in gypsum containing substrates which are
normally very hostile to sulfonates. The role of structural modifications such
as ethoxylation is not fully understood, but can be studied using a combination
of techniques. It is the aim of the proposed work to investigate (using
absorption, electrokinetic, chromatographic and spectroscopic techniques). The
mechanisms by which structural modifications affect absorption/precipitation and
to identify the reasons for the selective/preferential absorption or synergism
observed in mixed systems of the above surfactants. UNIQUENESS AND INNOVATION:
In contrast to other work on absorption, this research includes also the effects
on absorption of dissolution of the solid and interaction of the dissolved
species with the surfactant leading to complexation and even precipitation.
Solids invariably dissolve and the dissolved species often govern the entire
absorption (abstraction) behavior and yet these effects have been ignored in the
past. In this research, the effect of dissolved species is being quantitatively
determined and the absorption/desorption phenomenon and hysteresis phenomenon
explained.