* 8615631
* Continuing Development of Charge-Coupled Device Detectors   at the Mauna Kea Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Gerard Luppino, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 01/31/1991
* USD 483,000.00

The summit of Mauna Kea on the island of Hawaii is a premier site for optical,
infrared, and submillimeter astronomical observations. The University of Hawaii
has access to a wide range of facilities including the 2.2 meter operated by the
Institute for Astronomy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Infrared Telescope Facility, the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope, and the United
Kingdom Infrared Telescope. In order to make best use of these facilities and
the superb atmospheric conditions on Mauna Kea, the Principal Investigator will
undertake the development of Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) detectors and
associated control systems for use on these telescopes. These systems will be
used in a wide-ranging program of research that includes the investigation of
the nature of quasi-stellar objects and the galaxies associated with them, the
distances to nearby galaxies, the motions of star clusters in other galaxies and
other programs requiring very sensitive, geometrically-stable detectors.
Implementation of these detectors will serve not only the Hawaiian astronomers,
but also the international community of astronomers that uses the telescopes on
Mauna Kea. Information about detector performance, image processing techniques,
and techniques to optimize the image quality of telescopes will be of benefit to
many users. The scientific return is expected to add much to our knowledge of
the early era of our Universe.