* 8615892
* An Experiment in Seismic Tomography:  The Three-Dimensional Structure of the East Pacific Rise
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Sean Solomon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/1990
* USD 326,000.00

Understanding the processes that create new seafloor at mid- ocean ridges is a
critical aspect of marine geological and geophysical research. Although it is
now well accepted that seafloor spreading has created the present ocean crust
during approximately the last 200 million years, the details by which new
volcanic material is generated and emplaced at the ridges remains unresolved. An
important unknown is the distribution and longevity of subsurface magma chambers
in which partially melted mantle material is stored before being erupted to the
seafloor. Recently acquired deep penetration seismic reflection data from the
East Pacific Rise has revealed what appears to be the top of a fairly continuous
magma chamber along the Rise crest. The objective of the present project is to
use seismic refraction techniques to examine the magma chamber in more detail
than can be obtained from the seismic reflection data. Specifically, the project
will deploy a series of ocean bottom seismometer/hydrophones across the Rise
crest and then use explosive and acoustic energy sources to record the
horizontal transmission of energy through the crust. These data will be analyzed
by recently developed tomographic techniques which allow three dimensional
imaging using the entire data set. Specific questions to be addressed include
the width, depth, and velocity structure of the subsurface magma chamber. This
is a cooperative project between scientists at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The project will be
funded at the following levels: Woods Hole -FY87=$30000, FY88=$297000,
FY89=$87000 MIT -FY87=$30000, FY88=$163000, FY89=$133000