* 8616833
* Signature File Methods for Text Data Bases (Computer and    Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Christos Faloutsos, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/1991
* USD 122,958.00

This research develops the design and analysis of efficient searching methods
for text data bases. It utilizes a new method, called signature files, which
works well for archival applications with very active updating. The method is
especially suitable for optical disks. Specifically, signature files are
compared with other indexing methods analytically and through simulation.
Several alternative signature extraction methods are implemented and evaluated
to verify analytical results, and integrated signature methods, which cover both
the text itself and "keyword" attributes, are developed. To perform realistic
experiments, a prototype retrieval system is used, which stores and retrieves
abstracts of technical articles. This prototype is available to researchers at
the University of Maryland, to assist them with literature searching and to give
feedback to the system designers about what capabilities are needed and how the
system is used. There is an enormous and increasing amount of scientific
knowledge captured in the form of published articles and reports. This "text
database" is far too large to be effectively used without computer assistance.
Consequently, research on automatic retrieval methods, which allow effective and
extensive searching to be done with computer systems, is of paramount scientific
and practical importance.