* 8616036
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Nonlinear Analysis and   Optimal Design of Dynamic Flexible Mechanical Systems with  Joint Clearance
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Muthukrishnan Sathyamoorthy, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 06/30/1990
* USD 22,712.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Drs. Kenneth D. Willmert, Professor, and
M. Sathyamoorthy, Associate Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Clarkson University, to pursue with Dr. Yong San Yoon, Associate Professor and
Principal Research Scientist, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), for a period of 24 months,
a program of research to develop a joint clearance model for mechanical devices
and to apply it in the vibrational analysis of linkages undergoing deformations
due to high speeds and large loads. This research also will seek to determine
the optimal design of counterweights to reduce, as much as possible, the joint
forces. The research adds an international cooperative dimension to domestic
research grants supported by the National Science Foundation (Grant No.
DMC8500627) and Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Grant No.
AFOSR-84-0076) on use of the supercomputer for non-linear analysis and optimal
design of dynamic mechanical systems. Dr. Yoon will continue the development of
the joint clearance model and verify its accuracy. He also will apply the Gauss
constrained optimization method, developed by Willmert and Sathyamoorthy, to the
counterweight design problem. Drs. Willmert and Sathyamoothy will apply the
joint clearance model to mechanisms with flexible members using small
deformation linear analysis, and they will analyze large deformations of
mechanisms with clearances. Together these collaborators will optimally design
mechanisms whose links are undergoing large deformations and whose joints have
clearances. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. The U.S. and Korean collaborators are highly
respected scientists who have extensive research experience and productive
publication records in the field of the proposal.