* 8616228
* Bond of Epoxy-Coated Reinforcing Steel to Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1987,01/31/1990
* David Darwin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 01/31/1990
* USD 223,444.00

ln old reinforced concrete buildings and bridges corrosion of the steel
reinforcing bars has become a serious problem and in some cases has caused a
complete collapse of parking structures. In order to eliminate or at least
minimize the corrosion of steel reinforcement in concrete structures, current
practice uses epoxy- coatings on the bars. However, the bond adherence of the
coated bar with the concrete has not been evaluated with respect to the various
strength levels of the concrete and the various sizes of steel bars. This
project will examine the bond characteristics of epoxy-coated reinforcing bars
in order to establish design values which will ensure the safety of the
reinforced concrete structures. The two major parameters to be investigated are
the different sizes of the reinforcement which may be embedded in concrete of
various strength levels. The experimental data will be used to establish code
regulations and will serve as a basis for a mathematical model. The results of
this research will be beneficial to local, state and Federal bodies involved
with construction of reinforced concrete structures of all types. The project is
highly recommended by practitioners and academicians as a needed activity to
ensure the safety of reinforced concrete structures. The researcher is highly
qualified from past experience in research activities of concrete, and the
experimental facilities are available at the university. This is the first year
award of a two year project. The amount for the first year is $109,657 and
$113,787 for the second year.