* 8616922
* Collaborative Research: Testing Alternative Hypotheses for the Maintenance of Behavioral Differences among Populations
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1987,04/30/1990
* Stephen Rothstein, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 04/30/1990
* USD 60,000.00

This project will be a continuation of combined field and laboratory studies
designed to determine the factors responsible for the maintenance of vocal
dialects in the brown-headed cowbird. The research will be carried out
collaboratively by Dr. Stephen I. Rothstein of the University of California,
Santa Barbara, and Dr. Robert C. Fleischer of the University of Hawaii. Their
research will include (1) an intensive study of vocal variation within one large
dialect, to determine if variation at different geographic scales is important
to communication, (2) investigations of additional vocalizations besides the one
emphasized so far, to determine if all vocalizations vary in the same manner,
and (3) extensive banding, morphological, and biochemical studies, to determine
if dialects are differentiated genetically and the degree to which birds
disperse from one dialect to another. Such studies are important because
dialects are prevalent among songbirds, yet are poorly understood. One
hypothesis for the maintenance of dialects asserts that vocal differences
facilitate reproductive isolation among populations. This hypothesis attributes
major evolutionary significance to dialects and even suggests that they may
influence rates of speciation. Because avian studies have played a major role in
the formulation of modern theory about the origin of new species, dialect
studies may contribute to our understanding of this critical aspect of
evolutionary biology. Dialects are also important because the vocal differences
that characterize them are learned and, therefore, represent cultural
differences. These avian cultural differences may be the best analogs among
animals of the cultural differences that characterize human populations.
Information that Drs. Rothstein and Fleischer have gathered so far on the
cowbird does not support the reproductive-isolation hypothesis. Instead, males
seem to disperse and learn new dialects, but are at an initial disadvantage
until they learn their new dialect. This process parallels human behavior in
that people moving from one country or one profession to another are also at a
disadvantage until they learn the language of their new country or the jargon
and technical terms of their new profession. Lastly, this project is also
important because the cowbird is a parasitic species that is a threat to several
endangered bird species. Basic knowledge derived from the project may be used to
increase the effectiveness of intensive cowbird-control programs currently being
conducted by Federal and State governments in parts of Michigan and California.