* 8616736
* Foraging Energetics and Risk
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Thomas Caraco, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1990
* USD 63,396.00

Maintaining or managing a natural system requires that we understand the
survival strategies of the organisms that make up the system. We can gauge our
level of understanding by our ability to predict how survival strategies will
change as the environment changes. Many animals, especially small birds and
mammals, must find and consume enough food to meet their energy expenditures
each day, or face the possibility of starving overnight (when darkness
interrupts foraging). In an environment where food rewards vary randomly, theory
predicts that the foraging behavior of such animals depends on a comparison of
expected daily energy intake with daily energy expenditures. Given a particular
average level of food rewards, foragers should avoid food resources with high
reward variability when expected energy intake exceeds expenditures (i.e.,
average benefits exceed costs). However, foragers should prefer high reward
variability when necessary expenditures exceed expected energy intake (i.e.,
costs exceed average benefits). Dr. Caraco's previous experiments supported the
theory. In that work, daily energy expenditures were essentially fixed, and Dr.
Caraco experimentally manipulated the expected daily energy intake of foraging
birds. But competing theories predict similar behavior in these experiments. Dr.
Caraco's new research involves studies for which the different theories predict
different behaviors. He will hold expected daily energy intake constant and
experimentally manipulate daily energy expenditures. Using walk-in coolers, he
can select ambient temperatures where a ("warm-blooded") bird's food intake
exceeds, equals, and falls short of its requirement. He anticipates that the
bird's aversion to, or preference for, food-reward variability will still depend
on a comparison of expected energy intake with expenditure. If Dr. Caraco's
experimental results match his predictions, it would indicate that his theory
provides a marked increase in our level of understanding of the behavioral
strategies that promote survival in variable environments.