* 8616691
* Modification of Male Aggressive Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Irwin Bernstein, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 12/31/1990
* USD 206,791.00

Because of their greater size and strength, adult males of many species have the
greatest potential to injure members of a society. Societies must control
aggression within the group in order to continue to function as cohesive units.
Means must exist to modify and channel the aggression of maturing males. Dr.
Bernstein believes that adult males contribute significantly to the
socialization of adolescent males by punishing inappropriate aggressive
behavior. Even when adult males play minor roles in the socialization of infants
and juveniles, their role as socializing agents during adolescence may be
essential to the control of male aggression, thus permitting peaceful social
interaction among individuals of disparate sizes and abilities. Dr. Bernstein's
research conducted during 1985 to 1987 demonstrated that adult male rhesus
macaques are significantly more responsive to the aggressive behavior of
adolescent and adult males than to aggressive behavior of females or younger
males. His results suggested that selective interference by adult males modified
the aggression of adolescent males. Adolescent males maturing in the absence of
adult males showed abnormal aggressive patterns, in that they continued to act
aggressively toward females, younger animals, and kin, as was typical when they
were juveniles. During 1987, adolescent males (the "subject males") living in
two normally constituted social groups lacking adult males are beginning to
exceed the size of adult females. Dr. Bernstein will determine if their
aggression toward these females and their young is greater than normal. He will
then try to modify the aggressive behavior of these males, first by introducing
normal subordinate adult males, who will display normal behavior, and later by
introducing normal dominant adult males, who will display normal behavior and
also be capable of interfering in the aggression of the subject males. Dr.
Bernstein believes that the first case will provide adult-male models, but that
this will not be sufficient to alter the behavior of the subject males. In the
second case, he believes that the dominant adult males will punish abnormal
patterns of aggression directed against females, and that this socializing
experience will modify the participation of the subject males in aggressive
interactions with the group.