* 8616912
* Operation of a National Center for Small-Angle Scattering   Research at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (Materials    Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1987,06/30/1988
* George Wignall, Department of Energy Oak Ridge Operations Office
* Interagency Agreement
* David Nelson
* 06/30/1988
* USD 345,000.00

This is a request to provide renewed support for the operation of a National
Center for Small-Angle Scattering Research under the direction of G. D. Wignall
at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The center operates as a National Facility
providing outside users with access to a 30 meter small-angle neutron scattering
instrument at the High Flux Isotope Reactor (HFIR), and a 10 meter small-angle
neutron scattering instrument at the Oak Ridge Research Reactor. A 10 meter
small angle X-ray scattering facility with a rotating anode source has also been
available to outside users on a part time basis. The Center is staffed by three
research staff members (including the director) and associated support
personnel. The center identifies four major scientific areas for its research
activities and user programs: polymers; colloids and microemulsions; metallurgy
and ceramics; and biological sciences. In all these areas important scientific
advances are being achieved and research of high quality is being performed,
both by outside users and by the Center's own research staff. Small- angle
scattering research is important to many fields of science and there are many
areas where its impact and importance are still increasing. The center
constitutes a facility that is accessible to the research community and unique
in the nation. The key component is the 30 meter neutron scattering instrument.
Interactions with the management and research staff of the Solid State Division
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory are strongly synergistic and mutually
beneficial. Support for continued operation of the National Center For Small-
Angle Scattering Research is strongly recommended, with emphasis on neutron
scattering research and facility development for research in all four scientific
areas addressed. This is a thirty-one month award. Continued support for the
final two years of this award is contingent on the anticipated restart of the
HFIR reactor in mid-1987. This is a renewal of NSF grant No. DMR-8311769.