* 8616802
* Social and Individual Processes of Prey Selection in Ants
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1987,03/31/1991
* James F. A. Traniello, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 03/31/1991
* USD 78,400.00

The significance of studying the behavioral organization and ecology of ants
cannot be underestimated. In some habitats, ants comprise up to 30% of the total
animal biomass, and are important predators of other invertebrates, especially
insects. In both the tropics and temperate zone they are important in bringing
topsoil to the surface. Ants comprise a group of social insects whose behavior
and ecology is of considerable importance to man, and, because they are
important predators of other insects, they can be of great economic importance
in agricultural practices. Weaver ants, common in Africa and Asia, are known to
be effective biological control agents. Wood ants in Europe prey on a wide
variety of pest insects, and have successfully been introduced into the United
States in control programs. Because of the large number of workers in a single
colony (sometimes greater than 1,000,000) ants are able to exert their predatory
effects over large areas. Dr. Traniello's research will focus on one of the most
abundant, ecologically dominant groups of ants in North America. The species to
be studied preys on economically important insects, and is common in
agricultural situations. Little is known of its biology. An understanding of its
social adaptations is fundamental to understanding its economic potential.
Information on how prey are selected is necessary in order to appreciate the
range of pests that these ants prey on and the effect on the pest populations.
One social activity that is extremely important in this light is foraging.
Foraging includes search behavior, its social regulation, communication, and the
influence of the environment on the evolution of these traits. An experimental
study of these behaviors emphasizing their ecological significance is necessary
to fully evaluate the potential use of ants as predators in agroecosystems. Dr.
Traniello's study also uses ants as a model system to understand the effect of
early social experience and aging on behavior. Furthermore, it will contribute
to an understanding of how the environment may constrain an animal's learning
ability. The principles derived from the study may be applicable to other animal
systems, including vertebrates, and will therefore foster our understanding of
these phenomena in general.