* 8616965
* Regulation of a Ganglioside Antigen During CNS Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Martha Constantine Paton, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven C. McLoon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 110,389.00

The long term goal of this research is to understand the cellular mechanisms
that establish the topographically organized regions of the vertebrate brain.
Topographic organization involves spatial and temporal patterns of neuroblast
and axon migration. A search for the molecules that might be involved in these
processes, using immunofluorescent screens on rat embryo neural tissue and
antibodies raised against fetal rat retina, has resulted in the identification
of a ganglioside antigen recognized by a monoclonal antibody (Jones). The
developmental profile of Jones binding suggests that, in the fetal and neonate
brain, the Jones ganglioside is associated with the selective migration of
populations of cells and cell processes. If the Jones antigen is involved in the
differential control of cell and axon motility, a preferential distribution of
this molecule on growth cones and/or on the substrate they contact would be
expected. Dr. Constantine Paton will test this hypothesis by applying electron
microscope (EM) immunocytochemical analyses to pseudopodial and filopodial
contacts of cultured cells. The results obtained from these ultrastructural
localization studies will increase our understanding of early brain
morphogenesis. In addition, since gangliosides have been implicated in many
processes of neural growth and repair, this study may contribute to the general
understanding of regenerative ability in the central nervous system.