* 8616110
* 2nd Engineering Foundation Conference on:  "Chemical        Reaction Engineering", March 8-13, 1987, Santa Barbara, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1987,06/30/1987
* Milorad Dudukovic, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/1987
* USD 20,800.00

Reaction engineering is an interactive discipline encompassing the scientific
principles of chemistry, transport phenomena, applied mathematics, control,
economics, etc. Traditionally, its applications were confined to the petroleum
and chemical industry but are currently spreading to biotechnology, specialty
chemicals and production of new materials. Two major changes that occurred
during the present decade demand further evolution of reaction engineering: 1. a
slowdown in plant construction for large scale commodity chemicals and
petrochemicals 2. a variety of novel processes are being developed in specialty
chemicals, biotechnology and new materials (ceramics, metals, polymers, optical
fibers, semiconductors, etc.). Introduction of reacton engineering principles
and expansion of the discipline into these latter fields is needed. This
represents an unprecedented opportunity for significant impact of reaction
engineering on development of numerous new technologies. How to prepare for and
what should be done to meet these challenges of the future, are the underlying
themes of this conference. The Second Engineering Foundation Conference on
Chemical Reaction Engineering (EFCRE2) will gather a group of experts from
academia and industry to assess the new trends and developments in reaction
engineering and to critically evaluate the most promising future research
directions. The proposed conference will concentrate on two areas: a. Reaction
engineering of new materials and batch processing. b. The current state-of-the-
art and needed new approaches in direct reactor design (with minimal scale-up
effort) for large scale processes via implementation of modern computer
technology. Participation will be limited to 100 people, it will be held in a
secluded location, with everyone required to eat their meals together. This
format should encourage better exchange of ideas than at large less structured
meetings. The PI is emerging as a leader in reaction engineering and is well
qualified to organize the conference. A $20,800 grant out of FY 1987 funds is
recommended to cover expenses of keynote speakers from the universities in the
U.S. and to provide funds for six graduate students to attend the meeting.