* 8616621
* UV Microbeam Analysis of Microtubule Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* Edward Salmon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 12/31/1989
* USD 120,346.00

Before cells divide, their genetic information, contained in structures called
chromosomes, is duplicated precisely. During cell division, the duplicated
chromosomes are distributed into the two daughter cells so that each daughter
subsequently contains exactly the same kind and number of chromosomes. The
cellular organelles responsible for carrying out this crucial process are
collectively called the mitotic spindle. The spindle is composed primarily of a
complex network of microtubule cables that attach to individual chromosomes at
one end, and become anchored at their other end to sites called the cell poles.
During the course of cell division these cables somehow pull the chromosomes to
their respective poles, by a mechanism whose details are only poorly understood.
In this novel and well written proposal, the principal investigator will design,
construct, and calibrate an ultraviolet microbeam apparatus. This device is
capable of irradiating and thereby cutting a single microtubule fiber in a
living cell. The experiments described will allow the investigator to
distinguish between several current models of microtubule function during
chromosome movement. This is the case because the various models made different
predictions with respect to the effect of gap production on the stability and
dynamics of the fiber, the movement of chromosomes, and the nature of
irradiation-induced gap repair.