* 8616650
* Biosynthesis of Bacterially Induced Sesquiterpenoid         Phytoalexins in Cotton
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Margaret Essenberg, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* M.  Paige
* 12/31/1990
* USD 150,000.00

Biosynthesis of Bacterially Induced Sesquiterpenoid Phytoalexins in Cotton: The
project goal is elucidation of the biosynthetic pathway from farnesyl
pyrophosphate to the phytoalexin 2,7-dihydroxycadalene in cotton. Project
objectives are: 1) identification of intermediate metabolites of the
biosynthetic pathway, and 2) isolation and purification of the sesquiterpene
cyclase involved. A cotton line lacking the potentially interfering pigment
glands will be used. Direct MS/MS analysis of powdered, inoculated tissue, as
well as GC/MS/MS of tissue extracts will be used to search for resistance-
associated sesquiterpenoids. Putative intermediates will be purified for
structure elucidation. An assay will be developed for the sesquiterpene cyclase,
based on conversion of isotopically labeled substrate to a cyclic intermediate.
Purification of the enzyme will be undertaken. 2,7-Dihydroxycadalene and three
structurally related compounds are produced during expression of resistance to
the bacterial pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. malvacearum and accumulate to
inhibitory concentrations in fluorescent, necrotic leaf cells adjacent to the
bacterial colonies. They thus appear to play an important role in race-specific
resistance of cotton to bacterial blight. There is genetic evidence that this
resistance response results from a recognition event determined by a host
resistance gene and a corresponding bacterial avirulence gene. Identification of
the enzymes that are regulated will facilitate the study of how the recognition
event regulates phytoalexin production. The information gained should identify
traits that have to be bred or engineered into cotton to make it more resistant
to infection.