* 8616425
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Contact and Semidetached Close Binary Systems of Case B Mass Exchange
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* Kam Ching Leung, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1990
* USD 26,014.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Kam-Ching Leung, Professor of Physics
and Astronomy, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, to pursue with Dr. Il-Seong Nha,
Yonsei University, Korea, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative
research on contact and semidetached systems of case B mass exchange in binary
star systems. These scientists will make a photoelectric observational study of
a number of such systems with periods ranging from long to very long (11 days to
96 days). The results of this research could be used for checking or comparing
the predictions of theoretical models and for construction of future theoretical
models of binary star systems. This project deals with observations and analysis
of the regular changes in brightness of a relatively unobserved category of
binary stars which are close enough to each other so as to alter each other's
evolution but far enough apart that the period of revolution is many days. The
investigation of these binary stars is important for understanding the evolution
of stars and for understanding the more complicated, often explosive, binary
stars. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative
Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual benefit. The U.S. and Korean collaborators are highly respected
scientists who have extensive research experience and productive publication
records in the field of the proposal.