* 8616201
* Reaction Coupled Transport and Hydrodynamics in a Phase     Transfer Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1989
* Joe Goddard, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1989
* USD 104,000.00

This project is an investigation of reaction-coupled transport associated with
PTC (phase-transfer catalysis). The general objectives are to develop and employ
novel contacting devices, based on rotating-disk hydrodynamics, to investigate
the chemical-kinetic and transport mechanisms which govern the rate of PTC.
Specific projects are: 1) to continue current studies of solid-liquid PTC over a
rotating disk 2) to develop a novel fluid-fluid contacting device, for which a
theory is already worked out, and to employ it to investigate liquid-liquid PTC,
and 3) to carry out several exploratory studies of novel applications and
membrane-based energy transduction based on PTC. To date, PTC has been studied
mainly by chemists, who have now discovered hundreds of new organic synthesis
having potential industrial importance. At present, not enough quantitative
knowledge is available on chemical mechanisms and rates to allow for systematic
chemical-reaction engineering and scale-up of PTC systems. The novelty in this
approach resides in the development and use of contacting devices with
hydrodynamically variable mass transfer characteristics to study PTC kinetics
and mass transfer. The proposed research is expected to have an impact on 1) the
basic scientific understanding of PTC, 2) the reaction engineering and scale-up
of PTC reactions, and 3) new applications of PTC to the coupling of reaction and
transport processes ("phoretochemistry"). In addition, the proposed development
of a novel fluid-fluid contacting device with uniform interface would contribute
to numerous other branches of physicochemical hydrodynamics.