* 8616055
* Materials Research Laboratory Program (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1987,06/30/1988
* Theodore Geballe, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* W. Lance Haworth
* 06/30/1988
* USD 3,050,000.00

This award is for renewed support of the Materials Research Laboratory (MRL)
under the direction of Theodore H. Geballe at Stanford University. The MRL has
three major objectives: to support multidisciplinary efforts in materials
research which reqire the participation of several investigators to make
progress; to fund an important set of central facilities which support a wide
range of materials research on campus; and to start outstanding new research
efforts rapidly and intelligently through the use of "seed money". Of the 60 or
so faculty members currently active in the MRL, 37 participate in thrust area
research or receive direct MRL project support. There are 32 graduate students
and 4 postdoctoral research associates in the program, which maintains strong
links with industrial and government research laboratories through cooperative
research. The planned research includes major thrust areas in optoelectronic and
infrared materials, polymer structure and dynamics, structure and properties of
thin films, and photon materials research using free electron laser and
synchrotron sources to investigate electronic properties of surfaces and
interfaces. A particular strength of the Stanford MRL is its ability to span the
range from basic science to engineering in the individual thrust areas as well
as in the program as a whole. The thrust research is strongly interactive,
faculty are first-rate and the quality of students and postdoctoral associates
is very high. The MRL is well equipped and is addressing scientifically
challenging and technologically significant research problems. Research on
optoelectronic and infrared materials, polymers, and electrical and magnetic
properties of thin films is often at the forefront; research proposed on photon
materials science involving the free electron laser and synchrotron radiation
studies of surface chemistry makes an exciting new initiative. Seed funding has
been used effectively, and there are promising new interactions with industrial
research groups. Support for one year is provided to give MRL management the
opportunity to reorganize the MRL thrust areas and continue to define the role
of the MRL in the context of current long-range planning for science and
engineering at Stanford.