* 8616070
* Organelle Movements and Cytoskeletal Dynamics in            Reticulomyxa
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1991
* Manfred Schliwa, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 03/31/1991
* USD 258,200.00

Reticulomyxa is a large, multinucleated, freshwater protozoan with striking
intracellular transport and cytoskeletal dynamics. Saltatory movement of
individual organelles at a rate of up to 25um per second and cytoplasmic
streaming are observed within the extensive reticulapodial network of fine
strands and the naked cell body. In addition, the strands of the peripheral
network are capable of rapid extension, retraction, splaying and fusion. The
research proposed is aimed at elucidating the molecular mechanisms of the
movement of organelles and reticulopodial strands. Preliminary studies,
including a characterization of the structural organization of the network, the
development of a stable and reproducible permeabilized cell model, and the
preparation of monoclonal antibodies, have laid the groundwork for turning this
into a useful model system. From these studies, a number of specific projects
have emerged. To complete the characterization of the structural prerequisites
for motility, the polarity of microtubules and actin filaments will be
determined, and their three-dimensional organization will be analyzed in the
frozen-hydrated state. The preparation and characterization of monoclonal
antibodies will be continued. An assay for microtubule sliding in lysed
reticulopodial strands will be developed. The effect of monoclonal antibodies on
reactivated organelle movement and microtubule splaying will be assessed, and
the antigens likely to be involved in organelle movements and network dynamics
will be localized by immunoelectron microscopy. These studies are significant
because they promise to improve our understanding of organelle and microtubule
dynamics in the cell. They will also provide a new approach for analyzing the
molecular basis of particle transport in the living cells.