* 8617905
* Optimization of Large-Scale Dynamic Systems with Special    Reference to Energy Resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1987,04/30/1989
* George Dantzig, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/1989
* USD 50,834.00

The overall objective of this research is to develop techniques for formulating
and solving (optimizing) large-scale models of complex systems and to encourage
their application. The research on optimization includes techniques for solving
large-scale, multi-stage (staircase, dynamic) linear-programming models, their
extension to take into account uncertainty, and the solving of certain classes
of nonlinearly constrained (large-scale but sparse) systems such as those that
arise in equilibrium analysis. The research includes methodology for complex
models used to assess the effects of resource scarcity or changes technology
through modernization, innovation, and computerization, and also models used for
long-term planning, scheduling and control of complex engineering systems such
as those that distribute energy. The research on modeling includes ways to
formulate models of large complex systems; better ways to express end condition
in dynamic models; ways to reformulate models more compactly; ways to use high-
speed sampling methods (such as parallel processors) to simulate random events
in order to formulate constraints that represent a hedge against uncertainty;
and better ways to understand, maintain and update the extensive data bases and
large number of constraints used to specify models. The overall objective of
this research is to develop techniques for formulating and optimizing large-
scale models of complex systems. The optimization techniques which will be
developed will be implemented on the computer and the resulting programs will be
available for use on a wide variety of large optimization problems.