* 8617911
* Characterization of Semiconductor Clusters by Four-Wave     Mixing and Scanning
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Dror Sarid, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 10/31/1990
* USD 270,000.00

As lightwave technology further develops it is anticipated that microscopic
phenomena will become more important in the development of new optical devices.
The inherent capacity for reducing the size of optical devices is considerable
and this is one area in which the potential has not yet begun to be realized,
although some initial effort is evident. As dimensions shrink the ability to
design and manipulate relevant physical phenomena will become increasingly
important. The tools by which this will be done will probably involve electron
microscopes as well as x-rays, sychrotron radiation, and other potential
sources. Tunneling microscopy appears to be one important aspect of such a
thrust. Its ability to portray microscopic behavior particularly of surfaces, to
portray electronic behavior, and to generally monitor crystalline structure
offers one possibility. The combination of lightwave technology with the field
of scanning electron microscopy in a study of nonlinear optical materials and in
particular the small dimensional structures discussed in the proposal, are
timely and can be expected to lead to fruitful investigations and the
development of techniques of future importance to future applications of optics.
A 3-year continuing award is recommended for the amounts shown: 1987 - $90,000
1988 - $90,000 1989 - $90,000