* 8617892
* Primary Sequences of Acetylcholinesterases from cDNAs
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Terrone Rosenberry, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 06/30/1991
* USD 160,513.00

Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is found in a variety of structural Forms in
mammalian nerve and muscle tissues. These forms are different multimers of
catalytic subunits, which appear highly related by enzymological and
immunological critieria. Some heterogeneity among subunits is generated by
post.translational modifications of the catalytic subunit. Dr. Rosenberry will
determine the extent to which multiple AChE genes, distinct messenger RNAs
(mRNA), and post.transcriptional processing contribute to the diversity of AChE
forms. He has isolated a cDNA clone from a human brain cDNA library which
encodes protein sequences highly related to those found in Torpedo AChE, BuChE,
and Torpedo AChE protein sequences will allow the confirmation of a clone as one
encoding AChE or BuChE. Molecular techniques (nucleic acid sequencing and
restriction enzyme mapping) will reveal whether multiple AChE cDNAs exist, the
primary amino acid sequence of AChE catalytic subunits, whether multiple
catalytic subunits exists, and by inference, the diversity of AChE mRNAs. The
latter point will be confirmed by hybridization of AChE clones to Northern blot
transfers of mRNA from tissues expressing different AChE forms. These cDNA
clones will ultimately allow him to isolate genomic AChE DNA clones. The
diversity or singularity of AChE gene sequences can then be determined and the
relation to AChE mRNA forms examined. Once AChE cloned sequences are obtained,
and the nature of AChE gene and mRNA heterogeneity examined, the materials and
information will be available to undertaker examination of the physiological
factors regulating the expression of diverse AChE forms.