* 8617369
* Industry/University Cooperative Research:  A Study of Small Molecule Transport in Polymers by Oscillatory Sorption      (Supplement)
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Christopher Durning, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1990
* USD 62,262.00

Research Summary: Non-classical mutual diffusion in polymer/penetrant systems is
studied by an oscillatory sorption technique. The physical systems used in the
study are polystyrene (PS)/ethylbenzene (EB) and polyimide (PI)/n-methyl
pyrrolidone (NMP), and they are chosen because they are typical of 2 broad
classes of behavior. A series of experiments will be performed varying the
important dimensionless parameter governing the polymer diffusion behavior: the
diffusion Deborah number (DEB). The researchers aim to observe the transition
from non- classical to classical behavior as DEB is decreased. Quantitative
comparisons with a new, thermo-rheological theory will be made.
Uniqueness/Innovation: The researchers propose to use the oscillatory sorption
technique for macromolecular systems advocated by Vrentas and Duda (J> Memb.
Sci. 18, 161 (1984)). The method is potentially powerful: its characterization
of mutual diffusion resembles that of momentum transport by dynamic mechanical
testing. It eliminates uncertainties connected with imprecise initial conditions
and allows precise manipulation of the time scale for observation. The proposed
design employs a piezoelectric quartz crystal transducer. The theoretical
approach combines modern, non-equilibrium thermodynamics and kinetic theory of
concentrated polymer solutions; it formalizes the intuitive developmentof
Brochard and DeGennes (Phys. Chem. Hyd. 4, 313 (1982)). There are no adjustable
constants in this new approach so that a priori, quantitative predictions of the
data can be obtained and tested. Technical Impact/Significance: The proposed
experiments will clarify the molecular origins of non-classical effects at small
driving forces. Successful application of theory will represent the first,
rigorous predictions of non-classical transport. The work can then be extended
to expose more general laws governing nonlinear transport. The research has also
several practical benefits: (a) ultimately the theory will allow engineering
predictions of non-classical diffusion rates from standard rheological data and
classical diffusion data; (b) the quartz crystal microbalance enables the study
of micromolecule transport in polymer thin film and coatings development, (c)
careful research of transport in the PI/NMP system is of generic importance to
the electronics industry.