* 8617523
* Collaborative Research on Ancient Maya Settlement and       Community Patterns at the Site of Sayil, Puuc Region,       Yucatan, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1990
* Jeremy Sabloff, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1990
* USD 95,870.00

This collaborative grant permits Drs. Sabloff and Tourtellot to continue their
archaeological research at the site of Sayil, located in the Yucatan peninsula
of Mexico. It follows on the season of preliminary reconnaissance and two
seasons of field work which have produced a detailed map of the site. In this
next phase, the investigators will conduct both deep stratigraphic tests and
extensive but shallow excavations. These latter will serve to verify the surface
for evidence of buried features or additional feature types. The excavations
will also allow the recovery of cultural material such as ceramics which will
permit the purpose of each feature type to be determined. This site dates to
only a relatively brief period or if occupation was longer than expected. It
will also allow community size and organization to be determined. The
archaeological sites of the Puuc Hills region of northern Yucatan, where Sayil
is located played a crucial role in the development of ancient Maya civilization
between the late Eighth Century and the early Eleventh Century, A.D., but our
knowledge of these sites is surprisingly limited. There has never been an
intensive full scale settlement pattern study of an individual site. However,
since this region played a crucial role in the history of the Maya, it is well
worth conducting such work. This research is important because it will increase
our understanding of the origin and maintenance of complex societies such as our
own. Because of the excellent collaboration with Mexican scientists, it will
also help to develop close ties with this archaeological establishment. I
recommend support.