* 8617585
* Development of Cortico Cortical Connectivity in Monkey      Association Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Michael Schwartz, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 12/31/1990
* USD 195,000.00

The experiments in this proposal are designed to examine the development of
connectivity in the prefrontal cortex of the rhesus monkey brain. Recent
advances in understanding the connections between the two lobes of the frontal
cortex (cortico.cortical connec tions) in mature monkeys make this a model
system for examining the rules and mechanisms which govern their development.
Dr. Schwartz will conduct experiments to provide detailed information on two
aspects of development: (1) the tempo and pattern of ingrowth of
cortico.cortical axons in the prefrontal cortex, and (2) the generation, targets
and tempo of proliferation of synaptic contacts arising from callosal axons and
the relationship of these events to columnar organization. These studies will
examine fetal and neonatal monkeys using the neuroanatomical tracers HRP and
tritiated amino acids at the light and electron microscope level. The results of
these experiments will provide important new information on aspects of axonal
growth and connectivity formation in the cerebral cortex of developing primates.
The cortico.cortical connections in the prefrontal cortex of primates are highly
developed. Similarities in the pattern of behavioral impairments found following
damage to the frontal lobes in humans and monkeys suggest that the monkey
prefrontal cortex may provide an important model for understanding the structure
and function of cognitive functions on humans.