* 8617329
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on New Technique for        Optimization of Long-Term Power System Expansion Planning
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1990
* Kwang Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1990
* USD 20,583.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Kwang Yun Lee, Electrical Engineering
Department, Pennsylvania State University, to pursue with Dr. Young Moon Park,
Professor of Electrical Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea,
for a period of 24 months a program of research on a new technique for
optimization of long-term power system expansion planning. These collaborators
will attempt to determine the most economical and reliable generation and
expansion plan in an electric power system over a long-range planning horizon
(usually 5 to 30 years) subject to a number of technical, economical, and social
constraints. They will apply Pontriagin's maximum principle and use novel
assumptions regarding random load and characteristics of generating plants of
several types and other assumptions regarding the transmission network in order
to simplify the problem and make it possible to develop a closed-form analytical
production model and reliability indices rather than simulation models, with a
considerable reduction in computation time, without sacrificing reliability. The
topics of optimal electric power generation and transmission are most important
both to countries such as Korea, where the utilities are expected to expand
rapidly, and to the United States. Predictions about the need for new power
plants in the United States often have been excessive and plants under
construction have been cancelled with an enormous capital loss. This project
seeks to develop a new method for power system planning which would be
beneficial to the United States and Korea. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. The U.S. and Korean
collaborators are highly respected scientists who not only have extensive
research experience and productive publication records in the field of the
proposal but also have produced several joint publications from past
collaboration.