* 8617848
* U.S.-Hungary Research on Ca-ATPase in Sarcoplasmic Reticulum(Crystalline Protein)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Anthony Martonosi, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/1991
* USD 60,012.00

Proposal Objectives: The primary objective of this U.S.-Hungary cooperative
research project between Dr. Anthony Martonosi of the State University of New
York Health Sciences Center and Dr. Janos Somogyi of Semmelweis University
Medical School is to characterize the structure of a crystalline protein, Ca-
ATPase of sarcoplasmic reticulum. The researchers intend to obtain better
resolution from two dimensional crystals and also obtain, for the first time,
tri-dimensional crystals in order to better understand the molecular mechanism
of this membrane protein which is essential to cell function. Relevance to
Program Objectives: This project fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge in biophysics by enabling leading experts in the U.S. and
Hungary to combine their complementary talents, pool resources, and share
research facilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Merit:
The proposal ranks in the Excellent/Very Good category. Its technical merit
therefore warrants NSF support. The U.S. and Hungarian researchers' professional
credentials, resources, and facilities are well-regarded and the rationale for
international cooperation is clearly articulated. Significant research results
are expected as an outcome of this international cooperation. In particular,
success in the solution of the three dimensional structure of the described
protein would be a signal advance in the field. Interrelated Projects: Dr.
Martonosi currently receives support for related domestic research from the NSF
Biophysics Program under grant PCM-8403679. Funding: The requested budget covers
the incremental costs to the U.S. of international cooperation associated with
the research in accordance with program guidelines.