* 8617065
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:  On- line Characterization of Crystallization in the Cast Film   Extrusion of Homopolymers and Their Blends
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1990
* James White, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1990
* USD 8,000.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professors James L. White
and Mukerrem Cakmak, University of Akron, and Professor Hans G. Zachmann,
University of Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany. They will study
semicrystalline polymers undergoing stress-induced crystallization. They will
examine the phase transitions and the reasons for the transitions in various
thermotropic liquid crystal polymers. Their materials will be carefully chosen
blends of polymers that are either miscible or immiscible with each other. One
reason for selecting the particular materials is their potential commercial
importance. The primary purpose of the research is to learn about the
fundamental structures of the liquid crystalline polymers and their blends and
the sources and actions of the phase transitions of these materials. The U.S.
researchers will prepare the test materials and study them during melt-spinning
to obtain preliminary optical and thermal measurements. In Germany, the
researchers will use the HASYLAB synchrotron as an x-ray source for small-angle
scattering measurements. The project will benefit from the competence of the
investigators and their history of successful collaborations. Professors White
and Cakmak are experts in polymer engineering and Professor Zachmann is a highly
regarded polymer physicist.