* 8617614
* Joint U.S.-China Workshop on Earthquake Performance of Arch Dams; June 1-5, 1987; Beijing, China
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1986,10/31/1987
* Ray Clough, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 10/31/1987
* USD 30,808.00

Research on an important aspect of the dynamic behavior of arch dams, the
interaction effects between the dam and its reservoir and foundation has been
carried out during the past few years as a cooperative project under the U.S.
China Protocol for Scientific and Technical Cooperation in Earthquake Studies.
During the course of this study, many valuable results have been produced and
disseminated. This workshop is organized to provide an opportunity for many
leading research workers in all phases of this field to present their recent
work, and for the participants to identify the major problems that remain to be
solved in evaluation of the seismic safety of arch dams. The concept of the
workshop was to invite selected specialists from the United States and China as
well as the leading experts from other countries; this relatively small group
could then prepare a summary of the state of knowledge of arch dam seismic
behavior. The results of this activity will have significant impacts to the
seismic safety evaluation of existing dams as well as the determination of the
earthquake behavior of new dams which are under design or construction. This
activity in dam research will also culminate in one of the most successful
cooperative research projects implemented under the U.S.- China protocol in
Earthquake studies. An award is highly recommended.