* 8617757
* University-Industry Research Center in Pharmaceutical/      Chemical Sciences at the University of Puerto Rico
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1989
* Benjamin Perez-de Gracia, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 07/31/1989
* USD 106,400.00

The subject of this proposal is a University/Industry Research Center in
Pharmaceutical/Chemical Sciences at the University of Puerto Rico. An
operational grant to set up and operate the Center on the base of the
University/Industry Research Program in Pharmaceutical/Chemical Science is being
requested. The planning work started in 1983 with University funds and was
successfully accomplished with the aid of NSF grant no. ISI 84- 21088, received
in April 1985, by starting the University/Industry Research Program in
Pharmaceutical/Chemical Sciences at the University of Puerto Rico in November
1985. The proposed Center's main operational characteristics can be summarized
as follows: Participants: Puerto Rico pharmaceutical/chemical industry (twenty-
one pharmaceutical/chemical companies), (2) the University of Puerto Rico, (3)
the Puerto Rico Community Foundation (through grant No. PRCF 1-85 (C) received
in September 1985), (4) the National Science Foundation (through the operational
grant which is being requested). Industrial Focus of the Center: Most major U.S.
drug and pharmaceutical manufacturers have production facilities in Puerto Rico.
Often pharmaceutical and chemical processes take place within the same company.
There are about 110 plans in operation. Pharmaceutical/chemical plants in Puerto
Rico are usually state- of-the-art since they were built during the last 12-15
years. Practically the whole spectrum of drugs and pharmaceuticals is produced
in Puerto Rico. The creation of the University/Industry Research Center in
Pharmaceutical/Chemical Sciences at the University of Puerto Rico will fill the
existing vacuum in the relationship between the universities and the
pharmaceutical/chemical industry in Puerto Rico in basic and applied research,
education and training. The center will offer an effective mechanism through
which assistance can be sought from the industry to the Puerto Rico University
System. Twenty-one companies are supporting the setting-up of the
University/Industry Research Center in Pharmaceutical/Chemical Sciences, and
sixteen are participating actively in the University/Industry Research
Committee.