* 8617582
* Diagnostic Studies of Global Monsoonal Circulations within  the NCAR Community Climate Model (CCM)
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1987,03/31/1990
* Donald Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/1990
* USD 117,000.00

The objective of this research project is to examine how well the National
Center for Atmospheric Research's Community Climate Model treats the planetary
distribution of heating in its climate simulations. A series of sophisticated
diagnostic tools will be employed by the PI who is a world leader in this kind
of research. Proper specification of heating distributions are of great
importance in climate modeling and so this research treats a subject primary to
advancements in climate understanding and prediction. Heat energy from the sun
is received at the earth's surface and within the earth's atmosphere non-
uniformly in space, in particular from equator to poles, but also around a
latitude circle because of ocean and land distributions. Our weather and climate
respond to these distributions in solar heating. In order to successfully
simulate and predict climate in computer models one must represent them in terms
of heating functions as accurately as possible. For model simulation and
prediction of climate this is a necessary first step. It is also a difficult
task because of the non-linear interactions between solar radiation and
atmospheric moisture and trace gases, surface boundary conditions, and
ultimately terrestrial radiation retransmitted to the atmosphere and to space.
Research of this kind is key to understanding the climate system.