* 8617623
* Experimental and Analytical Studies of Nonlinear Structural Systems Under Earthquake Load
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1989
* Sami Masri, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/1989
* USD 267,033.00

This project is a coordinated effort of experimental work analysis in order to
be responsive to two major problems: verification mathematical modelling and
prediction of the capacity of actual structures. The emphasis of this project is
placed on steel structures and components. The experimental and analytical
laboratory studies to be carried out can be conveniently grouped under three
main headings: (1) equipment, (2) frames, and (3) joints. These studies
complement the scale field tests on existing motion earthquakes which are
underway or being proposed. The study of equipment includes investigation of the
failure modes supported correlation equipment response. For the steel frame
study a 4' x 6' shaking table will be used to study the response due to the
horizontal motion and the effects of vertical irregularity of frame stiffness.
Detailed nonlinear models will be developed for selected structures. For joint
study biaxial full-scale steel-moment connection tests will be conducted and
compared with the analytical prediction. The investigators are all competent
researchers of proven track record. The Principal Investigator is a leader in
the field and is highly experienced in the practical problems of seismic-
resistant design. This research will fill some of the gaps in the current
knowledge base about the nonlinear structural behavior and will lead to
techniques for improved reliable design of structures subjected to strong
earthquake shaking. A two-year continuing grant is recommended.