* 8617945
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research on the Experimental Ecologyof Spiny Lobsters in the Mexican Caribbean
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* David Miller, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1989
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports the participation of David Miller of SUNY at Cortland and
Romuald Lipcius of the Virginia Institute of Marine Science in a program of
cooperative research with Roberto de la Torre and others of the Centro de
Investigaciones Quintana Roo in Mexico and with Patricia Briones of the Puerto
Morelos Marine Research Institute of the National University of Mexico. Using
novel approaches based on their previous experience with lobsters plus standard
techniques of experimental field ecology, they will carry out a comprehensive
investigation of the ecology and population dynamics of Panulirus __________
argus, the spiny lobster. By means of field surveys, the collaborating _____
scientists are determining habitation, growth, settlement, mortality, and
recruitment patterns of postlarval, juvenile and adult lobsters as a function of
environmental and biotic conditions. They are then using these results to design
manipulative field experiments that assess the relative importance of these
factors. Spiny lobsters are key benthic predators in subtidal marine habitats of
tropical and subtropical waters. In spite of extensive research programs
throughout the world, little information exists on the ecological relationships
between the various life history phases of this crustacean. Due to the inability
of researchers to find young juveniles in sufficient numbers to carry out
quantitative surveys and manipulative field studies, less is known about the
ecology of young juveniles than of any other age group. This lack of information
has precluded reliable estimates of natural settlement, growth, mortality, and
recruitment rates. However, in the Mexican Caribbean there exist locations with
large numbers of postlarval, juvenile and adult spiny lobsters. The proposed
U.S.-Mexico collaboration will take advantage of this unusual research
opportunity and will produce the most detailed ecological information of any
population of young juvenile spiny lobsters in the world, which will also
represent one of the most extensive data sets gathered on any species in a
nearshore marine habitat. When combined with the work on adults and larvae by
Mexican researchers, this study will provide a model of lobster research
applicable to fisheries throughout the Caribbean.