* 8617332
* Workshop on Dynamic Fracture and Fragmentation of Geologic  Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1987,01/31/1989
* William Fourney, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dianne McCormick
* 01/31/1989
* USD 23,259.00

Dynamic fracture behavior of rock materials which includes crack initiation, and
propagation, is fundamental to understanding excavation of hard rock in
construction, mining, quarrying and nuclear waste sites. In most cases
excavation is accomplished with explosive loadings where it depends on initial
bore hole pressure, crack extension, stress wave induced fractures and longer
term gas pressurization in the bore hole. The research issues in fracture and
fragmentation of rock are many and they have attracted the attention of the
internaitonal research community. This award is to sponsor a workshop on Dynamic
Fracture and Fragmentation of Geologic Materials which is to be held immediately
following the 2nd International Symposium on Fragmentation by Blasting at
Keystone, Colorado in August of 1987, and prior to the meeting of the
International Society of Rock Mechanics to be held in Montreal, Canada. The
Workshop is timed to attract the best researchers in rock fracture and
fragmentation from the international community. The two main objectives of the
workshop are 1) to review the status of research on rock fracture and
fragmentation concerning analytical, experimental and computational viewpoints,
and 2) to establish research priorities from both the researchers and users
viewpoint. The organizing committee has been selected from well respected
researchers in the U.S. and a tentative attendance list has been prepared. We
anticipate that the workshop will be successful and will provide needed
direction to ensure that the NSF program in this important area yields
productive and uniformly high quality research.