* 8617193
* Compilation of Topographic, Magnetic, and Geophysical Data  from the Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1987,08/21/1990
* John Sclater, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/21/1990
* USD 109,296.00

The geological evolution of the Indian Ocean is the most poorly understood of
all the major ocean basins. In part this has resulted form diversity of
approaches and objectives of the major research cruises in the Indian Ocean.
Both United States and foreign scientists have concentrated on specific tectonic
or sedimentary problems, but no major cruises have concentrated on an integrated
understanding of its geologic history. This has resulted in a wide distributed
and non-uniform data base. A second problem has been the logistical complexity
of supporting U.S. and foreign cruises in the Indian Ocean, resulting in an
overall data base in any country that is insufficient to adequately address the
total history of the ocean basin. The objective of the present recommended award
is to compile topographic, magnetic and satellite derived gravity field from the
Indian Ocean. U.S. scientists will work closely with French and Australian
researchers to ensure that the data base includes results from the most recent
cruises. These compilations will be used to define (1) the early opening history
of the Indian Ocean; (2) the separation of Australia and Antarctica; and (3) the
closing of the seaway between Indonesia and Australia. Paleodepth charts will
aid in determining the sedimentary history of the basins in the Indian Ocean.
The overall compilation will be important in integrating existing data with the
results of drilling planned by the Ocean Drilling Program. This is a coordinated
study involving scientists from U.S. and foreign institutions. Dr. John Sclater
of the University of Texas has responsibility for overall coordination of the
project. He will be working with Drs. Robert Fisher (Scripps Institution) and
Dr. Steven Cande (Lamont-Doherty). Drs. Roland Sclich (France), Michael Coffin
(Australia) and Hugh Bergh (South Africa) will provide foreign data. The
principal investigators are highly qualified and funding is strongly recommended
at the following levels: FY87 &amp; 88 FY89 &amp; 90 Texas 69,785 73,731 Scripps
59,547 77,665 Lamont 75,654 73,141