* 8617873
* The Organization of Informational Structure in Articulator  Movement and Acoustic Duration Patterns (Computer and       Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* Jan Edwards, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce
* 11/30/1990
* USD 87,735.00

An accurate computational model of the prosodic patterns which organize
utterances into coherent units of sound is essential for good-quality machine
synthesis and recognition. Such a model will require an understanding of the
abstract prosidic categories of intonation, stress, and phrasing, and a
description of how they are implemented in pitch and rhythm patterns. This
research is aimed at modeling the timing patterns of English as they reflect
abstract prosodic categories. First, experiments will be conducted to explore
the types of stresses and phases that affect speech timing, and the precise
nature of the effects. A particular concern will be to discover a representation
for these effects that will make the specification of the underlying prosodic
patterns invariant across changes in speech tempo and segmental content. For
example, the representation must allow slow and fast productions of machine
recognition to be generated from an invariant specification of the stress and
phrasing for this noun phase, and it must allow the use of the same
specification in generating the prosodically identical noun phrase sublime
delegation. The preliminary experiments will examine the timing patterns of the
speech articulators involved in speech production as well as the resulting
patterns evident in the acoustic signal. The computational model also will
generate both articulatory and acoustic timing patterns.