* 8617344
* Logic, databases and parallel computation (Information      and Computer Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1987,04/30/1991
* Paris Kanellakis, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Jolita D. Middleton
* 04/30/1991
* USD 318,291.00

The goal of this research is to develop and test efficient, parallel evaluation
methods for database and knowledge base query languages. We will use the theory
of parallel algorithms to identify and realize the potential parallelism in new,
logic-based query languages. For this we will investigate the fine-grained
parallelism of primitive symbolic operations such as unification, term matching,
congruence closure and special fixpoint operators. We will develop and implement
parallel algorithms for recursive logical queries on state-of-the-art
multiprocessor systems. We will also examine the use of equational theorem-
proving techniques for database manipulation and design. The efficient
integration of such techniques with recursive logical queries is an important
step in combining functional and logic programming in a structured database
context. In recent years, basic query languages, such as the relational
calculus, have been augmented by adding new programming features. With these new
features, database and knowledge base languages are now moving closer to full
programming languages. The optimization and efficient evaluation of these
languages is crucial, if one is to combine the high performance of database
technology with the power of computing methods from artificial intelligence. New
parallel (multiprocessor) machines offer the raw computational power for
realizing this goal. But to harness that raw power for database and knowledge
base applications, completely new algorithmic techniques - adapted to parallel
evaluation - are essential. Such techniques will be developed by this research.