* 8617403
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Anomalous Transport of   Magnetically Confined Plasma
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Wendell Horton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 06/30/1990
* USD 23,510.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Wendell Horton, Professor of Physics,
University of Texas at Austin, to pursue with Dr. Duk-In Choi, Professor of
Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), for a
period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the basic theoretical
physics aspects of plasma dynamics. This research will deal especially with the
collective processes that produce the spontaneous fluctuations occurring in
magnetically confined plasmas which are thought to impose important limits on
the degree of plasma confinement that is theoretically possible. The research is
directly motivated by unresolved issues in the controlled fusion program, but
results of the research will be relevant to basic processes occurring in
stellar, magnetospheric, and astrophysical plasmas. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. The U.S. and
Korean collaborators are highly respected scientists who not only have extensive
research experience and productive publication records in the field of the
proposal but also have produced some 18 joint publications from past
collaboration.