* 8617482
* Support of the US National Committee on Problems of the     Environment (SCOPE)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Ruth Defries, National Research Council
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1990
* USD 247,000.00

OBJECTIVE: This proposal is for continued support of the NAS to the
Environmental Studies Board in its role as the U.S. adhering body (USNC) to the
Scientific Committee on Problems on the Environments (SCOPE). The scientific
objective of SCOPE are: 1) to advance the state of knowledge concerning the
influence of humans on their environment and the effects of environmental
changes on human health and welfare, with emphasis on global or regional
effects; and 2) to serve as a non- governmental, interdisciplinary and
international source of advice to governments, international bodies, and other
groups with respect to environmental problems. RELEVANCE OF THE PROJECT TO
PROGRAM OBJECTIVES: The activities of SCOPE are of considerable interest to the
scientific and engineering communities in many countries, including the U.S.
They span a broad range of disciplines including biological sciences,
environmental sciences, physical sciences, social sciences, earth-ocean-and-
atmospheric sciences, and various engineering disciplines including civil,
chemical, and environmental. Support of U.S. participation in international
scientific organizations such as SCOPE by U.S. scientists and engineers promotes
the NSF/SORP objective of strengthening the U.S. science and engineering effort.
MERIT OF THE PROPOSAL: The USNC/SCOPE, which is composed of highly competent
internationally recognized experts, has made considerable progress during the
last award period in involving other U.S. scientists and engineers in their
activities and informing the scientific and engineering communities of SCOPE
activities. It should be noted that an initiative for a SCOPE project by the
U.S. National Committee on Estuaries, Coastal Embayments and River Deltas was
adopted by the SCOPE General Assembly in September 1985. This project will
synthesize the understanding of the effects of rising sea level and changes in
sediment loads on coastal areas around the World. The USNC is presently
developing another SCOPE initiative on toxic chemicals