* 8617683
* U.S.-Hungary Research on Neutron Emission in Nucleus-NucleusCollisions (Physics)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Aaron Galonsky, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/1991
* USD 60,000.00

Proposal Objectives: The primary objective of this U.S.-Hungary cooperative
research project between Dr. Aaron Galonsky of Michigan State University and Dr.
Adam Kiss of Eotvos Lorand University is to study the high-density, hot region
formed when very energetic, heavy nuclei collide. Measurements will be made of
the energy spectra of neutrons and fragments resulting from collisions.
Comparisons of values should reveal new information about the basic question of
whether statistical equilibrium exists in the hot region. Relevance of Proposal
to Program: This project in nuclear physics fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States
and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents, pool resources, and share
research facilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Merit:
The proposal ranks in the Excellent category. Its technical merit therefore
warrants NSF support. The U.S. and Hungarian researchers are well regarded and
the rationale for international cooperation, in terms of anticipated mutual
scientific benefits, is clearly articulated. Significant research results are
anticipated from this cooperative project. Interrelated Projects: Primary
research costs for the domestic portion of this research project are received
from the Physics Division of the National Science Foundation under grant number
PHY-8611210. Funding: The requested budget covers the incremental costs to the
U.S. of international cooperation associated with the research in accordance
with program guidelines.