* 8617153
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Low Angle Light      Scattering Photometer
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Claude Cohen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1988
* USD 27,400.00

Technical Abstract: By means of this research equipment grant, a low angle light
scattering photometer will help provide needed information in a number of
research projects. Some of these include: i) Accurate determination of molecular
weight and molecular weight distribution of novel photoresist polymers. These
polymers are used in the production of integrated circuits on silicon chips and
their properties are affected by their molecular weight. Copolymers which
undergo chain scission with high yields when bombarded by electrons will be
optimized with regard to their structure, molecular weight, and distribution.
ii) A study of the compatibility and diffusion in polymer-polymer mixtures. The
availability of compatible mixtures should wident the range of the properties
and processability of thermoplastics. The effect of the approach to the phase
separation curve (by temperature changes) on the interdiffusion of the two
polymers is examined. iii) Determination of the interaction parameters of
polymers with solvents. In a study of the properties of microgels underway, the
low angle light scattering photometer provides information on both molecular
weights and interaction parameters that play a major role in the swelling
properties of hydrophilic gels. iv) Aggregation of colloidal particles and its
relevance to ceramic processing. It is believed that the solid state properties
of solution derived materials depend on the state of aggregation in the solution
phase. Aggregation kinetics, sol-gel transformation, the effect of composition
and polymer additives can all be indirectly monitored by total intensity
scattering which complement other techniques being presently pursued.
Innovation/Creativity: One of the uses of the photometer is the characterization
of new photoresist systems. The aim is to produce new systems with enhanced
sensitivity, resolution, and etch resistance without losing the inherent
advantages of adhesion, durability, reproducibility, and versatility which
poly(methyl methacrylate) (the standard photoresist) has shown over the years.
In the area of compatible polymer-polymer mixtures, major efforts are being
undertaken in a number of laboratories in the measurements of diffusion
coefficients. Very little or no information is being gathered, however, on the
size of the diffusing polymer molecules. Complementary total intensity
measurements to be obtained with the light scattering photometer will provide
important concentrations between size and diffusion coefficient hitherto
unavailable. The characterization of polymer-solvent interaction which plays a
crucial role in the swelling characteristics of gels and microgels can be
readily determined from a Zimm-plot of total intensity scattering. This
information is an important ingredient in developing a general framework for the
classification of the properties of gels and microgels. Finally in the area of
colloidal suspensions, total scattered light intensity is used to monitor the
effect of polymer additives on the stability of the suspensions, the deposition
of a coating (e.g. silica) on alumina and the sol-gel transformation of alkoxide
gels.