* 8617926
* U.S.-Finland Joint Seminar on Wood Technology and           Automation, Lahti, Finland, August 3-7, 1987
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Carl Eckelman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 12/31/1988
* USD 18,742.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: This recommended award requests
support for travel, per diem, publication, and other minor expenses for seven
Americans to participate in a seminar on wood technology in Finland. Professors
Carl A. Eckelman, Antti J. Koivo, and Frederick T. Sparrow of Purdue University
have organized the seminar with Professor Heikki N. Koivo, of Tampere Technical
University, Finland. The purpose of the seminar is to bring together American
and Finnish researchers on log positioning, defect detection in boards, and
computer aided design and automation in furniture manufacturing. Wood processing
for furniture manufacture has attracted much research in Finland and the topic
is receiving more attention in the United States. The seminar will focus on the
application of modern technologies, such as automation, robotics, and the use of
computers in furniture production. The seminar speakers will review the latest
methods and issues pertinent to these topics, and the participants will seek
solutions to the problems that are defined. The seminar, on August 3-7, 1987,
will include prepared presentations, visits to modern Finnish saw-mills and
furniture manufacturing plants, and problem-solving discussions. Beside the NSF-
funded participants, about 5-10 other Americans from the U.S. furniture
manufacturing industry will be invited to attend. A similar number of Finnish
participants are expected to be at the seminar. The conclusions of the seminar
will be summarized and distributed to the scientific community. The project
contributes to an important objective of NSF's cooperative science programs with
Western Europe, which is to stimulate scientific progress by bringing together
scientists and engineers from the U.S. and Europe who have similar research
interests and who wish to engage in mutually beneficial research cooperation.
Merit of Proposal: The prospect is good that this proposed seminar will lead to
a significant contribution to engineering knowledge. The U.S. participants are
respected, productive scientists and engineers. Their foreign colleagues in the
project are also widely recognized for their expertise in the topics of the
seminar. The work plan is sound and the budget is reasonable. The cooperating
scientists and engineers have complementary expertise and the project is
expected to benefit greatly from their combined efforts. Funding: This award
will not duplicate other funding. The Academy of Finland has endorsed the
seminar and is providing space for the meetings and is sponsoring the Finnish
participants. The funding for this award will come from NSF's Manufacturing
Systems Program in the Division of Science Base Development in Design,
Manufacturing, and Computer Integrated Engineering. The Division of
International Programs will administer the award.