* 8617231
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Fundamentals of           Lubrication with Naturally Occurring Oxide Films
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Frederick Ling, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1990
* USD 40,086.00

The purpose of this two-year U.S.-China research project between Marshall
Peterson and Frederick Ling of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) and
Shizhuo Li, Chinese Academy of Sciences' Institute of Metal Research is to study
lubrication of metals with naturally occurring oxide films. The objectives are:
to characterize the composition and properties of naturally occurring oxides at
both high and low temperatures; to determine the conditions which are conducive
to natural lubrication of a surface; and to advance understanding of the
behavior of oxide films in sliding contact. Nickel, cobalt, and iron alloys will
be prepared with rhenium, molybdenum, copper, and silver to form lubricating
oxides. The Chinese investigators will prepare and characterize these alloys;
friction and wear properties will be evaluated at the RPI laboratory; and a
qualitative model of solid film lubrication will be developed jointly. The
proposed research has significant practical applications. The discovery of a
special oxide alloy or surface treatment that forms its own lubricant that
reduces friction and wear, would be cost effective and extremely valuable for
the aerospace and automotive industries particularly in the development of
energy-efficient engines and other advanced power systems. The blending of the
metallurgical, corrosion and tribology expertise of the RPI and Shenyang
Institute of Metal Research promotes the major purpose of the U.S. - China
Cooperative Science Program; which is, to advance scientific knowledge through
the combined efforts and abilities of Americans and Chinese scientists and
engineers.