* 8617188
* A Theory of Chemical Reaction Networks:  The Dynamics of    Reactors with Complex Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Martin Feinberg, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1991
* USD 196,613.00

Reactors with complex chemistry, especially those involving heterogeneous
catalysis, are important commercially. Such complex systems can behave in
unexpected ways, causing multiple steady states, instabilities, runaway
reactions, explosions, etc. The goal of this research is the creation of theory
that provides practicing engineers and chemists with readily applicable
analytical tools to be used for: (1) the operation of reactors with complex but
well understood chemistry (the theory would provide an indication of the
stability problems that should be a source of concern) and (2) the study of
reactors with poorly understood chemistry (the theory would provide means for
the sensitive discrimination between rival mechanisms put forward to account for
laboratory observations). Multiple steady states, periodic composition
oscillations and sustained aperiodic oscillations have been studied for many
systems. The PI's major contributions have been in the analysis of isothermal
reactors (commonly used in industry) where the source of the unstable behavior
is to be found in the chemistry itself. Isothermal reactors are governed by
systems of coupled nonlinear differential equations where the variables are the
species concentrations and the parameters are the rate constants, residence
times and feed concentrations. These differential equations have a special
structure which the PI has exploited to predict the type of behavior to be
expected for some systems. In this renewal work he plans to expand the theory to
wider classes of problems. At the same time he will begin experimental testing
of the theory on the hydrogenation of ethylene on platinum in cooperation with
an experimentalist whose laboratory is fully equipped for this effort. Also, the
PI is planning to develop commercial software to be used on IBM PC's to
implement his theory.