* 8617408
* Trace Metal Removal by Biofilms in Wastewater Treatment     Reactors and Natural Aquatic Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Michael Shuler, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 07/31/1990
* USD 399,390.00

This is a recommendation to support research to characterize the removal of
trace metals from dilute aqueous solutions by biologically active films in
reactors that are designed to treat wastewater and films that develop on
surfaces submerged in natural bodies of water. The metals to be studied are
cadmium and lead. Results of this research are likely to be used in improving
the engineering design and operation of biofilm reactors and in assessing the
impact that trace concentrations of metals remaining in effluent will have on
natural aquatic eco systems. In a previous project under NSF Grant No. 8304120,
the investigators examined trace metal microbial interactions by film-forming,
marine organisms. Results of this prior work will be applied to the objectives
of the current project. The objectives of this project are consistent with those
of the Environmental Engineering Program. The qualifications of the
investigators are appropriate for the work to be done. This project will be
conducted in a collaborative effort by three co-investigators representing
capabilities in environmental engineering, chemical engineering and
microbiology. Award is recommended as a three-year Continuing Grant the initial
increment of which is in the amount of $139,806 for 12 months staring on
February 1, 1987.