* 8617416
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research       on Heavy Fermion Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1990
* Gregory Stewart, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 05/31/1990
* USD 5,950.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: This recommended award would
support a three-year cooperative research project between Professor Gregory R.
Stewart, University of Florida, and Professor Frank Steglich, Technische
Hochschule, Darmstadt, Federal Republic of Germany. They will try to
characterize new heavy fermion systems and those that are already known by using
resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, specific heat in fields to 25T, thermal
expansion, and thermopower at temperatures down to 0.050K. This proposal deals
with a topic of high current interest in solid state physics, superconductivity
in highly- correlated-electron metals with an effective electron mass of 200 me.
Professor Steglich has found that high-mass electrons (heavy fermions) are the
superconducting components of certain materials. The reason why some systems
become superconducting below 1K, while others become magnetic or do not order at
all remains unexplained. The proposed cooperative research will address this
issue, as well as other questions concerning the cause of the heavy fermion
ground state and whether superconductivity will be observed in heavy fermion
systems due to standard superconductivity electron pairing. The research will
benefit from the experience of the two researchers in working together and from
the equipment available in their two laboratories. The project thus contributes
to an important objective of NSF's cooperative science programs with Western
Europe, which is to stimulate scientific progress by bringing together
scientists from the U.S. and Europe who have similar research interests and who
wish to engage in mutually beneficial research cooperation. Funds from this
award would support necessary transportation and partial subsistence expenses
for the U.S. principal investigator. Return visits by Professor Steglich are
anticipated. Merit of Proposal: The cooperating U.S. and foreign investigators
are respected for their previous research accomplishments, and there is a very
good prospect that this proposed research will lead to a significant
contribution to scientific knowledge. The proposed cooperation presents the U.S.
investigator with the opportunity to work with a leading foreign research group
and to use highly specialized facilities abroad that are complementary to his
own. The work plan is sound and the budget is reasonable. Research in this field
is currently being vigorously pursued in the U.S. and abroad. The Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) is providing German counterpart support for the
project and has approved the inclusion of this activity under the Memorandum of
Understanding between the NSF and the DFG. Funding: This award will not
duplicate other funding. The German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) will
support the travel and one-month of per diem for Professor Stewart during the
first year of this award.