* 8617813
* The Role of Patronage in The Development of the Scientific  Community
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Richard Westfall, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 02/28/1989
* USD 15,000.00

The modern scientific community has descended from a community of scientists
which came into being as part of the scientific revolution in the late sixteenth
and seventeenth century. Before this time, there were individuals whom we
properly called scientists but there was no scientific community. Copernicus
apparently worked in relative isolation. Three-quarters of a century later,
Kepler also worked alone, but through correspondence he was in touch with other
astronomers. By the end of the seventeenth century, Newton, as determined a
recluse as the world has known, found himself surrounded by a scientific
community despite himself and spent his final twenty-three years as President of
the Royal Society. We know a great deal about the intellectual phenomenon called
the scientific revolution, but we know much less about the sociological
phenomenon which accompanied it. Scientific societies including both organized
societies and informal communities constituted the framework of the emerging
scientific community. The position of the community in the life of the
seventeenth century needs to be understood by a detailed examination of the way
knowledge was applied to technology in those areas in which it had found
applications, such as military architecture and drainage projects. The knowledge
that was employed in such areas and its precise relation to science can speak to
the issue of whether the members of the scientific community were supported as
purveyors of a necessity or whether they were fostered, like artists and
musicians, as ornaments to the society. The means of support that enable a
person to devote himself to science is a matter of significance to a social
history of the scientific community. One means of the support available to
scientists was patronage. The question of patronage is important because of the
ways in which the search for it, and acceptance of it, affected the scientific
work itself and hence the development of science. In his study of the social
history of the scientific community during the period of the scientific
revolution, Dr. Westfall, the premier historian of that period, examines the
role of patronage as a way of support for scientific activity by means of a
survey of scientists of the age and detailed individual studies of Galileo and
Descartes. A major objective of the research is to arrive at an understanding of
the mores of patronage and its influence on the careers of scientists and at an
assessment of the role of patronage in the scientific revolution.