* 8617794
* Dispute Management in Amish Society
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,08/12/1987
* John Hostetler, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 08/12/1987
* USD 46.00

How do individuals handle disputes and how is this process affected by the
values and norms of various cultural groups? While cultural norms and mores are
typically assumed to be important, little of the extant literature has sought to
illuminate why, how, and in what ways. Drs. Hostetler, Kidder, and Huntington
seek to do so through comparative study of disputing in Amish society--both
conflict management within this society and between the Amish community and
outsiders. The context of Amish society is particularly interesting because of
the strongly held commitment of this group to refrain from the use of law. Based
on systematic analysis of verbatim interviews and observation data, the study is
designed to identify the origin and range of disputes in this separatist group,
examine the alternatives for handling grievances and their consequences,
determine the social and economic costs to individuals prevented by their
religious beliefs from using the judicial system, and illuminate the
relationship between disputing and community well- being. By focusing on
settlements in two geographic areas (one traditional Old Order Amish and the
other modernizing Amish- Mennonite), this collaborative team intends to unravel
both the relationship between cultural values and disputing and whether changing
cultural mores stimulate different patterns in conflict management. Thus, the
research should advance our understanding of disputing in society and the ways
that such processes are affected by ideology, social solidarity, and social
change.