* 8617823
* Nonlinear Oscillations and Chaos in Narrow Gap              Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* Christopher Littler, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1990
* USD 161,000.00

Oscillatory instabilities (but not chaos) in the electrical properties of
semiconductors due to nonlinear effects of an applied electric field have been
known for a long time. The concept of chaos introduces a new means for analyzing
and understanding these nonlinear semiconductor systems, and helps to establish
the physical origin of the oscillations and non-linear behavior. A comprehensive
investigation of oscillatory behavior, bifurcation and chaos in the electrical
properties of narrow gap semiconductors (m- and p-InSb and Hg1-xCdxTe) that are
controlled by impact ionization of shallow impurities will be carried out, with
the goal of understanding the dynamics of deterministic nonlinear systems of
narrow gap semiconductors, especially chaotic ones. Both experimental and
mathematical modeling behavior will be investigated for period doubling tangent
bifurcations, intermittency, quasiperiodicity, frequency locking, strange
attractors, Lyapunov exponents, chaotic states, etc. Effects of various
parameters--sample doping, lattice temperature, magnetic field, sample contacts,
sample compensation, etc. on the chaotic behavior of both n- and p- type InSb
will be studied. Models will be developed to better understand semiconductor
dynamics and the relationship of the nonlinear oscillations/chaos to the role of
the impurities. The PI will seek to discover how the nonlinear
oscillations/chaos can be used to characterize the impurities in the samples.
The results should have general applicability to other semiconductors which have
similar properties. A major emphasis will be placed on studies at high magnetic
fields (up to 120 kG).