* 8617066
* Travel Grant: RUI: Engineering of Two-Photon Nonlinearities in Bulk and Artificially Structured Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Eric Van Stryland, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/1991
* USD 257,938.00

The proposed research will investigate two-photo absorption and the associated
self-refraction in various semiconducting materials in bulk and thin film
structures with differeing dopants and growth techniques. The PI's will use the
techniques and knowledge developed under NSF grant ECS 8310625 to investigate
new materials. This NSF sponsored work showed that the two-photon absorption
coefficient in undoped bulk semiconductors could be predicted to within 50%
knowing only a few material parameters. Questions still remain about the effects
of impurities and defects. Current researach has resulted in the development of
a predictive model for two-photon absorption in undoped bulk semiconductors and
the development of the photo-Hall technique to investigate nonlinear absorption
and subsequent self-defocusing. The possibilities of engineering the
nonlinearities in semiconductors by intentionally producing defects and adding
impurities as well as using thin-film architectures including narrow-band
interference filters and multiple-quantum wells will be investigated. The PI's
will collaborate with researchers at North Texas State University and Heriot-
Watt University, and with materials suppliers such as Hughes Research
Laboratories, Texas Instruments, Purdue University and Notre Dame University.
This reserach intends to apply experimental techniques and theoretical
understanding developed under past NSF sponsorship to perform an extensive study
of nonlinear two-photon absorption and associated self-refraction in a wide
variety of semiconducting materials and thin-film structures. The results of
these studies should have broad applications to such fields as optical
bistability, optical limiting and switching, and laser-induced damage to optical
materials. Several university and industrial collaborators are supplying samples
for this research.