* 8617710
* Expedited Award For Novel Research: Use of CD-ROM to Speed  Access To Engineering Research Results
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1986,07/31/1988
* Arthur Delcher, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/1988
* USD 30,000.00

The project proposed by Professor Delcher will explore the use of the new
compact-disk read-only-memory (CD-ROM) technology for cross-disciplinary
archival searches for recent research results. During 1986 the leaders of the
engineering societies were assembled by the Engineering Directorate at NSF to
explore ways the profession could adapt to the challenges of the next decade.
One working group analyzed new methods of dissemination of research results
which could speed innovation by U. S. engineers. A key finding was that CD-ROM
technology offered an exciting opportunity to provide unprecedented access to
all the archival research papers of the societies including graphical data with
full text searching that would ease cross-disciplinary research. In the current
project, abstracts of papers appearing in the leading engineering society
journals will be encoded onto a CD-ROM disk along with an index that will speed
full text searches on a personal computer. Graphical information may be included
and possibly the full text of research papers. Software for searching will be
provided. The CD-ROM disk produced by this project should serve as demonstration
to the engineering societies of the feasibility of their providing date in this
new medium. The overall objective is to speed innovation in the engineering
disciplines.