* 8617322
* Group Travel for U.S. Participants at Seventh International Conference on Small-Angle Scattering (Prague, 13-16 July    1987)
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1987,12/31/1987
* Eric Kaler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1987
* USD 10,000.00

Travel support of up to a total of $10,000 is provided for approximately 11 U.S.
participants in the 7th International Meeting on Small-Angle Scattering, to be
held July 13-16, 1987 in Prague, Czechoslovakia. Topics of the conference are
the theory, instrumentation and application of small angle x-ray (SAXS) and
neutron (SANS) scattering. Applications of both these techniques are found in
materials science (ceramics, metals, alloys, etc.) polymer science (mixtures,
blends, solutions, etc.), molecular biology (membrane structure, proteins in
solutions, nucleic acids, etc.), catalysis and chemical applications (structure,
porosity, size distributions, surface areas, etc.), critical phenomena and
condensed matter physics. Participation by U.S. scientists is essential if the
U.S. is to match the pace set in the last decade by the European scientists in
both SANS and SAXS. Currently in the U.S. there are six SANS facilities at both
reactor and pulsed neutron sources. Several high flux synchrotron source
facilities are now available for SAXS. It is intended to support only those
participants who will present papers and/or fullfill a significant technical
function at the conference. Applications will be screened rigorously for
scientific merit by a procedure outlined in the proposal. A final report will be
provided identifying the U.S. scientists that were supported and describing the
scientific highlights of the meeting. Each person receiving support will also
provide a one-page summary of their experiences. This is a jointly funded grant
for Thermodynamics and Transport Phenomena and Polymers Programs.