* 8617876
* The Influence of Principles of Universal Grammar on         Second Language Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Daniel Finer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1990
* USD 89,000.00

Abstract Narrative This project is an investigation of the relevance of theories
of universal grammar to the acquisition of phonology and syntax in a second
language. Earlier studies have suggested that certain patterns of errors
displayed by second language learners are not directly attributable to either
the native or the target language grammars, but are nonetheless consistent with
principles that have been independently proposed as defining possible human
languages. The investigation will focus on two such types of error patterns:
those involving anaphor binding, and those involving syllabic organization. The
interest of this project lies not only in its potential to add to the fairly
scanty data available on second language acquisition, but also in its relation
to central issues in linguistic theory. Much recent work in linguistics has been
concerned with developing a theory that can provide a unified account of the
range of variation across natural languages and the patterns of acquisition of
the child language learner. The formulation of this theory is still in the
preliminary stages, and it is still an open question whether the principles of
universal grammar play any role in the acquisition of a second language. This
study bears crucially on both the nature of second language acquisition and the
nature of universal principles of linguistic organization. The investigators are
well qualified to undertake the proposed research. The Principal Investigator is
a recent Ph.D. who has been active in research in syntactic and phonological
theory. The Co-Principal Investigator has also been working productively in
phonological and morphological theory, and, for the last few years, in the
emerging field of scientific research on second language acquisition. Both have
been very productive, and their complementary skills portend well for a
successful outcome of the project.