* 8617598
* Comparative Psychology of Infant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Beatrix Gardner, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 01/31/1990
* USD 89,130.00

In cross-fostering, the offspring of one genetic stock are reared by foster
parents of a different genetic stock to study the interaction of genetic and
environmental factors in the development of behavior. From 1966 to 1981, Drs.
Beatrix and Allen Gardner recorded the behavioral development of five
chimpanzees that were being reared under human cross-fostering conditions. In
earlier studies, the human foster- families spoke English to the infant
chimpanzees, none of which learned more than four words. What is unique about
the Gardners' laboratory was the use of American Sign Language combined with
continuous treatment of the chimpanzees as children are treated. Under these
conditions, the chimpanzees Washoe, Moja, Pili, Tatu, and Dar learned to use the
signs of ASL in ways that resemble the early development of human children, and
reached levels far beyond those expected on the basis of earlier linguistic
theory. Their behavioral development was recorded with a diary record,
systematic samples, controlled experiments, and motion- picture film and video
records. The Gardners' present objective is to transcribe, index, and annotate
the first two years of the diary record of each of these five chimpanzees. The
record of development that results will be the basis for comparisons among the
four individual chimpanzees that were cross- fostered from birth (Moja, Pili,
Tatu, and Dar), between these chimpanzees and one that was introduced into the
cross-fostering environment when she was one year old (Washoe), and between the
cross- fostered chimpanzees and chimpanzees reared in the wild and in laboratory
cages. Preliminary work on diary transcriptions shows that the planned analyses
are feasible. First, orderly sequences of development can be described, since
there are consistencies among the cross-fostered chimpanzees in the order of
appearance of behaviors of a given type, such as rolling over, crawling, sitting
alone, and standing unsupported on two feet. Second, there are individual
differences in rate of development; the most precocious chimpanzee in posture
and locomotion was also the most precocious in manipulative skills and in
communication. And third, many items of behavior described for young children
can be found in the records of the cross-fostered chimpanzees: perceptual-motor
behaviors, such as visually directed reaching; attachment behaviors, such as
using the caretaker as a base for exploring; and communicative behaviors, such
as pointing and negative headshakes, as well as the first 50 ASL signs. This
research concerns the effects of environmental enrichment on infant chimpanzees.
The special rearing conditions enable the Gardners to study, in addition to the
development of two-way communication with signs, such aspects of behavioral
development as locomotion, observational learning, manipulative skills, and
social play. Since intellectual, social, and linguistic development are
intimately related, such studies widen and enrich the analysis of the
developmental process. The processes that underlie precocity, retardation, and
the ultimate level of development are of concern to psychologists, biologists,
and anthropologists.