* 8617719
* Suspension Polymerization of Hydrophilic                    Monomers
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1990
* Nicholas Peppas, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/1990
* USD 183,990.00

The PI proposes to study hydrophilic (water swellable) microparticle production
by suspension polymerization. Such polymer particles have many practical uses
including: (1) in chromatographic separations of small or large molecular weight
solutes; (2) as ion-exchange resins; (3) as filling materials in packed bed
reactors; (4) as releasing agents for antifouling paints in marine science; (5)
as carriers for enzyme immobilization; (6) as releasing agents for drugs in
pharamaceuticals; and (7) as catalysts in reaction engineering. Structural and
geometric characteristics of the microparticles affect their usability in all
cases. In suspension polymerization, reaction takes place in an organic monomer
phase which is suspended in an inorganic phase; usually water. The product solid
polymer precipitates out and contains small amounts (&lt;10%) of unreacted
monomer. The desired products have controlled: particle size distribution,
shape, pore size distribution, molecular weight distribution and molecular
weight between crosslinks. In this research the PI plans to do kinetic modelling
of batch suspension polymerizations of hydrophilic monomers. Specifically, the
work will include the following activities: i. development of the kinetic models
applicable to the copolymerization/crosslinking reaction of a hydrophilic
monomer with a crosslinking agent, both before and after the gelation point and
until vitrification; ii. determination of the molecular weight distribution of
the product before the gelation point as a function of the kinetic constants of
the reactions and the feed ratio of the monomers; iii. development of the models
for reaction engineering in suspension polymerization in batch reactors; iv.
determination of the critical parameters that affect the particle size
distribution in this type of suspension polymerizations; v. conduct experiments
of suspension polymerizations with 2- hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) and
ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA) as a crosslinking agent and determination
on- or off-line of the particle and molecular weight distributions; and vi.
comparison of the predictions of the system equations with experimental results
for EGDMA/HEMA batch suspension polymerizations.