* 8618186
* Protein Export in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Bruce Geller, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* M.  Paige
* 12/31/1990
* USD 190,000.00

The long-term objective is understanding the mechanism by which proteins cross
through membranes. The proposed research is a biochemical characterization of
the energy requirements for protein transport across the Escherichia coli inner
membrane. An established, in vitro, bacterial protein export assay will be used
to measure the effects of both ATP and a transmembrane electrochemical potential
on protein export. The in vitro assay allows these energy sources to be
carefully controlled and measured during the movement of proteins across inner
membrane vesicles. Previous results have shown that both ATP and an
electrochemical potential are necessary for protein export in vitro. By
sequentially adding ATP and a transmembrane electrochemical potential to the in
vitro assay, the order and timing of the energy requirements can be understood
with respect to the individual molecular steps that occur during this complex
reaction. The requirement for ATP, independent of the electrochemical potential,
suggests that ATP hydrolysis may be necessary for protein export. Preliminary
evidence indicates that during protein export, the terminal phosphate residue of
ATP is transferred to a cellular component with an apparent size of about 30,000
daltons. The effects of inhibitors of protein export on this phosphate group
transfer will be measured. A correlation between the extent of inhibition of
protein export and phosphate transfer would further define the role of ATP in
protein export. The phosphate label may allow a means of isolating this
potentially important component in protein export.