* 8618043
* The Organization and Acquisition of Complex Perception      Action Skills
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Marshall Haith, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1990
* USD 123,886.00

People learn a remarkable variety of perception-action skills during their
lifetime, from playing sports and musical instruments to operating vehicles and
using computers. Our ability to acquire such skills in relatively short periods
of time is remarkable and unique. Other animals perform highly skilled actions,
but are unable to learn new skills beyond relatively narrow behavioral limits.
Understanding how such skills are acquired and performed is critical for
building theories of human learning and action. This knowledge is also important
for devising optimal training techniques and for designing machines capable of
skilled action. Unfortunately, very little is known about the processes that
underlie the acquisition and performance of skilled action. The present research
will examine skill learning and performance on especially designed computer-
controlled video tasks. In these tasks, expertise takes considerable time to
develop and requires the precise coordination of many different actions. These
skills are similar to the kinds of perception-action skills used in a wide
variety of everyday contexts. The project will consist of three studies. The
first study will examine some of the characteristics that define skill at
different levels of expertise. In particular, it will assess whether differences
between experts, intermediates, and novices reside primarily in the individual
component skills required for a task or primarily in how the components are
combined. The results from this study will permit the isolation of the features
of skill that contribute most to high levels of expertise. The second study will
examine the learning mechanisms involved in the acquisition of expertise.
Complete novices will practice over eight sessions. A complete record of
performance will be collected, as well as interview data of people's
understanding of the task. These data will permit the documentation of the
phases of learning subjects pass through in acquiring expertise and how
different types of knowledge contribute to the learning process. The third study
will explore the specific ways in which observing others' performances affects
learning. It will examine how the effect of observing others depends on when the
observation occurs and on the level of expertness of the observed performance.
The findings will be important for understanding how learning processes utilize
different types of information as well as for suggesting techniques for
increasing the speed of learning. This research promises to provide important
information on how people acquire complex skills and insights into designing
optimal methods of instruction.