* 8618769
* Accomplishment-Based Renewal:  Investigations in EconometricModels                                                                               >
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Jerry Hausman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 12/31/1990
* USD 162,161.00

This project is an important extension of the recent work of this very talented
researcher. The general area in which Professor Hausman is working in known as
the errors-in-variables econometric model. It is well known that variables used
in economic research are susceptible to measurement error. The errors can derive
from many sources. For example, published survey data might include clerical
errors or incorrect information, and accounts of national expenditures,
investment, income and so on are highly aggregated. The magnitude of the errors
is not known to the researcher, but the distributional form the errors might
take can be assumed. Since the effects that these errors can have on the final
analytical results depend strongly on the distributional form and on the
statistical estimation technique, knowing precisely the properties of various
error generating processes is therefore quite important. Past research by
Professor Hausman and his colleagues has shown that errors of measurement are
not so severe if the errors are linear. In this case many of the usual
econometric estimation techniques yield consistent estimates. If, however, the
errors follow a nonlinear process, the effects on the results are much more
pronounced. In this project Professor Hausman analyzes the effects of nonlinear
errors in econometric models. He shows that commonly used techniques produce
inconsistent estimates, and thus ambiguous results. New estimators are derived
which yield consistent estimates in a general nonlinear model, and the
asymptotic properties of these new estimators are examined. By approximating the
nonlinear error process with a general, semiparametric linear process, Professor
Hausman derives instrumental variables which allow for the identification and
consistent estimation of structural econometric models. The techniques are
applied to data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey for estimate expenditure
functions for food in the U.S.