* 8618356
* Behavior of the Geomagnetic Field as Recorded by Holocene   Lake Sediments in the Western United States
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1987,03/31/1990
* Kenneth Verosub, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 03/31/1990
* USD 73,000.00

This project will continue the development of a master curve of geomagnetic
secular variation for western North America during the last 12,000 years. The
curve is derived from the paleomagnetic study of suites of overlapping cores
from small lakes in the western United States. The records from each lake are
correlated on the basis of ash layers from various Cascade volcanoes. The
research will involve the measurement and analysis of samples already collected
from five lakes as well as the collection of samples from several additional
sites. These samples will be used to verify and refine a proposed master curve
of secular variation as well as to develop a curve of geomagnetic intensity
variation. These curves will be compared to those developed from lava flows and
archaeological features as well as from lakes in other parts of North America.
As the curves are being developed, they will be used to solve geologic problems
relating to the distribution of volcanic ash layers, the assessment of volcanic
hazards, and the dating of archae>ological sites. In addition, the relationship
between rock magnetic properties and various palynological and sedimen>tological
indicators o f climate and environment will be studies. The PI is at the
forefront of this important area of paleo>magnetism. Funding at the revised
level is recommended.