* 8618721
* INDUSTRIAL UNIVERSITY COOPERATION: Surface and Thin Film    Investigations With Low Energy Positrons
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1987,11/30/1990
* David Gidley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1990
* USD 113,500.00

The structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of thin metal films and
metallic and semiconductor surfaces will be investigated with a new ultra-high
vacuum, low energy beam of spin-polarized positrons. Two principal techniques
will be employed: energy and angle resolved spectroscopy of positrons re-emitted
from surfaces; and surface electron capture by (spin- polarized) positrons to
form positronium. The electronic properties (positron work function, electronic
exitations, and mean free paths) and magnetic properties (surface critical
exponents and anisotropies) will be studied as a function of film thickness and
substrate composition as the film evolves from 2- dimensional to 3-dimensional
character. Both techniques are also sensitive to trapping of positrons at
surface and near surface defects and thus structural properties (surface
roughness, island formation, nucleation densities, interface interdiffusion) of
supported thin films can be studied as well. Ultimately, the goal is to
incorporate the above techniques into a scanning positron microprobe to allow
imaged spatial resolution of thin film and surface phenomena below 1 micron.
Thin films and surfaces exhibit properties that can be distinctly different from
a material's bulk properties. Such differences can produce great technological
opportunities in such diverse areas as chemical catalysis, magnetic films, and
tribological coatings.