* 8618467
* A National Data Program for the Social Sciences             (NORC General Social Survey - Five Year Renewal)
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1987,03/31/1993
* Tom Smith, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/1993
* USD 3,745,522.00

Abstract Since l972, the General Social Survey (GSS) has provided yearly data
on a representative sample of American's attitudes, behaviors, and socio-
demographic characteristics. (The sole exceptions, due to budgetary constraints,
were in l979 and l981.) These surveys provide data sets that are very widely
used by social scientists, especially to examine recent trends in American
society. Because the core of the GSS is a set of questions that is identically
repeated each year, the survey provides a uniquely valuable source of trend data
for the research community. The value of the GSS is also enhanced by the speed
with which it is distributed to the research community. Each year's survey is
pretested in the Winter, conducted in the Spring, and made available to
universities around the country in the Fall. Thus, the data are available during
the year in which the survey was conducted. In addition, its complete
documentation and easy access have made the GSS very widely used in the training
of young scientists. In addition to a core of replicated items, each year's GSS
includes a unique module which either repeats portions of a classic study
conducted 20 to 30 years previously and/or a module which addresses a topic of
special interest to the research community. Recently included topics include
batteries of questions pertaining to respondents' socio-political participation
and their attitudes toward poverty. Current plans tentatively call for future
modules on religion and family. The analyses of these special topics is greatly
facilitated by the inclusion of the core items because they provide a wide range
of attitudinal, behavioral and demographic variables to be related to the items
in the module. Each year's GSS also includes a module that is developed by an
international board of scientists. This international collaboration began in
l980, and involved the principal investigators of the GSS and several social
scientists from (ZUMA) in West Germany. They met to work on the design of a West
German survey to be modeled after the GSS, and they agreed to include common
modules on such topics as family life and job values in their respective
countries' surveys. British and Australian scientists were next to join the
international research group, and scientists from five other European nations
are expected to join in the next few years. These collaborative activities are
building a data set that will greatly promote systematic cross-national research
on topics of mutual interest to social scientists of different nationalities.
This award is for the first year of a five year cycle of the General Social
Survey, to be conducted between l988 and l992.