* 8618430
* Percolation Enhanced Coalescence
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Robert Schechter, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1990
* USD 110,000.00

Research Summary: This proposal deals with the general question of emulsion
stability, which in the past has been dealt with using the same theoretical
considerations that are applied to dispersions of colloidal solids in a liquid.
There is, however, a fundamental difference when the dispersed phase is an
immiscible liquid rather than a solid. Molecules of the liquid may be
incorporated into the interfacial phase forming rigid liquid crystalline
structures which then stabilize the emulsion. An immiscible liquid may also
dissolve into micelles which tend to form in the continuous phase when
surfactant is present. The presence of these swollen micelles in the continous
phase can enhance the coalescence rate. The hypothesis in this work is that one
of these two phenomena is, in general, overriding; and the classical theory
which is so successful in dealing with the stability of colloidal suspensions is
not relevant when dealing with emulsion stability. This research tests this
hypothesis. Novelty: The research is innovative even though the techniques for
evaluating emulsion stability and droplet coalescence rates are not. The novelty
arises because the chemical system used to conduct the study is carefully
characterized relative to its tendency to form liquid crystalline or
microemulsion phases at equilibrium. These crucial measurements are concerned
with the behavior of the equilibrium systems. If successful, a correlation
between certain equilibrium properties and emulsion stability will be
demonstrated, thereby providing an entirely new and radical approach in
structuring surfactant molecules. Technical Impact: The need to create stable
emulsions is prevalent in many applications of surfactants. Foods, paints,
agricultural insecticides, and many other products are stable blends using new
surfactant chemicals to obtain the desired stability. On the other hand,
sometimes the breaking of emulsions is required. An entire industry has been
created to deal with this problem, especially to service the oil industry. This
research could profoundly influence the methodology used for the selection of
chemicals for emulsion destabilization, as well as the types of chemicals used.