* 8618452
*       Relative Sea Level Changes Along the Margin of the    Hudson Strait/Frobisher Bay Ice Streams, Arctic Canada:  A  Contribution to Glacial Chronology and Glacial Isotasy ...
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1987,10/31/1989
* John Andrews, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 10/31/1989
* USD 130,000.00

Controversy exists on the position of sea level along the NE margin of the
Laurentide Ice Sheet between 10 and 18 ka. In addition, there are minimal
constraints on the location of the ice front prior to the first mappable Late
Pleistocene raised marine sediments date 10.7 ka. This research involves a
detailed study of Late Quaternary sea level oscillations along the margin of the
Laurentide Ice Sheet in the vicinity of Hudson Strait and Frobisher Bay, Arctic
Canada. Previous field work suggested that significant oscillations of sea level
occured over short intervals of time but these are difficult to resolve if one
relies on dating shells in raised marine wediments. Using the "isolation" method
for reconstructing detailed relative sea level curves, an approach which
consists of coring a series of small lakes above the marine limit down to
present sea level, changes in relative sea level and the paleoenvironments will
be deduced from changes in diatom floras. Radiocarbon dating of small segments
of cores close to transitions will be carried out by accelerator dating methods.
As lakes will be cored beyond the 10.7 ka ice margin a focus of the research
will be assessment of glacial/climate/sea level events across the Younger Dryas
chron (ca 11-10ka). The subsequent period, between 8 and 10ka, was one of rapid
ice sheet retreat and collapse and thus will serve as an analog for the
hypothesized CO2 induced retreat of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.