* 8618755
* Mathematical Sciences: Symmetry Problems in Complex Analysisand Potential Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Dmitry Khavinson, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1989
* USD 22,000.00

A two-year award is recommended in support of mathematical research focusing on
approximation in the complex domain and associated higher dimensional
generalizations. The principal investigator plans to use techniques from
functional analysis, complex function theory and potential theory to address
fundamental questions in two areas. The first concerns the correspondence
between geometric properties of bounded sets and basic approximations related to
the sets. Specifically, the principal investigator has established a lower bound
for the distance between the classical conjugate of the identity function and
the algebra of rational functions on a set. It is twice the area divided by the
perimeter. Equality holds for discs and annuli. Work will be done investigating
other possible cases of equality. Interestingly, this result includes the
classical isoperimetric inequality. The solution to this geometric question
involves questions about the Neumann problem for the Laplace operator and
ordinary differential equations in the complex domain. All the concepts for
approximating the conjugate identity in the plane extend to higher dimensions.
This leads to the second line of study, generalizing classical Schwarz functions
to dimension greater than two, replacing the conjugate function by one which
becomes constant under the Laplacian (the distance function). Rational functions
go over to harmonic functions (the closure of the kernel of the Laplacian). One
has an easy upper bound on the approximating distance in terms of the volume of
the set in question. The conjectured lower bound is volume divided by boundary
area. Results in this context will be harder to achieve. However a viable form
of the Schwarz function has been proposed for higher dimension. Taken together
with additional work on the interplay between geometry and basic concepts of
potential theory, one expects progress toward a better understanding of the
nature of the lower bound sought. This work is expected to have broad
application to mathematical analysis and the geometry of function spaces.