* 8618596
* Uncertainty and Delay in Bargaining
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1992
* In-Koo Cho, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 05/31/1992
* USD 107,800.00

This project is important because of its methodological contribution to game
theory and its substantive contributions to our understanding of industrial
organization, wage negotiations and bargaining with imperfect information.
Although he is just beginning his career, the investigator has already made
significant contributions to economic applications of game theory. The
methodological contribution comes from extending the concept of strategic
stability beyond the current range of economic applications. This is important
because there are multiple outcomes intrinsic in the strategic behavior of
economic agents and the concept of strategic stability permits researchers to
rigorously identify specific sensible outcomes and in this way make testable
predictions. The project develops computationally tractable algorithms for
determining strategic stability. Substantively, the project examines entry
deterrence, i. e., firms within an industry deter potential competitors by
signalling tough competition against any future entrants. Preliminary results
obtained by the investigator suggest the solutions of current models of entry
deterrence depend crucially on a minor assumption and, therefore, are not
strategically stable. The investigator also proved that a unique stable solution
exists for entry deterrence. The contribution of this project comes from
generalizing these results and determining the specific characteristics of the
stable solution. The project also studies the use of strikes in wage
negotiations. Recent work demonstrated that wage negotiations between two
rational players, management and union, may involve strikes, even though a
strike is costly for both parties. The contribution of this project comes from
explaining why wage negotiations often involve a take-it-or-leave-it offer by
the management, which frequently leads to a costly shutdown of the firm.