* 8618991
* The Use of Porous Coalescers for Breakdown of Emulsions
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Ka Ng, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1989
* USD 71,770.00

Research Summary: This project is a theoretical and experimental study of the
physics involved in the use of granular porous coalescers to break emulsions.
The aims are: (a) to obtain a fundamental understanding of how a porous
coalescer functions, (b) to develop quantitative theoretical models for
predicting the performance of a coalescer in breaking and separating an emulsion
and (c) to suggest a novel coalescer design to achieve separation with high
efficiency. The experimental work involves flow visualization of the behavior of
droplets, "blobs", and filaments in two-dimensional, photoetched, glass porous
medium models with micron-sized flow channels. The theoretical study is based on
population balance equations for describing the evolution of the size of
droplets and blobs along the coalescer. Novelty/Innovation: The most novel
aspect of the proposed research is the use of the photoetched, glass porous
coalescer model, which allows a systematic study of the sole effect of surface
charge, wettability and topology of the medium on separation efficiency. It is
expected that totally novel high- performance coalescers can be designed based
on the results of this research. For instance, a graded coalescer in which the
size of pore chambers increases along the coalescer would allow uninterrupted
growth of huge "blobs" while minimizing the pressure drop and thus pumping cost.
A coalescer coated with anionic or cationic polymers would provide a surface
charge which attracts an emulsion stabilized by a surfactant with the opposite
charge, resulting in high separation efficiency. Technical Impact: At present,
it takes about 3 man-years of pilot-plant testing just to make sure that an
existing coalescer will perform up to the level specified in a warranty for a
specific application. In addition to significantly reducing the need for pilot-
plant testing, results of this research provide a procedure for designing a
coalescer to handle a given emulsion at a much reduced cost. Furthermore, this
research is also expected to have considerable impact in the general areas of
multiphase flow in porous media (e.g. oil recovery) and of emulsion stability.