* 8618046
* Structure, Thermodynamics, and Reactivity of Net Nineteen- Electron Organometallic Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1990
* David Tyler, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* John B. Hunt
* 09/30/1990
* USD 167,152.00

The purpose of this project is to determine the fundamental chemical and
physical properties of the "net 19-electron adducts" which are formed in the
reactions of 17-electron organometallic radicals with ligands which donate two
electrons. The electronic structures, geometries, reactivities and formation
thermodynamics of the 19-electron adducts will be investigated. The electronic
structures are of particular interest. Since only nine valence orbitals are
available on the metal atom, the nineteenth electron must enter an antibonding
orbital. The thermodynamics of adduct formation will be measured and the factors
affecting adduct stability will be investigated. Organometallic compounds are an
important class of industrial catalysts and include the most promising comounds
for use as catalysts in converting light energy into chemical energy and
electrical energy. The molecules which will be studied are an important class of
intermediates which are formed in light- induced reactions of organometallic
compounds. The results of this study are expected to be useful in understanding
photocatalytic processes involving organometallic species and in designing new
photocatalytic schemes. Dr. David R. Tyler is a leader in this area of research
who was extremely productive under a previous NSF grant.