* 8618992
* U.S.-Guinea Cooperative Research:  Functional Analyses of   Invertebrate Communities in Streams and Rivers of the West  Africa Onchocerciasis Control Program Area
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1989
* Margaret Wilzbach, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1989
* USD 15,290.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Kenneth W. Cummins and Dr. Margaret
A. Wilzbach, University of Maryland Center for Environmental and Estuarine
Studies, to pursue with Dr. Lauren Yameogo, Head Hydrobiologist, Onchocerciasis
Control Programme (OCP) in the Volta River Basin Area (a World Health
Organization project), Guinea, for a period of 12 months, a program of
cooperative research on the functional analysis of invertebrate communities in
streams and rivers of the West African OCP area. These scientists will develop
sensitive techniques which will allow for continuing evaluation of the
environmental status of the running waters of the area. Their functional
analysis of invertebrates will be used as an indication of ecological conditions
of streams and rivers, especially those in areas not yet under pesticide
treatment. Invertebrates will be categorized according to mechanisms they use in
acquiring food. It is of great interest to researchers concerned with
comparative stream ecosystem studies that systems in other regions, such as Sub-
Saharan Africa, be investigated using tools and insights gained from other work
in North America and Europe. The data collected in this project should be of
great value to such researchers. The collaborators are highly respected
scientists with a record of successful research in the region to be studied. Dr.
Cummins has served as member and chairman of the Ecological Group, a special
advisory panel for OCP, and Dr. Wilzbach has served as expert observer for the
Ecological Group, in Mali. Dr. Yameogo is recognized as an expert on the
identification and ecology of stream and river invertebrates in West Africa.
This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through
the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and
through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.