* 8618999
* Lawmaking and the Dynamics of Discretion in an              Administration Agency
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Andrew Scull, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 01/31/1990
* USD 72,832.00

This longitudinal study of the development of law, under the able direction of
Dr. Calavita, examines the decisionmaking processes of the Immigration and
Naturalization Service (INS) as it has interpreted Congressional legislation.
The focus of the research is on the period from 1952 to the present, a time in
which the INS has exercised wide discretion in the interpretation of
Congressional statutes. Also Dr. Calavita examines judicial- administrative
interaction and the influence of court decisions on INS decisionmaking and
discretion. Systematic analysis of archival data and in-depth interviews are
used to probe the transition from formal law to law-in-action and the effect of
the external and internal environment on this policymaking process. Among the
factors under study are a macro-level contradiction between the economic role of
immigration and the political effort to restrict immigration, INS response to
concerns articulated by special interest groups and individual legislators, and
a dual personnel structure within the agency itself that includes both political
appointees and career officials. This study represents an important attempt to
advance knowledge of the evolution from formal to de facto law, while bridging
the theoretical schism between macro- and micro-level explanations of legal
behavior. It should add considerably to our scientific understanding of
lawmaking in administrative agencies.