* 8618775
* Strategic Behavior in Industrial Organization
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Michael Whinston, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/1989
* USD 36,330.00

Traditional analyses of industrial behavior typically link the exercise of
market power in an industry to the internal features of that industry such as
demand conditions, concentration ratios, barriers-to-entry, and specifc
anticompetitive practices. Some economists have argued that the sheer size of a
firm, even when size is measured in absolute terms rather than relative to any
particular market, is an important determinant of potential collusion. One
aspect of this concern relates to the way multimarket contact among large,
diversified firms may blunt competition. Despite the prevalence of multimarket
contact among firms, relatively little research has focused on the potential
link between multimarket contact and economic performance. The contribution of
this project comes from extending preliminary work by the investigator that
finds that multimarket contact does support collusion under certain natural
conditions. The results of this project could show that antitrust policy should
consider both the relative and absolute size of firms. The project considers
other significant and unresolved issues in industrial organization such as the
process of exit in declining industries for multiplant firms. The project
examines the phenomena of learning-by-doing if consumers rationally forecast
future price declines that result from learning and delay their purchases to
take advantage of these declines. It considers the effects on the nature of
collusive equilibria in repeated price-setting games of allowing firms to
voluntarily limit their sales. Although the investigator is just starting his
career, he has already published important papers on related topics. He can do
the research.