* 8618453
* Asperities, Barriers, Fault Geometries and Their Relationship to Earthquake Precursors and Rupture Initiation
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1987,04/29/1988
* John Nabelek, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing grant
* Patty Brooking
* 04/29/1988
* USD 28,200.00

Two aspects of the rupture initiation of earthquakes will be investigated: 1)
the relation between the stress distribution on the fault surface and precursors
and 2) the relationship between pre- existing fault geometry and the initiation
of ruptures. Asperities and stress distribution on the fault surface associated
with large earthquakes may be related to short-term precursors and
predictability of such earthquakes. If an asperity gets stressed enough to
produce dilantancy and then ruptures, short-term precursors are likely to be
observed. If rupture originates in a low-stress ("weak") region of the fault and
propagates and breaks asperities, there may be no stress-related precursors.
Preliminary investigations of several large earthquakes support the above
concept. It has been suggested that pre-existing fault geometry and the
distribution of physical barriers may strongly influence the initiation and the
total extent of earthquake ruptures. In particular, King and Nabelek (1985)
pointed out the strong influence fault bends can have on the initiation and
termination of rupture and showed several examples. If earthquakes initiate near
bends (or other barriers) and if such behavior is sufficiently common, it can be
used to identify areas for intensified monitoring. Similarly, if ruptures tend
to be confined to regions between bends, the geometry of the fault-zone can be
used in estimating earthquake hazard. We propose to test the above hypotheses.
We shall determine the locations of asperities on the fault surfaces of large
earthquakes by inversion of teleseismic waveforms. The locations of high-stress
asperities will then be compared to the locations of observed precursors if any
were observed. By inverting for the details of the faulting mechanisms and
stress release, we will determine where the ruptures initiated and what segments
of faults moved during the earthquakes. Detailed comparisons with geological
observations will be made. We will analyze large events world-wide in well
monitored areas for which good geological and/or precursory data are available.
Initially, we will concentrate on nine large events in China for which we have
already collected geological, seismological and precursory data. We will also
analyze the most recent (1986) events in California and Alaska.