* 8618558
* Three-Dimensional Analysis and Computer Modelling of        Schooling Patterns of Pelagic Animals
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1987,10/31/1991
* Charles Prewitt, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 10/31/1991
* USD 198,175.00

This is a collaborative ocean sciences instrumentation development project
project with investigators from the University of California- Los Angeles. Its
objective is to test and evaluate the usefulness of newly available
instrumentation to study the adaptive schooling behavior of individuals within
schools or groups of pelagic organisms. Original and rigorous mathematical
analysis of schooling behavior will be tested by using digital data output from
modern 3-dimensional video-graphic systems and applying this data to 3-D
mathematical models developed for x-ray crystallographic studies. Hamner, who is
an accomplished behavioral biologist, and his associates at UCLA will purchase a
3-D videographic system with an integrated data analysis and display capability.
The system's specialized cameras will be modified for underwater use. Initial
video work will be done in a large aquarium but eventual use with schooling
organisms in the open ocean is planned. Prewitt, who is an skilled
crystallographer at Carnegie will acquire a compatible computer graphic
workstation and modify existing software for 3-D videography and automated image
motion analysis for use with Hamner's data. They will collaborate to develop
mathematical models and computational protocols to analyze and study schooling
and behavioral patterns. X-ray crystallography is the discipline that studies
the geometrical relationships of atoms, ions, or molecules within crystals.
Their geometry may be static or dynamic, random or structured. Statistical
analyses have been developed to describe these relationships. Animals also
congregate in non-random, dynamic structures such as fish schools. X-ray
crystallographic technology and statistical analysis methods may be transferable
to biological sciences to better understand the dynamics and adaptive strategies
of schooling behavior in fish and other organisms. Should the transfer of
technologies between these different fields be successful, not only will there
be a positive impact on ecological and behavioral studies, but other areas of
ocean sciences that analyze distances in three-dimensional space.