* 8618260
* Theoretical Studies of Interplanetary Magnetic Fields,      Turbulence, and Cosmic Rays
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Jack Jokipii, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 10/31/1990
* USD 252,200.00

An important part of the sun's influence on the Earth and planets, and on
processes throughout interplanetary space, is exerted by the solar wind and its
embedded magnetic field. Although significant progress has been made toward
understanding these effects, wide gaps remain which provide fertile areas for
theoretical research to complement the many ongoing experimental programs. The
growing collection of observational data is leading to the discovery of new,
subtle, and apparently fundamental relationships between the terrestrial
environment and the state of the interplanetary medium. For example, possible
influences of cosmic rays on global electricity have been proposed. A second
example is the existence of solar-cycle effects on Earth's environment. It is
not yet precisely clear just which of the sun's emissions vary over the course
of a solar cycle nor is it clear how they vary. For this reason, continued
investigation of the behavior of the interplanetary medium is central to a firm
understanding of solar-terrestrial relationships. This grant will support
continuation of a program of theoretical investigations into the properties and
behavior of the interplanetary medium, with emphasis on solar-terrestrial
relationships. Emphasis will be placed on the large-scale structure of the solar
wind, its magnetic field, and the various manifestations of its fluctuations and
turbulence. In particular, the effect of large scale magnetic field structure on
cosmic ray acceleration, propagation and anisotropies will be studied. As part
of this effort a Sun workstation will be acquired to facilitate supercomputer
access and hence large scale numerical modelling of particle propagation in the
interplanetary medium. The investigators are highly qualified in this research
area.