* 8618805
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Plume-related Basalts fromHainan Island and Leizhou Peninsula, South China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1987,06/30/1991
* Chu-Yung Chen, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 06/30/1991
* USD 58,497.00

Proposal Objectives: The primary objective of this U.S.-China cooperative
research project between Drs. Martin Flower and Chu-yung Chen of the University
of Illinois at Chicago and Dr. Xie Guanghong of the Guiyang Institute of
Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences is to study magmatic activity in the
South China Basin through sampling and geochemical analysis of igneous rocks,
such as basalts and xenoliths, which are formed from molten materials. The
project consists of stratigraphic sampling and trace element analysis of whole-
rock and xenolith samples. Based on the results of this geochemical study, the
investigators propose to develop the first volcanic model of South China and if
possible, characterize the composition of the Earth's mantle in this part of the
world. Joint field research will take place on Hainan Island and the Leizhou
Peninsula; both U.S. and Chinese laboratories will perform the sample analysis.
Relevance to Program Objectives: This project in volcanology and mantle
geochemistry identifies and promotes mutually beneficial scientific research for
the advancement of world scientific knowledge through the combined facilities,
abilities and efforts of leading American and Chinese scientists. The project
has been approved by the Chinese Academy of Sciences under the Basic Sciences
Protocol of 1980. Merit: This very good project will contribute new geochemical
and petrologic data on the volcanism and mantle evolution in both South China
and Southeast Asia. It is a significant first step towards the development of a
comprehensive model of volcanism for Southeast Asia and could form the basis for
a future joint geophysical and petrological study of the South China Sea
basement. Acquisition of geochemical data and further geophysical studies of
this region may also provide solid scientific rationale for basement drilling in
South China Sea by the International Ocean Drilling Project. Funding: This is a
new two year award. The international financial arrangements are reciprocal;
that is, the Chinese side covers the expenses for research in China and the NSF
China Program will fund research in the United States. The funding for this
project totals $39,725.