* 8618789
* Further Investigations of Ice-Proximal Sedimentation        Processes, Glacier Bay, Alaska
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1987,10/31/1989
* Norman Smith, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Friscic
* 10/31/1989
* USD 39,621.00

This award is in support of continued study of sediment deposition processes in
Glacier Bay, Alaska, near the termini of tidewater glaciers (It is a companion
proposal to DPP-8619153, submitted by Dr. Ross Powell). During the past two
years these processes have been investigated near the termini of Riggs and
McBride Glaciers. The study will now be extended to: (1) McMuir Glacier, a
tidewater glacier similar to McBride but fronting a less restricted basin, where
the distribution and origin of fine laminated sediments as well as sedimentation
raters versus distance from the glacier will be investigated; (2) Wachusett
Basin, a restricted basin, a restricted basin fronting Carroll Glacier where the
production and distribution of bergstone diamicton (a sediment type) will be
studied, and (3) Wachusett Delta, where hypotheses developed from the study of
Riggs glacier regarding sediment storage and release will be tested. A field
laboratory will permit rapid on-site processing of water and sediment traps
samples. An understanding of modern glaciomarine sedimentation is essential for
interpretation of deposits left by the Pleistocene ice sheets, which are now
recognized to have been extensively grounded below sea level. Dr. Norman Smith
and his colleague Dr. Ross Powell are well-known for their work on this problem
in Glacier Bay.