* 8618009
* International Workshop on Risk Management in the Developing World; July 5-10, 1988; Nairobi, Kenya
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/1987,08/31/1989
* Jane Ives, Suffolk University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/1989
* USD 16,600.00

This award will provide partial support for a workshop on risk analysis in
developing countries to be held from July 5-10, 1988 in Nairobi, Kenya. The
workshop will bring together many of the world's leading researchers in risk
analysis to review the status of comparative research on risk assessment theory
and methods. Funding by the National Science Foundation will provide partial
support for three American researchers to attend the workshop. NSF funds will
also be used to support the writing of a background paper that reviews the
recent literature on risk in developing countries. Professor Jane Ives, the
principal investigator and workshop organizer, is a prominent scientist in
international aspects of risk assessment. Her qualifications and broad
experience are major assets for the writing of the background paper and for the
successful management of the workshop. The workshop will address key issues
surrounding the suitability and applicability of risk analysis methods and
approaches for developing countries. Three central questions to be addressed by
the workshop are: To what extent are risk analysis methods and approaches
culture bound? To what extent can risk analysis methods and approaches be
adapted so as to be sensitive to the needs of developing countries? What lessons
can be learned from analogous attempts to transfer assessment and decision
making methods from developed to developing nations. As part of the workshop,
several case studies will be presented and discussed. It is expected that the
workshop will advance the state of knowledge on risk in developing nations. It
is also expected that the workshop will (1) identify promising areas for future
research, and (2) establish linkages among scientists from the United States and
developing countries.