* 8619148
* Organization of Spinal Reflexes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1990
* James McMillan, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1990
* USD 96,749.00

Nociceptive reflexes are commonly used as indices of nociception in human
subjects and in experimental animals. Justification for such an interpretation
of segmental reflex responses is provided by evidence that many spinal cord
dorsal horn neurons have response characteristics related to both nociception
and reflex mechanisms. Much evidence suggest that our understanding of
organization of some of the most basic segmental spinal reflexes is far from
complete. If such reflexes are to provide insights into organization of more
complex sensorimotor functions of the mammalian central nervous system, it is
important to focus attention back at the segmental level of the spinal cord. The
work of Dr. James McMillan has two goals. The first is to examine some basic
aspects of the organization of segmental nociceptive spinal cord reflexes. Such
"simple" reflexes are considered as models of more complex sensorimotor
integration in the central nervous system. The primary focus of this part of the
study is the differential contribution of synergistic muscles to the reflex
movement around a single joint. The flexion and crossed extension reflexes will
be monitored by recording isometric tension from appropriate muscles in
decerebrate cats. effects of body position and other physiological stimuli on
excitability of the reflex responses of fast and slow knee and ankle extensors
will be examined in detail. The second goal is to evaluate segmental nociceptive
reflexes as animal models of pain perception in humans. Such reflexes are
commonly used as experimental indices of pain perception, but there is evidence
that some procedures known to affect pain perception do not affect these
reflexes in the same way. The studies proposed here are part of a long-term
effort to examine similarities and differences between these reflexes and pain
perception.