* 8619753
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: Studies of Orbital   Occupation near the Nuclear Fermi Surface (Physics)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Jochen Heisenberg, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1990
* USD 5,844.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: This recommended award would
support a three-year cooperative research project in nuclear physics between
Professors Jochen H. Heisenberg and F. William Hersman, Department of Physics,
The University of New Hampshire; and Dr. H.P. Blok, Free University, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, and Dr.P.K.A. de Witt Huberts and others at the Dutch National
Institute for Nuclear and High Energy Physics (NIKHEF), also in Amsterdam. The
researchers will carry out a program of nuclear structure studies using
intermediate energy electrons to probe details of nucleon orbital occupation
near the nuclear Fermi surface. Two experimental programs are proposed which are
directed at understanding how the individual nucleons in the compound system of
the nucleus arrange themselves with respect to their neighbors. Proton knockout
from oxygen will determine which orbital shapes are preferred by the nucleons
and with what probability, while the measurement of charges and currents looks
at the rearrangement of all other protons when one proton is moved from one
orbit to another. The Nuclear Physics Group at The University of New Hampshire
carries out an active program of electromagnetic nuclear structure experiments
at the MIT-Bates Linear Accelerator. The Group plans to extend its program by
increasing its interaction with Dutch scientists also active in this field. This
will allow them to make use of high resolution spectrometers which are at
present unique to the NIKHEF facility. The work to be carried out in cooperation
with Dr. Blok, de Witt Huberts, and colleagues at NIKHEF is a related and
natural complement to the current investigations of the American researchers.
The project thus contributes to an important objective of NSF's cooperative
science programs with Western Europe, which is to stimulate scientific progress
by bringing together scientists from the U.S. and Europe who have similar
research interests and who wish to engage in mutually beneficial research
cooperation. Funds from this award would support necessary transportation and
subsistence expenses for the U.S. principal investigators. Merit of Proposal:
The prospect of a significant contribution to scientific knowledge from this
proposed research is very good. The U.S. principal investigators are respected,
productive scientists. The foreign researchers with whom they will cooperate in
the project are also widely recognized for their expertise in this field.
Previous collaboration between the two research groups has been productive, and
the likelihood of additional mutual benefit from a continuation of the joint
effort is high. The work plan is sound and the budget is reasonable. Funding:
This award will not duplicate other funding. The principal investigators receive
support for the domestic aspects of this research from the U.S. Department of
Energy.