* 8619653
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Joint Seminar on           Electrochemical Passivation, Numbrecht, Federal Republic    of Germany, September 8-13, 1987
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Richard Oriani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 01/31/1989
* USD 15,116.00

This award would allow 11 American scientists to attend a joint seminar with 10
German scientists on electrochemical passivation. The seminar, organized by
Professor Richard A. Oriani, University of Minnesota, and Professor Hans J.
Engell, Max Planck Institut fuer Eisenforschung, Dusseldorf, Federal Republic of
Germany, will be held in Numbrecht, Federal Republic of Germany, on September
8-13, 1987. Passivation is the formation of thin layers of mainly oxides and
hydrous oxides on the surface of metals. These surfaces protect against
corrosion. Metals owe their utility to the ability to form these surfaces and
thereby remain stable in the presence of thermodynamic activities from the
environment. Understanding the stability or breakdown characteristics of the
passivating layers is of critical importance for the technological use of
metals. Many new techniques have recently emerged for the study of passivation,
and the bulk of the research is being done in the U.S. and the Federal Republic
of Germany. The study of passivation presently includes many disciplines not
common to classical corrosion research. One goal of the proposed seminar is to
provide an opportunity for American and German researchers and scientists from
several disciplines to learn of each others' work. The seminar participants were
chosen because they are among the most active in research on passivation. The
seminar should provide a useful interchange of ideas between the participants
and could lead to additional collaborative research between the American and the
German scientists. At the seminar, each participant will present a report on his
or her work. Discussion will follow the presentations. Then the participants
will be assigned to a small group which will discuss a specific topic in
passivation research. The small groups will prepare outlines for position papers
on their topics, and they will present the outlines to the total body of
participants for discussion. After this, the small groups will prepare written
statements of their outlines. The outlines and the other records of the seminar
will be converted by the organizers into a summary paper, including
recommendations for future research, which will be submitted to a journal for
publication.