* 8619216
* Radiolaria as Indicators of Productivity in the Norwegian   Sea
* O/D,OPP
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1990
* Neil Swanberg, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/1990
* USD 141,716.00

Foraminifera and radiolaria are unique among zooplankton because they are
essentially immotile, they reproduce slowly relative to most of their prey and
they produce fossils which dominate much of the world ocean's sediments. Thus,
more than any other zooplankton group, these organisms are coupled to a parcel
of water and the abundance and composition of their fauna should be indicative
of the integrated trophic history of that water. Polycystine radiolaria are the
more diverse of the two groups and tend to be more important in high- latitude
sediments. Evidence that the radiolarian fauna in the Norwegian Sea responds to
changes in production suggests that radiolaria from these waters might be
excellent indicators of biological processes at lower trophic levels. The high-
latitude radiolarian fauna has never been studied in the plankton during or
after a bloom. This proposal outlines a plan to do so by sampling radiolaria
quantitatively during several cruises along a latitudinal gradient from the
Arctic circle to Spitzbergen and analyzing the radiolarian faunal composition
using multivariate canonic analysis and doing morphological studies of skeletons
of the major species. The results of these analyses will be used to interpret
the response of radiolarian populations to the major bloom event in the
Norwegian Sea. This information can ultimately be used to interpret the trophic
history of a water mass on a month-to-season time scale and will also provide
important information for the interpretation of the ecological significance of
the fossil fauna.