* 8619933
* U.S.- Austria Cooperative Research: Comparative             Biostratigraphy of the Middle Cretaceous,                   Trans-Pecos Region, Texas (Earth Sciences)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* David LeMone, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1988
* USD 4,993.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: This recommended award would
support a one-year cooperative research project in earth sciences between
Professor David V. LeMone, Department of Geological Sciences, University of
Texas at El Paso, and Dr.Heinz A. Kollmann, Natural History Museum, Vienna,
Austria. The joint study is aimed at comparing and contrasting the fossils of
gastropods (snails, etc.) found in the Middle Cretaceous platform carbonates of
Europe (Greece) and North America (Trans-Pecos Region, Texas). The areas have
been separated by the formation of the Atlantic Ocean as a result of sea floor
spreading during early Cretaceous time, approximately 100 million years ago. The
resulting analysis will record the degree of endemism (evolutionary rates) of
the gastropods as well as evaluate their potential for use as index (time) and
facies (environment) fossils in comparison with traditionally utilized forms
(bivalves, ammonoids, et al.). The project is expected to contribute to improved
means of reconstructing geological history. The University of Texas at El Paso
houses the Southwest Biostratigraphic Institute, of which Professor LeMone is
Director. The Institute contains many local paleontological specimens, and is
well situated with reference to the regional Cretaceous sections. Dr. Kollmann
is an internationally known expert in the field of this research, and his
department at the Natural History Museum in Vienna has excellent collections and
equipment that will be useful in this study. The project thus contributes to an
important objective of NSF's cooperative science programs with Western Europe,
which is to stimulate scientific progress by bringing together scientists from
the U.S. and Europe who have similar research interests and who wish to engage
in mutually beneficial research cooperation. Funds from this award would support
necessary transportation and subsistence expenses for the U.S. principal
investigator, as well as shipping costs. Return visits by Dr. Kollmann and
members of his research group are expected. Merit of Proposal: The prospect of a
significant contribution to scientific knowledge from this proposed research is
very good. The U.S. principal investigator is a respected, productive scientist.
He will be working with a foreign researcher who is widely recognized for his
expertise in this field. The work plan is sound and the budget is reasonable.
The Austrian Science Foundation (FWF) is providing counterpart support for the
project and has approved the inclusion of this activity under the Memorandum of
Understanding between the NSF and the FWF. Funding: This award will not
duplicate other funding.