* 8619493
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Improvement of Amorphous  Silicon Semiconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1991
* Hellmut Fritzsche, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1991
* USD 28,140.00

The objectives of this two-year cooperative research project on the improvement
of amorphous silicon semiconductors between Hellmut Fritzsche of the University
of Chicago and Chen Jukuang of the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences are to elucidate the correlation between the microstructure
and the electronic properties of amorphous silicon, arrive at a better
understanding of surface and interfaces of this amorphous semiconductor
multilayers and measure microscopic mobility as a function of temperature,
doping and preparation conditions. This is a continuation of a 1982 U.S.-China
Program cooperative research grant. This project addresses problems at the
forefront of current research on amorphous crystalline materials. Amorphous
silicon is a promising material for many solid state devices. A better
understanding of these materials is expected to improve the quality and
reproducibility of semiconductors which are useful for large area solar cells
and numerous electronic and optical devices. The Chicago and Shanghai groups'
combined expertise on semiconductor physics and materials preparation and
characterization will promote the U.S.-China Cooperative Science Program's
objective of advancing scientific knowledge through international collaborative
research.