* 8619804
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:      Critical Velocity Phenomenon
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* Roy Torbert, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1990
* USD 23,225.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: This recommended award would
allow Dr. Roy B. Torbert, University of Alabama in Huntsville, to collaborate
with Dr. Gerhard Haerendel, Max Planck Institute for Physics and Astrophysics,
Munich, Federal Republic of Germany. They will attempt to resolve some of the
problems in interpreting the experimental results on the critical velocity
effect in space plasmas. These two researchers have produced conflicting results
and they propose to make definitive tests of the problems by working together.
The resolution of the issues they define should lead to a better understanding
of the physics of plasma-neutral gas interactions and their applications to
solar system astrophysics and neutral beam interactions. Each of the researchers
proposes new diagnostic instruments for electric field and current measurements
that should benefit the experiments. They wish to explore possibilities for
cooperation in developing the equipment and for doing future studies. The
project thus contributes to an important objective of NSF's cooperative science
programs with Western Europe, which is to stimulate scientific progress by
bringing together scientists from the U.S. and Europe who have similar research
interests and who wish to engage in mutually beneficial research cooperation.
Funds from this award would support salary, necessary transportation, and
partial subsistence expenses for the U.S. principal investigator, as well as
other minor costs directly related to the collaboration. Merit of Proposal: The
prospect is very good for a significant contribution to scientific knowledge
from this proposed research. The U.S. principal investigator is a highly
respected, productive scientist. The foreign researcher with whom he will
cooperate in the project is also an internationally known expert in this field.
The work plan has been carefully prepared and the budget is reasonable. The
cooperating scientists will have the opportunity to make significant advances in
their research efforts by sharing specialized knowledge and insights gained
previously from their separate, individual studies. Both researchers will
contribute to the project and will benefit significantly from the cooperation.
The Max-Planck-Gesellschaft is providing German counterpart support for the
project. Funding: This award will not duplicate other funding. The principal
investigator receives support for the domestic aspects of this research from
NASA. The Solar Terrestrial Program of NSF will fund $14,300 of this award from
its 1988 budget. That amount and $5,950 from International Programs in FY 1988
will supplement the last 24 months of this award.