* 8619697
* U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research:  Static Stresses in      Concrete Armor Units Used for Breakwaters
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* William McDougal, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 12/31/1988
* USD 5,700.00

This award will allow Professor William G. McDougal, Oregon State University, to
collaborate with Professor Hans F. Burcharth, University of Aalborg, Denmark.
They will study the strain resistance characteristics of the dolos armor unit.
Such units are used to provide protection against wave induced forces for
shorelines, jetties, and breakwaters. Traditionally, large stones have been used
to make rubble structures to form the protection, but as construction has been
extended into increasingly hostile wave environments, the necessary weight of
hydraulically stable stones becomes unreasonable. Such stones are hard to find
and to handle. As an alternative to stones a variety of armor units have been
developed. The dolos has received considerable attention, because it has a high
hydrodynamic stability coefficient, it's units interlock well, and it is
relatively porous, but it is also susceptible to structural failure. The
proposed research will test dolosse for strain under a variety of simulated
conditions. Professor McDougal is one of the few U.S. engineers studying this
problem, and Professor Burcharth is an international authority on concrete armor
units. It is necessary to conduct the research at Aalborg University, because
the test dolosse are there. They would be expensive to move or to construct in
the U.S.