* 8619517
* The Classical/Balance Controversy:  Evolutionary Biology    and Social Policy in the Fifties and Sixties
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* John Beatty, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 12/31/1988
* USD 30,000.00

The so-called "classical/balance" controversy pitted against each other two of
the most charismatic figures in genetics and evolutionary biology in one of the
most bitter arguments ever waged in those fields. The debate centered ostensibly
on the issue of genetic variation within species. The classical view held that
there is little such variation and that natural selection weeds this out. The
balance view held that there is much genetic variation within species and that
variation is actually maintained by natural selection. Throughout the 1950's and
1960's, H. J. Muller, the principal champion of the "classical" view, and
Theodosius Dobzhansky, who promoted the "balance" position, were locked in
dispute, in part on account of their personalities, in part on account of the
nature of the scientific issues involved, and in part on account of the social-
policy issues connected with the dispute. Dr. Beatty will examine this
controversy, dealing not only with its long lasting intractability and its
sudden transformation in the late 1960's, but also with the more general nature
of evolutionary biology since the heralded evolutionary synthesis of the 1920's
and 1930's. For, the classical/balance controversy is a revealing microcosm of
the post-synthesis period. In the first place, it illustrates the priorities of
evolutionary biologists as they turned from the success of the synthesis to
other issues, both long standing ones which had been set aside during the
formation of the synthesis and new ones which arose out of it. The controversy
exemplifies as well as the methodological, epistemological, and conceptual
problems that befuddled the pursuit of those post-synthesis goals. Moreover, the
classical/balance controversy illustrates the sorts of social policy (broadly
speaking, "eugenic") concerns that were inspired by synthesis and post-synthesis
developments, and by concurrent social and political changes. Besides scientific
papers and books published in connection with the controversy, Dr. Beatty will
also examine a number of publications concerning the broader social implications
of the dispute. He will also use transcripts and reports of meetings,
correspondence, unpublished papers, diaries, notebooks, lecture notes, exams,
etc. He will also interview a number of scientists who are still active and were
involved in the debate. This well-rounded study promises to make a major
contribution to our understanding not only of the development of contemporary
evolutionary biology but also of the ways social forces help to shape how
science works.