* 8619833
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: Multiphoton Excitation of Complex Atoms (Physics)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Walter Johnson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1990
* USD 5,650.00

This award will support a three-year cooperative research project in physics
between Professor Walter R. Johnson, Department of Physics, University of Notre
Dame, and Dr. Peter Zoller, Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of
Innsbruck, Austria. The scientists and members of their research groups are
collaborating in theoretical calculations regarding multiphoton ionization of
atoms. The goal is to develop a modern theoretical basis for the description of
this process, particularly in heavy atoms, including the effects of electron-
electron correlation. The theoretical framework of the calculations will be the
time-dependent Hartree-Fock method. Parallel to this work, a quantum defect
theory of nonlinear optical processes will be developed. Current interest in
multiphoton processes stems in large part from the availability of lasers. When
certain atoms are subjected to high intensities of laser radiation, there is an
unexpected, enhanced production of multiply charged ions. It is to explain such
experimental results on a quantitative basis that both research groups wish to
develop a modern theory of multiphoton ionization. At the present time,
theoretical analyses of multiphoton ionization processes in atoms are usually
based on the so-called independent particle model of the atom, which neglects
interactions between the electrons (electron correlation effects). This model is
simple, but does not give satisfactory results when applied to atoms with
several electrons in the outer shells, such as the alkaline earth and rare gas
atoms. Professor Johnson has developed methods for treating such atoms that go
beyond the independent particle model. His expertise in electron correlation
effects in atoms will be combined with that of Dr. Zoller, whose field of
research is laser-atom interactions and multiphoton processes. Funds from this
award would support necessary transportation and subsistence expenses for the
U.S. principal investigator and a member of his research group. The Austrian
Science Foundation (FWF) is providing counterpart support for the project and
has approved the inclusion of this activity under the Memorandum of
Understanding between the NSF and the FWF.