* 8619785
* U.S. Sweden Cooperative Research:  Long and Short Time      Relaxation Processes and the Ion-Matrix Coupling Problem in Salt + Polymeric Solvent Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* C. Austen Angell, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 11/30/1989
* USD 7,000.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: This recommended award would
support collaborative research between Professor Charles A. Angell, Purdue
University, and Professor L.M. Torell, Chalmers University of Technology,
Gothenburg, Sweden. They will continue their work on the elucidation of time-
dependent processes in potentially important solid state electrochemical device
media. Specifically, they plan to (a) make direct comparisons of experimental
and computer simulation results of glass transitions on picosecond time scales,
(b) test predictions from their former work about separate and distinguishable
relaxations due to total structure and mobile cation substructure in certain
ionic liquid systems, and (c) produce the first complete non-cryogenic
picosecond relaxation process observed in a glassy solid. Additionally, they
will compare short-time mechanical and electrical relaxation processes in salt +
polymeric solvent systems, and they will try to extend their work to certain
liquid and glassy oxide systems, such as P2O5, using light-scattering methods,
and to certain geochemical glasses for which high temperature glassy state
compressibility data are needed. Professors Angell and Torell have successfully
worked together in the past. Their two laboratories emphasize opposite ends of
the relaxation time spectrum, so their research is strengthened by the different
expertise and equipment of each setting. Their joint work has permitted research
on single relaxation processes over a large range of times. The project thus
contributes to an important objective of NSF's cooperative science programs with
Western Europe, which is to stimulate scientific progress by bringing together
scientists from the U.S. and Europe who have similar research interests and who
wish to engage in mutually beneficial research cooperation. Funds from this
award would support partial transportation and subsistence expenses for the U.S.
principal investigator and members of his research group, as well as other minor
costs directly related to the collaboration. Merit of Proposal: The cooperating
U.S. and foreign investigators are respected for their previous research
accomplishments, and there is a very good prospect that this proposed research
will lead to a significant contribution to scientific knowledge. The proposed
cooperation presents the U.S. investigators with the opportunity to work with a
leading foreign research group and to use highly specialized facilities abroad
that are complementary to their own. The work plan is sound and the budget is
reasonable. Previous collaboration between Professors Angell and Torell has been
productive, and the likelihood of additional mutual benefit from a continuation
of the joint effort is high. Funding: This award will not duplicate other
funding. The principal investigator receives project support from NSF's Division
of Materials Research, Solid State Chemistry Program, Grant No. DMR-8304887.
This recommended INT award would fund the addition of an important international
dimension to that research project. The principal investigator receives other
support for the domestic aspects of his research from the Department of Energy.