* 8619854
* Marine Stratocumulus Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1989
* Bruce Albrecht, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/1989
* USD 221,416.00

The physical processes involved in the maintenance and dissipation of marine
stratocumulus will be studied using aircraft observations and theoretical
models. The observations for this study will be made using the NCAR Electra
during the stratocumulus field phase of FIRE (First (International Satellite
Cloud Climatology Project) Regional Experiment) to be conducted off the coast of
southern California in July of 1987. The analysis will make use of mean,
turbulence, cloud microphysics, and radiation measurements from the Electra. The
overall objective is to improve and generalize methods for including
stratocumulus processes in general circulation models. The specific focus is on
entrainment and mixing processes at cloud top, convective circulations in marine
stratocumulus, and processes that regulate the cloud fraction in broken cloud
conditions. The theoretical effect will involve the development of a new low-
order spectral model of convection that contains terms representing the effects
of latent heating, entrainment, and radiative and surface heat fluxes, as well
as the effects of a shearing background wind field. An analysis of the solutions
to the model will produce the expected macrostructure of boundary layer
circulations: for example, the horizontal wavelenghts and orientations of the
embedded bands and the intensities of the circulations in the rows. These
theoretical results will be compared with the structure obtained from the FIRE
measurements.