* 8619759
* Neural Substrate for Self-Stimulation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1987,08/01/1989
* Charles Gallistel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/01/1989
* USD 147,800.00

The medial forebrain bundle (MFB) is an area in the brain. In animals, if an
electrode is implanted in this brain structure and small electrical stimulations
are given to this site, the animal will start to self-stimulate the area if
allowed to do so. The mechanisms behind this self-stimulation are being studied
by Dr. Charles Gallistel. The (MFB) self-stimulation phenomenon is a "bridge
between brain and behavior". It links behaviorally manifested motivation and
information storage processes to activity in a neural pathway descending through
the MFB to the midbrain. The stimulation creates a transient motivational state,
the priming effect. It also produces a rewarding signal, a neural signal that
codes for some motivationally significant facet or facets of the animal's
environment. The message carried by this rewarding signal is laid down in
memory; it is converted somewhere within the nervous system into an enduring
record of the magnitude of the rewarding signal. Together, the transient
motivational state and the memory of the rewarding signal dominate the animal's
behavior more dramatically than the motivational and rewarding effects of
natural variables. The disadvantage of the self-stimulation phenomenon is that
it is an artificial phenomenon. The normal function of the stimulated pathways
remains ill understood. However, studies suggest that these pathways play a
fundamental role in mediating the behavioral effects of naturally occurring
nutritional, social and sexual rewarding events and motivating states. The
hypothalamus and associated limbic structures are the site where the diverse
hormonal and sensory messages crucial to the successful and timely execution of
the animal's basic functions (self-preservation and reproduction) are
integrated. This integration generates signals that descend to the midbrain,
where they determine the course of the animal's behavior by selectively
potentiating and depotentiating crucial elements in the neural circuits that
establish the basic high-level patterns of coordination. A related function of
these parts of the brain is probably the collation of information about
substances and situations relevant to basic behavioral goals. Signals carrying
this information may be relayed over MFB projections to the sites in the nervous
system where this information is stored for use in organizing subsequent goal
directed behavior. Thus, while the exact function of the rewarding and
motivating pathways excited during self-stimulation may not be elucidated until
they have been identified and studied under more natural conditions, it is
nonetheless possible to frame well founded hypotheses regarding their general
function. The advantage of the self-stimulation preparation from the standpoint
of behavioral neuroscience is that highly integrated behavioral effects are
produced by direct stimulation of central neural tissue. A vertebrate model will
give us extreme access to this motivational system.