* 8619121
* Fault Tolerant Highly Parallel Signal Processing            Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Prithviraj Banerjee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1990
* USD 46,000.00

The availability of low-cost, high-density, high-speed processors and memories
in VLSI, together with the increasing demands for high-performance in signal
processing, has resulted in numerous proposals for highly parallel signal
processing architectures. Since reliability is a key requirement, this research
addresses the issues involved in the design of fault tolerance features in these
parallel architectures. The specific, unique and promising approach to fault
tolerance in this project is the use of low- cost on-line system-level error
detection and correction techniques, which are tailored to the signal processing
algorithms being executed on these architectures. Novel encoding schemes for
various classes of signal processing algorithms are being explored. The effects
of mapping large problems on limited processor mesh-connected architectures are
being investigated from the viewpoint of algorithm-based checking. The effects
of finite precision arithmetic on system level encodings are being studied. The
fault coverage and reliability improvements due to algorithm-based checking
schemes are being investigated using analytical techniques as well as functional
simulations. Eventually, the research should result in the identification of
some basic principles for the design of algorithm-based fault tolerance
techniques.