* 8619652
* Topics in Game Theory
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* Abraham Neyman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1990
* USD 145,228.00

This is an important project because its results have a wide range of
applications in economics. The project consists of work on the properties that
imply stability in non-cooperative games, repeated games with bounded complexity
and stable equilibria of repeated games. The research on stability addresses a
major difficulty associated with the application of game theory to economics,
i.e., multiple solutions for non-cooperative games. Game theory does not provide
sharp conclusions or testable predictions because there are many possible
outcomes intrinsic in a game. Past work by the investigators has dramatically
changed this area of research by demonstrating that the concept of stability can
be used to distinguish specific sensible outcomes to economic games with an
infinite number of possibilities. But multiple solutions reappear if
investigators can use different definitions of stability based only on their
judgement about what is or is not intuitively plausible. The contribution of
this project results from establishing the first convincing axiomatic foundation
for stability. Stability will not be defined but derived from a minimal list of
properties in this way limiting the number of acceptable definitions of
stability. Stable equilibria are calculated for some of the more important
economic problems such as the chainstore paradox and the prisoners' dilemma. The
classical theory of repeated games assumes full rationality and does not put any
bounds on the complexity that a strategy can have. But there are strategies in
the repeated games that could not be calculated using the most advanced
computers available. This project develops a more reasonable theory of repeated
games in which there is some upper bound on the complexity of strategies. This
one modification of repeated games theory is shown to explain apparent anomalies
in observed repeated games. Finally, these two lines of research are joined in
an effort to prove that long-term interaction described by stable repeated games
must inevitably lead to efficient cooperative outcomes. The investigators have
made numerous fundamental contributions to our understanding of game theory.
They are capable of successfully pursuing this exciting and very ambitious
research agenda.