* 8619966
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: Cell Biology of      Receptor Mediated Endocytosis
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Alan Schwartz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 07/31/1991
* USD 8,390.00

This is a three-year cooperative research project in cellular biology between
Professor Alan L. Schwartz, Professor of Pediatrics and Professor of
Pharmacology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, and
Professors H. J. Geuze and G. J. A. M. Strous, Center for Electron Microscopy,
University of Utrecht, The Netherlands. The cooperating scientists and members
of their research groups will continue their efforts to elucidate the cell
biology of receptor mediated endocytosis (RME) and to define this process in
both biochemical and morphological terms. The investigators will use the hepatic
asialoglycoprotein receptor as their model for the study of RME. Receptor
mediated endocytosis is a process by which extracellular macromolecules and
particles gain entry to the intracellular environment. The process is
responsible for the cellular uptake and delivery of a broad class of substances
which include essential cell nutrients (e.g. iron, Vitamin B-12), toxins (e.g.
diphtheria toxin), cell growth factors/hormones (e.g. insulin), viruses (e.g.
influenza), and proteins undergoing clearance from the circulation (e.g.
asialoglycoprotein). This cooperative study is expected to lead to an increased
understanding of the molecular basis of cell-cell communication and the transfer
of biochemical information from outside of a cell to within it. Such an
understanding of the basic biology of RME would have direct applicability to the
elucidation of cellular processes in normal cells, and in addition provide a
background on which to base new approaches to directed drug therapy. The
approach here will combine a biochemical and molecular biological aspect
(Professor Schwartz's expertise) with ultrastructural immunocytochemistry (the
expertise of the Dutch investigators). Professor Geuze's laboratory in Utrecht
is equipped with several state-of-the-art electron microscopes and ultra-cryo
microtomes which will be utilized in this study. Funds from this award will
support necessary transportation and subsistence expenses for the U.S. principal
investigator and members of his research group. The government of The
Netherlands, through the University of Utrecht, is also providing support for
the project.