* 8619396
* U.S.-Norway Cooperative Research:  Investigations of        Core-Ionization Energies, Acidities, and Related            Chemical Properties
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1988
* T. Darrah Thomas, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 11/30/1988
* USD 5,100.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objedtives: This recommended award would
allow Dr. T. Darrah Thomas, Oregon State University, and his research associate,
Dr. Michele Siggel, to collaborate with Dr. Leif J. Saethre, University of
Tromso, Norway. They will study chemical processes that depend on the ability of
a molecule to accept charge. Two factors affect this ability: (1) the charge
distribution in the neutral molecule, which establishes a potential at the site
of interest that is more or less favorable to accepting charge, and (2) the
ability of the valence electrons to rearrange after the charge is added, and
thus create a more favorable environment for the added charge. The proposed
research will try to determine the relative importance of these two factors in a
variety of chemically interesting systems. The research will use combined
measurements of core ionization energies, Auger kinetic energies, and gas-phase
acidities together with theoretical calculations. Dr. Thomas has developed one
of the outstanding electron spectroscopy laboratories in the world. Dr. Saethre
has worked with Dr. Thomas' group in the past and this project is a continuation
of their productive research history. The Norwegian research group is strong,
especially for the required theoretical work of the project, and it has good
research and computing facilities. The expected results of the research could
increase the understanding of fundamental chemical properties. The project thus
contributes to an important objective of NSF's cooperative science programs with
Western Europe, which is to stimulate scientific progress by bringing together
scientists from the U.S. and Europe who have similar research interests and who
wish to engage in mutually beneficial research cooperation. Funds from this
award would support necessary transportation and subsistence expenses for the
U.S. principal investigator and members of his research group, as well as
communication and shipping costs. Return visits by Dr. Saethre are anticipated.
Merit of Proposal: The cooperating U.S. and foreign investigators are respected
for their previous research accomplishments, and there is a very good prospect
that this proposed research will lead to a significant contribution to
scientific knowledge. The U.S. principal investigator is a respected, productive
scientist. His foreign colleague is also carrying out important studies in this
field. The work plan is sound and the budget is reasonable. Both research groups
will contribute to the project and will benefit significantly from the
cooperation. The government of Norway, through the Norwegian Council for
Industrial and Scientific Research and the Norwegian Marshall Plan, is also
providing support for the project. Funding: This award will not duplicate other
funding. The principal investigator receives project support from NSF's Division
of Chemistry, Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Grant Nos. CHE-8613418
and CHE-8313251. This recommended INT award would fund the addition of an
important international dimension to the first of these research projects.