* 8619526
* US-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Proanthocyanidin       Polymers and their Complexes
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1989
* Wayne Mattice, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 07/31/1989
* USD 3,000.00

This award will allow Professor Wayne L. Mattice, University of Akron, to
conduct collaborative research with Dr. Lawrence J. Porter, Chemistry Division
of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, located at Lower Hutt,
New Zealand. The conformational properties of proanthocyanidin polymers, and the
nature of their complexes with other macromolecules is the focus of the research
investigation. Proanthocyanidin polymers are widespread in plants and are of
particular interest because plants use them as a natural defense mechanism.
These polymers are also of commercial interest as natural adhesives. The polymer
samples will be provided by Dr. Porter, an organic chemist with an extensive
background in working with proanthocyanidins as natural products. Dr. Mattice, a
physical chemist, will perform circular dichroism and flourescence measurements,
molecular mechanics calculations, and statistical mechanical treatments of the
samples and complexes. This research project fulfills an objective of the
U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Science Program by bringing together the expertise
of respected physical and organic chemists to conduct investigations that will
be of mutual benefit. The New Zealand scientist provides the expertise on sample
synthesis, isolation, purification and handling. The American PI has the
expertise in theoretical characterization and facilities in his laboratory for
the spectroscopic analysis and computational support. The NSF Program Director
in Materials Research for the Polymers Program has recommended funding of the
bilateral exchange. The selection committee in New Zealand has recommended this
project as a high priority mentioning the truly cooperative nature of the
program.