* 8619577
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:      Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Gerd Faltings, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1990
* USD 5,500.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: This recommended award would
support a three-year cooperative research project in mathematics between
Professor Gerd Faltings, Department of Mathematics, Princeton University, and
Professor Gisbert Wuestholz, University of Wuppertal, Federal Republic of
Germany. The mathematicians are collaborating in the area of arithmetic
algebraic geometry, a subject particularly concerned with the number of
solutions of algebraic equations in several variables when the solutions are
restricted to a finite field. Topics of joint research are: (1)questions of
effectivity for diophantine problems (classical diophantine equations are
polynomial equations for which the unknowns are to be rational numbers), (2)the
Shafarevich-conjecture for algebraic surfaces, (3)variations of Hodge-structures
and periods, and (4)integer points on abelian varieties. These are topics of
extreme interest and profundity in mathematics. Professor Faltings has made
important contributions to the field of arithmetic algebraic geometry and is
internationally acclaimed for his accomplishments. Professor Wuestholz is a
world expert in the techniques necessary to obtain effective results in this
area of mathematics. The collaboration of these two investigators is expected to
be an extremely productive one. The project thus contributes to an important
objective of NSF's cooperative science programs with Western Europe, which is to
stimulate scientific progress by bringing together scientists from the U.S. and
Europe who have similar research interests and who wish to engage in mutually
beneficial research cooperation. Funds from this award would support necessary
transportation and partial subsistence expenses for the U.S. principal
investigator. Merit of Proposal: There is an excellent prospect that this
proposed research will lead to a significant contribution to scientific
knowledge. The U.S. principal investigator is a highly respected, productive
mathematician. The foreign researcher with whom he will cooperate in the project
is also an internationally known expert in this field. Previous collaboration
between Professors Faltings and Wuestholz has been productive, and the
likelihood of additional mutual benefit from a continuation of the joint effort
is high. Funding: This award will not duplicate other funding. The principal
investigator receives project support from NSF's Division of Mathematical
Sciences, Grant No. DMS-8502316. This recommended INT award would fund the
addition of an important international dimension to that research project.