* 8619732
* Equipment Replacement in a Technologically Dynamic          Environment
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1990
* Wallace Hopp, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1990
* USD 65,030.00

Almost all equipment replacement models assume that replacement technology
remains constant over time and that replacement decisions are driven primarily
by deterioration of the current equipment. However, in areas such as computer
hardware and software, robotics, automatic control, and other electronic
technologies, which are undergoing rapid technological change, replacements are
made to upgrade the current system, as well as replace deteriorating equipment.
Hence, it is critical to consider the state of the currently available
replacement technology and the potential for technological improvements in the
near future to make economic replacement decisions. Current replacement models
are not well-suited to this problem. The objective of this study is to develop a
useful method for analyzing the equipment replacement problem under
technological change. Because technological forecasting is costly and uncertain,
the basic approach will be to characterize conditions for which it is optimal to
replace. These conditions will help the decision-maker determine whether
forecasting is necessary and will indicate how sensitive the optimal "keep" or
"replace" decision is to the accuracy of the forecast. Means for computing these
conditions will be based on recent results in planning horizons and sensitivity
analysis in dynamic programming. 8714696 Rode Gallium Arsenide and related
compound semiconductors have progressed from the R&amp;D to the production stage
where manufacturing efforts are being planned and carried out. The processing of
these materials is very different from the processing of Silicon for integrated
circuits. This proposal covers a request for support of the Second U.S.
Conference on GaAs Manufacturing Technology. A substantial group of leaders in
the field, representing U.S. industry, universities and government, will meet at
this conference. This conference will take place October 12-14 at Portland, OR.
This conference represents an attempt to integrate university based
manufacturing studies with industrial manufacturing engineering efforts. NSF
support of this interactive role is extremely important.