* 8619852
* Metal Colloids and Thin Films
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,07/31/1990
* Kenneth Klabunde, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1990
* USD 16,862.00

This award supports the participation of Dr. Kenneth J. Klabunde of Kansas State
University in a program of cooperative research with Dr. Galo Cardenas-Trivino
of the University of Concepcion, Chile, focusing on the producion and
characterization of a new class of stable colloids in thin-film form. The U.S.
principal investigator has developed a method, based on the clustering of metal
atoms in organic solvents at low temperature, for producing stable thin-film
metal colloids using non-aqueous media. The resulting colloidal particles are
unusually pure and can be combined in thin-film forms with interesting
electrical and optical properties. The properties of the resulting colloids and
metallic films are not predictable a priori, but may turn out to be insulating,
metallic, or semiconducting, and therefore may have important uses. For example,
the films may optically resemble metal films but be only poor electrical
conductors. These properties, and the possibilities that others may be
evidenced, form the stimulus for this work, which extends previous colloidal
formation using Au and Pd to Pt, Cu, Ag, Zn, Cd, Ga, In, Ge, Sn, and Pb. Various
solvents will also be used in colloidal formation. The resultant colloid
particles and thin films will be studied using electrophoresis, electron
microscopy, spectroscopy, thermogravimetric analysis and other electrical and
thermal measurements. The objectives of the collaboration include the
characterization of both the colloidal particles and the thin films produced
from them. In this cooperative project colloid and thin film preparation will be
carried out primarily in the U.S. investigator's laboratory, while
characterization will primarily be pursued in the laboratory of the Chilean
collaborator. Considering the range of properties of the materials already
observed, in addition to an improvement in our general understanding of particle
stabilization in non-aqueous media, this work could result in the development of
materials useful in the ceramics, electronics, or catalyst industries, with
applications as decorative coatings, semiconductors, conductors, solar cells,
etc.