* 8619513
* Interionic Structure of Ion Pairs.  Hydration Effects in    Molecular Electronic Spectra of Laser Dyes.
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1987,09/30/1990
* Ernest Grunwald, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 09/30/1990
* USD 184,900.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports research
by Prof. Ernest Grunwald, which aims at increasing chemical understanding of two
important aspects of chemical structure and reactivity in solution: (1) the
interionic structure of ion pairs, as analyzed by their electric dipole moments;
and (2) hydrophobic interactions and solvent structure in solution, via
spectroscopic studies of laser dyes. Both areas of research, though
experimentally unrelated, are important for advancing understanding of dynamic
chemical phenomena in ionic solutions. The ion-pair project is a continuation of
research supported heretofore by Foundation grant CHE-8310130, under which
steady progress was made toward creating an experimental and theoretical base of
deduction of interionic structures. The principal methodology to be employed in
the current work is analysis of electric dipole moments of modified anilinium
sulfonates with strategically located substituent groups. The second project
will use the comparison of medium effects in absorption and emission spectra of
laser dyes at high pressure (up to 7 kbar) to sort out the contribution of
hydration energies to transition energies. The interpretation of the results
will provide critical information on the structure of the water network in
aqueous solutions.