* 8619806
* U.S.-Norway Cooperative Research:  Compartmental Modeling ofthe Metabolism of Retinol and Retinol-Binding Protein
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Michael Green, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 02/28/1990
* USD 4,450.00

This award will enable Dr. Michael H. Green to collaborate with Drs. Kaare R.
Norum, Rune Blomhoff, and Trond Berg, University of Oslo, Norway. They will
study the metabolism of vitamin A and will apply the unique approach of
computer-assisted, model-based compartmental analysis to data on (1) the in vivo
turnover of retinol and retinol-binding protein (RBP) in vitamin A - sufficient
rats, (2) the dynamics of intracellular transport and secretion of retinol in
vitamin A - deficient rats, and (3) the kinetics of receptor-mediated
endocytosis of retinol/RBP in parenchymal and stellate rat liver cells. Their
studies will facilitate the development and quantification of physiologically
relevant compartmental models which describe the dynamics of whole body and
hepatic retinol and RBP metabolism. They will gain information on (1) the nature
and extent of RBP vs. retinol recycling among plasma, liver, and extrahepatic
tissues, (2) the hepatic regulatory pathways which are affected by vitamin A
deficiency, and (3) the intracellular and subcellular transport of retinol and
RBP in hepatic cells in vitro. The proposed experiments are a continuation and
extension of their previous successful research collaboration. Dr. Green is an
expert in analytical methods for vitamin A, model-based compartmental analysis,
and whole body vitamin A metabolism. The Norwegian researchers are specially
skilled in receptor-mediated endocytosis, liver cell separation and culture, and
vitamin A metabolism and methods.