* 8619886
* Effective Distributed Computing: A Reliable Objective-Base  Environment for Computer Science Research
* CSE,EIA
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1993
* Medhi Sayfi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 07/31/1993
* USD 3,265,823.00

The Clouds Project at Georgia Tech is a research effort directed toward the
development of a distributed object-based computer system. This award will aid
in the establishment of an experimental computer research facility to support
work to evolve the Clouds system from its current status as a research tool to a
more robust system that will support a wide variety of computing research. This
will involve further development of the connection between Clouds and Unix so as
to provide the features of Clouds within a familiar environment; develop- ment
of a distributed object filing system to support named, permanent objects;
porting the Clouds kernel to more modern machines; and, eventually, providing a
distributed operating system on top of the kernel, supporting such features as
object migration for load balancing, a fault-tolerant job scheduler, global
system monitoring systems, support for multi-cluster structuring, transparent
replication of objects, and others. The Clouds system will also serve as a
testbed for ongoing research in several areas including environments, software
engineering and fault tolerance. The project will utilize a new shared-memory
multiprocessor system and a number of new workstations to be acquired under the
grant as well as equipment previously available at Georgia Tech. Under this
award, the Clouds project will be substantially expanded and other research
areas strengthened as well. It is also expected that the graduate program will
continue to expand thereby providing additional needed doctoral level computer
science graduates.