* 8619818
* US-United Kingdom Cooperative Science: Decision and Risk    Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Herbert Moskowitz, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1991
* USD 11,858.00

The proposed research project is an outgrowth of an initial collaborative effort
to review and assess the state of knowledge in the fields of decision and risk
analysis, with the aim of providing a perspective for future research directions
in these disciplines. A recent review of the evolution and state of the fields
suggests four broad and significant trends: (1) increased focus on decision and
risk analysis applications, (2) more interdisciplinary research among normative
and descriptive researchers in direct and allied disciplines, (3) growing
efforts to reexamine existing theory, and (4) accelerated growth of interactive,
intelligent software for decision support and training. Consistent with these
broad research trends, this proposed research project is divided into the
following two categories: (1) Theory and methodological development and (2) risk
analysis and management. Theory and methodological issues to be addressed
include model formulation, modeling uncertainty, modeling preferences, and
optimization. A fundamental premise in the proposed work is that usually, more
information is acquired than is necessary to reach an optimal choice. Moreover,
as precise inputs from individuals are generally unreliable, imprecise
information may be more relevant, appropriate, and all that is required to
arrive at a rational decision. Given this premise, the investigators shall
reexamine the existing theory and build and test (both computationally and
behaviorally) interactive, integrated, intelligent decision support models to
facilitate model building, uncertainty and preference assessment, and
optimization consistent with this premise. The results of the research should
provide new normative and descriptive knowledge regarding human inference and
decision making capabilities and behavior, new methodologies, and intelligent,
interactive software to support decision making training and practice. This
research will be carried out in collaboration with Professor Derek W. Bunn of
the London Business School. It is the objective of the U.S.-United Kingdom
Cooperative Science Program to promote mutually beneficial research cooperation
and to enable U.S. scientists to take advantage of special research
opportunities. This award fulfills that objective by enabling Dr. Herbert
Moskowitz to spend three years in collaboration with British scientists with
complementary expertise.