* 8619720
* US-Hungary Cooperative Research on Thermal Oxidation Degradation of Polyolefins and Poly (Vinyl Halides)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Otto Vogl, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/1990
* USD 46,100.00

Proposal Objectives: The primary objective of this U.S.-Hungary cooperative
research project between Dr. Otto Vogl of Polytechnic University and Dr. Ferenc
Tudos of the Central Institute of Chemistry is to study oxidation of polyolefins
of various stereochemistry and structural similarities. The research should help
answer the fundamental question of how the chemical structure of macromolecules
affects degradation process and may lead to methods for increasing the service
life of polymers. Relevance to Program Objectives: This project in polymers
research fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine
complementary talents, pool resources, and share research facilities in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence. Merit: The proposal ranks in the
Excellent/Very Good category. Its technical merit therefore warrants NSF
support. The U.S. and Hungarian researchers are well regarded and the rationale
for international cooperation, in terms of anticipated mutual scientific
benefits, is clearly articulated. Significant research results are anticipated
from this cooperative project which could be useful in locating vulnerable
linkages in conventional polymers. Interrelated Projects: Dr. Vogl currently
receives support from the NSF Polymers Program for the study of Helical Polymers
Optical Activity under grant number DMR-8617768. Funding: The requested budget
covers the incremental costs to the U.S. of international cooperation associated
with the research in accordance with program guidelines.