* 8619053
* Understanding Written and Pictured Information
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1991
* Mary Potter, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1991
* USD 375,000.00

This research, a renewal of Potter's current NSF-supported research project,
will study the very rapid processes involved in reading, comprehending, and
remembering words, sentences, and pictures. The main focus of the work is on
levels or stages of processing: What are the levels of processing, what is their
time course, and how do they interact? I. In reading, is the first stage of word
recognition (a) responsive only to the visual word itself, as modular theories
hold, or (b) is it influenced by the previous sentence context, as "interactive"
theories propose? The nonword illusion and letter migration are two phenomena
that reflect early stages of word recognition; if they show an effect of
sentence context, that will support (b). An extension to "nonobject" perception
is planned. II. As a sentence is read, several levels of representation are
presumably computed: a syntactic structure, the literal meaning of the word
combination, and a broader interpretation of the meaning in the context of the
text. These levels of sentence processing will be tracked as they evolve over
time, by varying the rate of reading and by probing recognition of a word in the
sentence at several intervals after presentation. III. Immediately after reading
a sentence, "verbatim" recall is possible, even for long sentences that exceed
the normal memory span of seven or so unrelated words. This shows that one's
memory for a sentence is efficiently structured. The research will test the
hypothesis that the structure is primarily meaning- based; recall, like
spontaneous sentence production, starts from a set of ideas the speaker intends
to express, and it relies on the verb to produce the appropriate sentence
structure. The words used to express the ideas of the original sentence are
selected from recently-activated words, resulting in high accuracy of recall
under normal circumstances. Together, these studies will give a picture of
several levels of processing during the reading, understanding, and recall of
sentences, and will draw parallels to picture processing in certain cases. The
research will increase understanding of the reading process and may help in the
design of improved methods of reading instruction.