* 8619470
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  High Energy Heavy Ion    Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Jere Lord, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 02/28/1989
* USD 5,050.00

This award would allow Drs. R. Jeffrey Wilkes, Thompson H. Burnett, and Jere J.
Lord, University of Washington, Seattle, to collaborate with Dr. K.N. Ingvar
Otterlund and his research group at the University of Lund, Sweden. They will
study high energy heavy ion interactions. The purpose will be to search for the
new state of nuclear matter, the quark-gluon plasma, which is predicted to be
created in heavy ion collisions. Their research will be done at the heavy ion
facility at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva,
Switzerland and at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in the United States. The
heavy ions 16O and 32S will be accelerated to energies of 13-200 GEV/nucleon and
then directed into emulsion chamber detectors, which are arrays of nuclear
emulsion plates. The procedure will permit precise observations of the produced
particle tracks. This experiment is possible because the new CERN heavy ion beam
became available in late 1986. The research is strengthened because the U.S.
group is expert in the design and construction of emulsion chambers, and their
Swedish counterparts are strong in exposure arrangements and analysis of data,
and they are well-known for their theoretical interpretation of multiparticle
production. The proposed cooperation presents the U.S. investigators with an
opportunity to work with one of the world's leading research groups and to use
highly specialized facilities abroad that are not easily available to them in
the U.S.