* 8619803
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: State-Selective      Detection of Products from State-Selected and Oriented      Reactants (Chemistry)
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1987,04/30/1990
* David Parker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 04/30/1990
* USD 6,420.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project in chemistry
between Dr. David H. Parker, Department of Chemistry, University of California,
Santa Cruz, and Dr. Steven Stolte, Catholic University Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. The investigators will combine recent advances in laser methods for
detection and characterization of molecules formed in crossed-molecular-beam
reactions with techniques which prepare the reacting species in selected
rotational and vibrational states. In addition, directional properties such as
the dependence of the reactivity on the orientation of the reactants (the so-
called steric effect), which provide intimate details on how a chemical reaction
proceeds, will be emphasized. Dr. Parker has considerable experience in applying
the technique of laser ionization to detect reaction products in flames,
supersonic expansions, and other challenging environments. By carefully
selecting the frequency of the laser light used in probing for reaction
products, he can also determine the specific energy level or levels those
product species are in. Professor Stolte, in Nijmegen, leads a research group
that has developed elegant methods for producing beams of molecules in selected
orientations and energy states, allowing them to react with various other
species, and detecting the products as well as the alignment of product
chemiluminescence when it occurs. By cooperating in a detailed study of a few
carefully selected reactions, the two scientists expect to enhance current
knowledge of molecular reaction dynamics, and in particular to gain a better
understanding of how a chemical reaction takes place on the most basic level.
Funds from this award will support necessary transportation and subsistence
expenses for the U.S. principal investigator. The government of The Netherlands,
through the Catholic University Nijmegen, is also providing support for the
project.