* 8619867
* RUI:  Metabolism and Recycling of Water in Lactating Rodents
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1987,08/01/1989
* Christine Oswald, Seton Hill College
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 08/01/1989
* USD 44,820.00

Population for small mammals are often characterized by wide temporal variations
in the number of individuals. Variations in physiological responses to stress
during reproductive periods often limit population distributions within species.
For instance, lactation, the period during which the dam supports offspring
through the production of milk, places particularly high water and energy
metabolism requirements on small mammals that have large litters. The ability of
the dam to make physiological adjustments to these requirements determines the
success or failure in rearing the litter. Ultimately then, the size of the
population is partly dependent on the response of the dam to the metabolically
demanding period of lactation. The purpose of this project is to study the
components of water metabolism during lactation and during non-reproductive
periods to determine which and to what extent components are adjusted to the
combination of water and lactation stress. The species to be studied are redback
voles and white-footed mice. The voles are poorly adapted to dry environments
and are often found in desert- like regions. The extent to which these two
species adjust components of their water metabolism will thus help elucidate the
role of the environment in shaping physiological responses of animals during
lactation. Measuring the components of water metabolism represent the first
complete quantitative analysis of water metabolism during lactation in a wild
species. They are thus critical to eventual understanding of the population
dynamics of small mammals.