* 8619104
* Normative and Conceptual Issues in the Regulation of        Biotechnology in the Nation's Bays and Estuaries
* BIO,BIO
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Mark Sagoff, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1990
* USD 61,668.00

This project will identify and analyze ethical and conceptual issues involved in
the regulation of recombinant DNA organisms in aquatic systems. Statues
governing aquatic ecosystems reflect aesthetic, cultural, and moral values,
which provide a context for analyzing public concerns for the natural
environment. In this project, the principal investigator will examine concepts
of pollution, water quality, and biological integrity, which are central to the
regulatory framework, in relation to the sorts of changes that recombinant DNA
organisms may cause to occur in marine environments. The ways in which such
changes are described and classified, and the choice of environmental and
ecological indices with which to assess risks or harms, will be crucial to how
recombinant DNA organisms are regulated. The project involves philosophical
analysis of the relevant scientific, regulatory, and philosophical literatures
and on-going, on-site interaction with marine and estuarine scientists at
several University of Maryland laboratories and centers. In addition, the
principal investigator will participate in a working group of biologists,
ecologists, social scientists, regulators and scholars. Group members will
prepare and critique each others' papers on scientific, regulatory, and ethical
issues associated with application of recombinant DNA organisms in aquatic
environments. Products will include a book containing the papers by the
interdisciplinary working group and a series of essays by the principal
investigator, for publication in scholarly and professional journals. This
project will make a valuable contribution to the understanding of scientists and
the public and its officials about ethical and value issues associated with
environmental applications of recombinant DNA organisms, particularly in marine
and estuarine environments. Because of their track record and resources, the
principal investigator and institutional environment are uniquely suited for
this project; the working group members provide the right mix of expertise and
affiliations to complement the skills available from the institutional sponsor.
The research design is appropriate; costs are reasonable; and results are likely
to be useful and widely distributed. Total support in the amount of $61,668 is
recommended.