* 8619272
* Sensory Components of Under-Ice Movement and Hole Finding   Behavior of Ringed Seals and Weddell Seals
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1987,05/01/1991
* Robert Elsner, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/01/1991
* USD 354,005.00

Arctic and Antarctic seals are able to inhabit areas of complete ice cover by
virtue of their ability to make and maintain breathing holes through the ice.
The sensory system of these marine mammals is crucial for locating these holes
while the animal is under ice. The difficulty of working with these animals in
the natural environment has resulted in few studies which address the
orientation and navigation capabilities of marine mammals. This project involves
the refinement of acoustic remote sensing technology and its application to
Weddell seals in the natural environment in Antarctica. Drs. Wartzok and Elsner
have developed a system for acoustically tracking seals as they swim under the
ice. Preliminary studies have indicated that vision plays a dominant role in
under-ice navigation when this sensory modality is available. More detailed and
quantified studies of the roles vision, audition and vibrissal senses play in
under-ice navigation and hole finding by seals will be conducted. In addition,
the ranges at which seals can visually detect new breathing holes will be
correlated with the laboratory-based limits of visual sensitivity and the field
measured light extinction coefficients will be determined. Additional research
will quantify the ranges at which seals can use auditory cues to detect new
breathing holes and what types of auditory cues they use. Once the importance of
audition for these animals in their natural environment is determined, the
impact of anthropogenic sound on the biology of these animals can be inferred.
The range over which vibrissae function in hole finding will be determined. The
tracking of more than one seal under the ice will provide an understanding of
under-ice behavioral interactions.