* 8619842
* U.S.-Tunisia Cooperative Research:  New Institutional       Economics and Economic Development
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Jeffrey Nugent, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 01/31/1990
* USD 12,500.00

Professor Jeffrey B. Nugent, University of Southern California, leads a
collaborative research project on New Institutional Economics (NIE) and Economic
Development in Tunisia involving scholars at the University of Southern
California and the University of Tunis, Tunisia. His main collaborator is
Professor Mustapha K. Nabli, who heads the project's counterpart group at the
Economics Department, University of Tunis. NIE analyzes the effect of
institutions on economic behavior and explains why institutions change over
time, whereas traditional economic theory overlooks institutions. Considering
the influence of institutions in economic analysis leads to different
conclusions compared to other forms of analysis and NIE has changed
interpretations of findings in macroeconomics, labor economics, health
insurance, military procurement, and other economic topics. NIE is especially
useful in situations where institutional change is likely to be an important
factor in drawing economic conclusions, such as in developing countries. Despite
its potential, NIE has not been greatly used to describe the economics of
developing countries. This is the topic of interest for Dr. Nugent's and Dr.
Nabli's group, and they have done several studies in Tunisia. The country offers
good case material for NIE analysis, because of its changing institutional
structures. The two research groups have exchanged graduate students and
research visits for several years. The support from this award will allow the
researchers to come together to synthesize the results of their past work and to
plan their next steps. The award will fund visits of the American researchers to
a meeting in Tunis with their Tunisian counterparts and return visits by
Tunisians to the University of Southern California. Drs. Nugent and Nabli plan
to publish a volume summarizing their work and to prepare articles on specific
topics. The proposed cooperation allows the U.S. investigators to use data
sources abroad that are not easily available to them in the U.S.