* 8619228
* High Resolution Infrared Atmospheric Spectra:  Solar        Spectra Atlas and Laboratory Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1991
* Aaron Goldman, University of Denver
* Continuing grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 04/30/1991
* USD 383,100.00

The infrared spectrum of the sun, observed through the earth's atmosphere,
affords a wealth of information about atmospheric trace gases, their identities,
and their amounts in the whole atmosphere when observed from ground level. The
information comes in the form of individual spectrum line positions
(wavelengths) in the solar spectrum, and in the intensity with which any given
spectral line is absorbed from the background of the solar spectrum. Each
spectrum line is a signature of some molecular or atomic species. By sensitive
ground-based, or balloon-borne, spectroscopic instrumentation it is thus
possible to survey the atmosphere for trace levels of gases of natural or man-
made origin, and to observe changes over time. By using spectroscopic
instruments of very high resolution, it is possible to observe hundreds of
spectral lines representing various atmospheric trace gases, but to do this
requires a detailed catalogue of precise wavelengths of the various gases
present in the atmosphere, and of the solar spectrum itself as seen through the
atmosphere. This grant supports an extension of research done under grants
ATM-8315647 and ATM-8609286. It continues the analysis and cataloguing of
spectroscopic data gathered in those earlier grants and, in its second and third
years, further laboratory measurements to produce new high-resolution spectra of
individual trace gases of atmospheric interest, including gases believed to
affect the stratospheric ozone layer. These new data will also be analyzed and
catalogued. Theoretical analyses of the complex molecular spectra will be made
as an aid to identification and interpretation. This activity, while not in
itself yielding new insights into physical and chemical science, yet builds an
indispensible reference tool on which more probing investigations can proceed.
The atlas of solar infrared spectra being developed under this grant is useful
to all scientists working on the infrared spectroscopy of the sun and of the
earth's atmosphere. The work will be done in a laboratory equipped with state-
of-the-art spectroscopic instrumentation. This research group enjoys an
international reputation for its role in advancing the application of high-
resolution spectroscopy to studies of atmospheric composition.