* 8619401
* A Case Study of Reasoning in Theory Construction
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Carol Smith, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 12/31/1988
* USD 12,000.00

Drs. Millman and Smith are using a case study of a sustained episode of
reasoning in the construction of a new scientific theory to develop a
philosophical account of the deployment and organization of various reasoning
strategies in theory generation. The case study focuses on Darwin's reasoning to
the formulation of a first sketch of his theory of natural selection between
1837 and 1842. Their project is organized around several questions: (1) What is
the best way to characterize or represent Darwin's early views in the B
Notebook? (2) What heuristic strategies or principles of inquiry are useful in
theory construction? Are there any significant differences between reasoning in
the generation of new theories and reasoning in later phases theory development?
(3) What are the main types of change that occur during the process of theory
construction? The Darwin case which Drs. Smith and Millman are examining
suggests several ideas about theory construction: (1) Commitment to a primary
concept cluster (along with other features of a problem situation) may precede
and help guide the first formulation of a theory. (2) Organized inquiry may
include such reasoning strategies as (a) play with opposite hypotheses relating
concepts in a cluster, (b) use of interacting multiple analogies, (c) work on
component units of theory, and (d) use and reasoned violation of methodological
principles. (3) Drs. Millman and Smith also will discuss a number of types of
change within developing conceptual systems, with particular attention to the
role of conceptual differentiation. The ultimate goal of this project is not,
however, a simple, albeit extraordinarily rich case study. Using their expertise
in both philosophy and cognitive psychology, they will examine features
identified in the Darwin case for their applicability to other cases of theory
construction. This study thus promises significant contributions to the history,
philosophy and psychology of scientific theory development.