* 8619457
* Geochemistry and Petrology of Archaean Supracrustal Rocks   from West Greenland
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1990
* Robert Dymek, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Campbell
* 11/30/1990
* USD 226,955.00

The evolution of the Earth's early crust will be investigated through studies on
the Isua and Malene supracrustal rocks from West Greenland. X-ray fluorescence
and instrumental neutron activation analyses for major and trace elements will
be integrated with results from isotopic studies in order to: (a) characterize
the diversity of crustal components in clastic metasedimentary rocks; (b)
identify the nature of ancient crustal components of the Isua rocks by carrying
out multivariate mixing calculations on metasediment chemical compositions; (c)
evaluate the origin of Malene gneisses as possible products of hydrothermal
alteration of ancient oceanic rust by heated sea-water; and (d) determine
whether metasedimentary granulite show element depletions, as found in many
granitic gneisses metamorphosed to the granulite facies. Mineral compositions
will be determined by electron microprobe analysis and relevant geothermometers
and geobarometers will be used to refine the metamorphic history of this region.
Field work will be carried out in order to evaluate the relationship of Malene
Supracrustal rocks to granitic gneisses and characterize their stratigraphic and
lithologic variations. The Principal Investigator is a leading authority on
early Earth geochemistry and petrology, and has a great deal of field experience
in Greenland. The facilities required for this investigation are adequate at
Washington University.