* 8619661
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Joint Seminar on Current   Developments and Trends in Polymer Science (Yountsville,    California, September 7-11, 1987)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1988
* David Tirrell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 06/30/1988
* USD 19,610.00

This award would allow 12 young American polymer scientists and 18 young German
polymer scientists to attend a U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Joint Seminar on
"Current Developments and Trends in Polymer Science," to be held in Yountsville,
California on September 7-11, 1987. The seminar will address critical areas in
advanced materials science through a well-balanced program that includes both
the physics and chemistry of macromolecules. The proposed seminar is being
planned by two Americans, Professors Samuel I. Stupp, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, and David A. Tirrell, University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
and four professors from the Federal Republic of Germany, Claus D. Eisenbach and
Oskar Nuyken, University of Bayreuth, Hans W. Spiess, Max Planck Institute for
Polymer Science, Mainz, and Joachim Wendorff, Deutsches Kunststoff-Institut,
Darmstadt. The seminar will have 16 Americans (4 not funded by NSF) meet with 18
Germans for five days to hear presentations and to have discussions on current
topics in polymer science. A purpose of the seminar is to expand the scope of
the personal and technical interactions between the American and German
scientists and to initiate joint research projects. The relatively isolated
location of the seminar and the small number of participants will facilitate
informal discussion. The proposed seminar should allow the American and Germans
to explore scientific and methodological issues in modern polymer science. The
seminar will provide a setting for presenting and testing new ideas about an
important and rapidly changing area and it should have a positive effect on
research in this field.