* 8619717
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Experimental Tests of    Theory Concerning the Motor Control of Speech
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* James Lubker, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 12/31/1990
* USD 15,150.00

Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: This recommended award would
support costs for Professor James F. Lubker, and one of his graduate students,
both from the University of Vermont, to collaborate with Professor Bjorn E. F.
Lindblom, University of Stockholm, Sweden. They will research questions on how
the central nervous system controls speech production. They will try to specify
the goals of the central nervous system in speech and how the goals might be
explained. The motor control of speech articulators represents a high-level and
uniquely human form of fine motor control. Their studies will seek to determine
whether speech motoric goals are differentiated from other non-reflexive motor
goals, and to relate speech motor control to general motor control theory. The
proposed research has important consequences for understanding language theory
and the development of language. Professors Lubker and Lindblom have
productively worked together for several years. Professor Lubker helped set up
the laboratory he will visit in Sweden. Professor Lindblom has been a frequent
visitor in Dr. Lubker's Laboratory in Vermont. The project thus contributes to
an important objective of NSF's cooperative science programs with Western
Europe, which is to stimulate scientific progress by bringing together
scientists from the U.S. and Europe who have similar research interests and who
wish to engage in mutually beneficial research cooperation. Merit of Proposal:
The cooperating U.S. and foreign investigators are respected for their research
accomplishments, and there is a very good prospect that this proposed research
will lead to a significant contribution to scientific knowledge. The cooperation
presents the U.S. Professor with an opportunity to work with one of the world's
leading research groups in the field and to use highly specialized facilities
abroad that are complementary to his own. The work plan has been carefully
prepared, and the budget is reasonable. Both research groups will contribute to
the project and will benefit significantly from the cooperation. Funding: This
award will not duplicate other funding. The University of Vermont and various
organizations in Sweden have funded Professor Lubker's research in Sweden in the
recent past.