* 8619964
* U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research:  Foraging Strategies of  the World's Northernmost Ungulates--How Mammals Survive     under Harsh Conditions
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* David Klein, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 12/31/1988
* USD 15,710.00

This award would support collaborative research between Dr. David R. Klein,
University of Alaska, Fairbanks, and Mr. Christian Bay, Greenland Fisheries and
Environmental Research Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark. They will study the
foraging strategy of muskoxen o in Peary Land, North Greenland. The study area,
at 83 N contains the muskoxen, which are the northernmost population of
ungulates in the world. At this latitude the muskoxen must compensate for
limitations in available forage by optimizing their intake of high quality
forage in the summer and by slowing their activity in the winter. During the
summer the muskoxens' movements and the plant species grazed upon will be
directly observed by the researchers. The movement patterns of the animals in
the winter will be measured through the use of activity-monitoring collars
transmitting data via satellite. It is important to study the range and habitat
limitations of muskoxen, because there is a dearth of research on arctic
mammals, and because there is increasing pressure on the muskoxens' normal
grazing lands from energy and mineral explanation and from the return of
aboriginal peoples to lands not recently used by them. This study will
contribute to an understanding of how to manage the species under restricted
resource conditions.