* 8619813
* Kant and Contemporary Philosophy of Science
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Michael Friedman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Armstrong
* 02/28/1989
* USD 30,000.00

Within the history of philosophy, Immanuel Kant stands as the towering figure
serving as a kind of watershed in modern philosophy. His task, as he saw it, was
to resolve the scepticism concerning the nature of knowledge, especially
scientific knowledge, which had been generated by the English philosopher, David
Hume. Hume essentially argued that there are only two kinds of knowledge:
analytic which is true by definition and synthetic which is contingent and can
never be known with certainty. Kant introduced a third category of knowledge,
the synthetic a priori, which is knowledge about the real world which is not
simply true by definition, and which can also be known to be true with certainty
because the human mind is structured a priori to perceive things according to
these fixed categories. Euclidean geometry and Newtonian physics were examples
for Kant of scientific knowledge which must be true about the real world.
Unfortunately for Kantian theory, within a few years of its enunciation, non-
Euclidean geometries were developed. Within a century, Einstein replaced
Newton's physics with one based on a non-Euclidean geometry. Given these facts,
philosophers have tended to dismiss Kant's philosophy of science. Dr. Friedman
argues that such a dismissal is short-sighted and that Kant's philosophy of
science has an enduring philosophical significance. While Kant's philosophy
should indeed be seen as based on a commitment to specifically Euclidean
geometry and specifically Newtonian physics, nevertheless, it is still worthy of
careful attention today. For, on the one hand, Kant has a particularly acute
grasp of the physics and mathematics of his time. His insight into the
foundational issues surrounding space, time, and motion in Newtonian theory is
unparalleled, and his work therefore illuminates the status of these fundamental
physical concepts even from a sophisticated modern point of view. Yet on the
other hand, our own philosophy of science develops by evolving directly from
Kant's: by attempting to adjust basic Kantian themes to the revolutionary
development of non-Euclidean geometry and non-Newtonian physics. Dr. Friedman
will show in detail how Kant's conception of the necessary and a priori
character of the principles of both Euclid's geometry and Newton's physics makes
perfectly good sense in the context of 17th and 18th century science. At the
same time, however, it will be possible to illuminate the radical changes that
have since occurred. In particular, Dr. Friedman's study aims to shed light on
the emergence of logical positivism as the dominant philosophy of science of the
first half of the 20th century. This study thus promises to make a major
contribution to our understanding not only of Kant's philosophy of science but
also of our own contemporary understanding of the development of science.