* 8619490
* Mos.    Gund                    Techniques to Search Confor ational Space for Cholinergic   Ligands
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1988
* Tamara Gund, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1988
* USD 0.00

The acetylcholine receptor is a representative of a large class of membrane
proteins responsible for the electrical activity of the nervous system. The
receptor is involved in many biologically important processes, such as
regulation of sleep, memory and learning processes. Understanding the structure
and function of the receptor as well as being able to predict active ligands
will greatly further our understanding of these important biological molecules.
Dr. Gund proposes to develop a computational method to systematically survey
molecular conformations for large molecules with many degrees of conformational
freedom for the CYBER 205 vector supercomputer. She will then relay information
from the conformational calculations as well as from molecular dynamics
calculations on the CYBER in real time to a VAX based molecular modeling system
for further interactive manipulations. Other objectives will involve relaying
information from ab initio and molecular mechanics calculations to a VAX based
molecular modeling system. The applications of these objectives will be to
determine the bioactive conformations of cholinergic ligands including
polypeptides, receptor mapping, calculation of conformational states of
receptor-ligand bound and unbound complexes, and design of new ligands which
would explore the topography and mechanism of receptor-ligand binding.