* 8619885
* Variable Stars
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1987,11/30/1990
* Emilia Belserene, Nantucket Maria Mitchell Association
* Continuing Grant
* minette wilson
* 11/30/1990
* USD 83,600.00

The Maria Mitchell Observatory on Nantucket Island has specialized in the
observation of variable stars, specifically the careful measurements of the
periods within which the stars become brighter and fainter. The data are
supplemented by the Harvard University's collection of photographs, many taken
in the last century. The long data interval allows detection of changes in the
periods. These inform astronomers of actual changes in the stars due to their
aging. The Observatory has attracted undergraduate students for many summers and
some winters. The students help make observations and work on chosen stars as
their projects. This grant is to continue the students' program. In the past,
the student financial support has been only nominal, so that many of the best
students could not afford a summer on the island. This grant is to continue the
program of students' observations of variable stars and to expand and optimize
it through the Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program. The Maria
Mitchell Observatory commemorates America's first woman astronomer and has
provided particular encouragement to women students. The Observatory is
maintained largely by private funds. Emilia Belserene has been its director
since 1978. In part due to her personal experiences, she is committed to
ensuring that the women at the observatory will have opportunities to gain
confidence in traditionally masculine activities.