* 8619965
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany (F.R.G.) Joint Seminar:    Chemistry of Heteronuclear Clusters and Multimetallic       Catalysts, Koenigstein/Taunus, F.R.G., September 7-11, 1987
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1988
* Richard Adams, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 07/31/1988
* USD 9,165.00

This award will support the participation of nine U.S. scientists in a joint
seminar that will focus on the chemistry of heteronuclear cluster compounds and
multimetallic catalysts. The seminar takes place under the U.S.-Federal Republic
of Germany Cooperative Science Program. A few scientists from other countries
will also participate. The main topics to be discussed are (1) multimetallic
catalysts in homogeneous media, (2) the chemistry of mixed metal molecular
clusters, (3) molecular clusters on supports, and (4) metal alloys. Synthesis
and preparative methods, determinations of structure and bonding, and studies of
reactivity and catalytic properties will be reported upon at the seminar. The
purpose of the meeting is to present the latest research findings of the
participants, to identify topics of mutual interest, to formulate current
problems and goals, and to plan directions for new research in the field. The
seminar co-organizers are Professor Richard D. Adams, Department of Chemistry,
University of South Carolina, and Professor Wolfgang A. Herrmann, Inorganic
Chemistry Institute, Technical University of Munich, Federal Republic of
Germany. The discovery that certain metal alloys have catalytic properties that
are far superior to their components has been one of the most important
developments to occur in the area of heterogeneous catalysis in the last two
decades. Bimetallic catalysts (e.g. platinum-rhodium, platinum-iridium) are used
extensively in petroleum refining, for example, though the mechanism of their
action is not understood. The study of transition metal cluster compounds has
also become a focus of considerable attention during the past twenty-five years.
These compounds have provided unique opportunities to study the nature of
organic transformations at multinuclear metal sites, and may also ultimately
contribute to a better understanding of heterogeneous catalysis. The two related
and important areas of research have many features of their chemistry in common.
In general, however, they are investigated by significantly different
methodologies. Researchers in both the U.S. and the Federal Republic of Germany
are very active in these fields of chemistry, and many of the leaders in these
areas from the two countries, plus several from other countries, will
participate in the seminar. The organizers of the meeting believe that by
bringing together scientists from the two disciplines to discuss their latest
research findings, the concepts and principles that these areas have in common
will be more fully revealed. This should lead to a better understanding of the
chemistry involved and also stimulate new ideas and directions for future
research.