* 8619405
* Dissertation Improvement Research (Thailand):  Circulating  Antigens During Trypanosoma lewisi Infections Characterized by Monoclonal Antibody Procedures
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1989
* Donald Dusanic, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1989
* USD 11,800.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Ms. Varee Prasertsiriroj, Scientist (on
leave of absence for study), Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty
of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand, to pursue, for a
period of 12 months, dissertation research in microbiology and immunology,
relevant to development of Thailand, under the direction of Dr. Donald G.
Dusanic, Professor, Department of Life Sciences, Indiana State University. The
purpose of this study is to identify and characterize important parasite
antigens circulating in the plasma of rats infected with Trypanosoma lewisi, a
protozoan parasite. These circulating antigens may have a role in
immunosuppression or immunoprotection. Attempts will be made to (1) purify these
antigens by affinity chromatography using monoclonal antibodies., (2) define
them physically and biochemically, and (3) determine their roles in immunity.
Parasitic protozoa are a major cause of the infectious diseases which affect man
and livestock. They play an important role in limiting the social and economic
development of many countries, especially in tropical regions. The research will
provide an opportunity to study mechanisms of control of parasitic infections
and, therefore, will contribute to development of tropical countries such as
Thailand. Dr. Dusanic is a highly respected scientist in the field of this
proposal, and he has produced an impressive number of well placed graduates, in
the United States and abroad, in the field of parasitology. This project is
relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which
seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers
and their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit.