* 8619167
* U.S.-Fed. Rep. of Germany Coop. Research: Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectral Studies of Competitive Heavy Metal Binding Reactions with Estuarine and Groundwater Humic Acids
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* James Alberts, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1989
* USD 5,274.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project between Dr.
James J. Alberts, Senior Research Ecologist and Director, The University of
Georgia Marine Institute, Sapelo Island, Georgia, and Dr.Zdenek K. Filip,
Institute for Water-, Ground-, and Air Hygiene, Federal Health Office, Langen,
Federal Republic of Germany. The scientists are collaborating in a study of the
binding of ions of the toxic heavy metals copper, cadmium, and lead to humic
acids isolated from salt marsh estuaries in the United States and from
groundwaters in Germany. The binding studies will be conducted with selective
ion electrode techniques, in known aquatic matrices of controlled pH and ionic
strength, and will examine the maximum binding capacities of these humic
materials for these heavy metals. In addition, the effect of competitive binding
by common environmental cations will be investigated. Fourier Transform Infrared
(FTIR) spectral analyses will be conducted on the uncomplexed humic materials
and on the same materials after complexation to the elements in an effort to
obtain information regarding the mechanism of binding by the metals. Heavy
metals introduced into the environment from many commercial processes continue
to pose a potential health hazard to a large portion of the population in
industrialized countries. The fate of these elements in the environment is often
controlled by chemical reactions of the metals with naturally occurring organic
compounds (humic matter), which may lead to a greater mobility of the metals in
aquatic environments. Two such environments which are of extreme importance are
groundwaters, because of their widespread use as a source of drinking water, and
coastal estuaries, which often support large animal and plant populations and
have both commercial and recreational value. Knowledge of the interaction of
heavy metals with humic matter in these systems is critical to our understanding
of basic environmental processes involving heavy metals. The studies to be
carried out here will involve state-of-the-art analytical techniques in two
laboratories with long histories of research in these areas. By sharing their
complementary expertise and experimental facilities, the cooperating scientists
expect to make significant advances in their individual research programs. The
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft is providing German counterpart support for the
project.