* 8619612
* Behavior of Peak Vertical Acceleration Across Small Two-    Dimensional Strong-Motion Array
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Mansour Niazi, TENERA L P
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 11/30/1990
* USD 181,979.00

This is a 1985 SBIR Phase II award. Spatial coherence of the vertical component
of ground motion across a dense two-dimen- sional array for as many as 30
shallow earthquakes which produced approximately 200 high quality observations
over a small area of engineering interest at distance of 50 km or less will be
studied. The data consists of digitally recorded vertical accelerograms, across
the 12-element inner-ing subarray (200m radius) of the SMART-1 Array in
northeastern Taiwan, plus the central station. The abundant near-source strong
ground motion data permit major improvements in the attenuation relation and the
shape of vertical response spectra, both of critical impor- tance in engineering
design, and their associated uncertainties. For the projected subarray the
uncertainties are only minimally affected by site classification. Dispersion of
the ground motion parameters in time and frequency domains will be studied as a
function of source depth, distance, azimuth and magnitude. The impact of known
subsurface structure and the anelastic response of the soil column (for
different levels of shaking) will be evaluated. Understanding of the near-source
behavior of vertical acceleration across a dense array outside the western U.S.
allows independent verification f assumed relationship between vertical and
horizontal ground motion parameters and devise of new site specific attenuation
law and response spectra both of engineering importance in the design.