* 8619632
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Examining Errors of      Biological Information Transmission Concerning the Genetic  Code
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1988
* Jack Parker, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 12/31/1988
* USD 3,980.00

This award would support research collaboration between Professor Jack M.
Parker, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, and Professor Charles G.
Kurland, University of Uppsala, Sweden. They will study errors of biological
information transmission concerning the genetic code. Mistakes seem to occur on
the ribosome which refer to the amount of energy invested in protein synthesis.
The proposed research will attempt to discover the types of errors, their costs
or benefits, and the strategies cells have for coping with the errors. Much of
the data on missense errors comes from early in vitro work, but it is not clear
________ how these results correlate with the in vivo situation. _______
Professors Parker and Kurland will study the misreading of phenyla-lanine codons
in a native message, both in vivo and in vitro. _______ ________ Professor
Parker has systematically explored in vivo missense errors in _______ selected
proteins and has expertise in gene manipulation. Professor Kurland and his group
have developed a refined in vitro system to study ________ errors in protein
synthesis, but he has confined his studies to synthetic messages. Combining the
approaches of the two researchers is important because it allows a comparison of
in vivo and in vitro _______ ________ misreading of a single message. The
proposed research should lead to refinements in the interpretations of the data
derived from the two experimental methods.