* 8619790
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Ecological Adaptation    Concerning Sodium Usage by Large Mammals Under Seasonally   Stressful Environmental Conditions
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* Peter Jordan, University of Minnesota Saint Paul
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 06/30/1990
* USD 5,700.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor Peter A.
Jordan, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, and one of his graduate students
with Drs. Ake Pehrson and Goren Cederlund, Grimso Wildlife Research Station,
Riddarhyttan, Sweden. They will examine theoretical and applied questions
concerning the amount of sodium in the diets of wild ungulates, particulary
moose. Dr. Jordan's earlier work has shown that sodium may be a limiting
resource for moose and other herbivores in North American boreal regions,
because of its scarcity in normal terrestrial forages. Dr. Jordan has recently
been studying sodium relationships in these animals with his Swedish
counterparts under natural conditions and those in which sodium sources (salt
blocks) are provided by the researchers. This research will be concerned with
how large mammalian herbivore scope with cold periods when plants which provide
sodium are scarce. The research station at Grimso provides excellent facilities
to monitor animal behavior by telemetry and to conduct feeding experiments with
captive moose. The proposed cooperation presents the U.S. investigator with an
opportunity to use highly specialized facilities abroad that are not easily
available to him in the U.S. The researchers will carry out physiological
examinations of the animals, as well as conduct population censuses to
understand better how large animals survive under stressful environmental,
conditions.