* 8619810
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: High-Pressure        Technology and Synthesis of Advanced Ceramic Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1989
* Vladimir Hlavacek, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 02/28/1989
* USD 3,030.00

This award will support a one-year cooperative research project between
Professor Vladimir Hlavacek, Chemical Engineering Department, State University
of New York at Buffalo, and Prof. Dr. Ir. K. R. Westerterp, Twente University of
Technology, Enschede, The Netherlands. The engineers will cooperate in an
experimental and theoretical examination of the role of high-pressure technology
in the processing of advanced ceramic materials. They will carry out research on
a high-temperature, high-pressure, self-propagating synthesis process that will
simultaneously provide for the synthesis and sintering of ceramic powders
without the use of additives. The process utilizes the liberation of heat by a
strongly exothermic reaction under high pressure, and takes place quickly. A
similar approach is being investigated to achieve bonding between different
ceramic materials and between ceramics and metals in such a way that the
resulting bonded materials have high strength and good thermal shock resistance.
The processes will be simulated on a supercomputer for typical values of the
governing parameters. Such simulations should provide insights into conditions
within the various samples under investigation, and guide the selection of
materials and optimum experimental conditions. Advanced ceramic materials
possess specialized properties that make them potentially useful in high-
performance applications ranging from heat- and wear-resistant parts to
electronic and optical devices. For some applications their superior performance
may lead to reduced costs, and they may substitute for a variety of scarce
materials. The procedures under study here are expected to be less expensive
than current technologies in this area. By combining Professor Hlavacek's
expertise in the synthesis of ceramic materials with Professor Westerterp's
experience and resources in high-pressure reaction engineering, the engineers
expect to enhance their research progress in this field significantly, and to
prepare the new materials in larger quantities than is currently possible in
Professor Hlavacek's laboratory in Buffalo. Funds from this award would support
necessary transportation and subsistence expenses for the U.S. principal
investigator. The government of The Netherlands, through the Twente University
of Technology, is also providing support for the project.