* 8619533
* Normative Concepts in Ecology and Their Consequences for    Enviromental Policy
* BIO,BIO
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Earl McCoy, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/1991
* USD 72,044.00

A philosopher who specializes in studies of science policy and environmental
ethics and an ecologist who studies plant-animal-habitat interactions will
investigate two foundational concepts in ecology: balance of nature and
community. The goal is to understand (1) the roles of evaluative assumptions in
these concepts, (2) how these assumptions may affect the interpretations and
conclusions ecologists draw from their work, and (3) the moral justifiability of
the support that may thereby be given to specific policies regarding
environmental protection. Meeting weekly, the two investigators will analyze 30
key ecological works. The ecologist has primary responsibility for the analysis
of the two concepts; the philosopher, for the ethical analysis. Drafts of their
work will be commented on by a group including several ecologists and
historians, an expert in environmental policy and a philosopher specializing in
ethics and environmental policy. During the course of the project, several
graduate seminars in ecology will also examine these issues. Results will
include a co- authored manuscript examining the concepts and their
presuppositions, the practical consequences of using them in environmental
policymaking, and possible answers to questions of the moral justification for
their use. This project will provide an important impetus to the development of
adequate analyses of theoretical and normative implications of ecological
science. The investigators are both exceptionally well- qualified; graduate
studies are involved; institutional support is very good. This is a good example
of the kind of cross-disciplinary collaborative research EVS should encourage.
Results are likely to be provocative and widely disseminated. Costs are very
reasonable. Total support in the amount of $72,044 is recommended, with $35,404
to be awarded in this fiscal year.