* 8619152
* Holocene Glaciation and Climate Change, Western Spitsbergen,Svalbard Archipelago
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1987,05/31/1990
* Susan Short, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 05/31/1990
* USD 113,149.00

The Svaldbard Archipelago is sensitive to changes ocean/atmosphere circulation
in the Norwegian Sea because it lies at the northern limit of the North Atlantic
Drift referred to as (the Gulf Stream off eastern North America). Rapid
deglaciation of this archipelago occurred during the Pleistocene/Holocene
transition. Local glaciers were absent or contracted throughout most of the
early Holocene, but more recently these glaciers have expanded. It is known that
they were more advanced during the Little Ice Age (ca 600 to 50 years before
present) than now, but the timing of the onset of Neoglaciation and its
relationship to climate change remains largely unknown. This study addresses the
timing of Neoglaciation and Holocene climate change through laboratory analysis
of a series of sediment cores recovered from Lake Linne, a low-elevation lake on
western Spitsbergen that was an arm of the sea until about 8,000 years ago.
These cores are the longest and most extensive ever recovered from a high-
latitude lake; as such, they offer a high-resolution proxy record environmental
change during the past 8,000 years. The history of local cirque glacier activity
will be interpreted from the record of exotic pollen influx. These two
independent proxy records of Holocene climate change will lead to improved
understanding of the timing and climatic controls on high-latitude glaciation.