* 8619453
* Individual and Organizational Factors in Prosecutorial      Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1989
* David Rauma, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 12/31/1989
* USD 74,513.00

Over the past decade, scholars have turned their attention to examining the
dynamics of decisionmaking in the criminal justice system. Much of this work has
focused on the courts and important decisions surrounding sentencing and parole.
Of equal importance are the decisions made by prosecuting attorneys in
confronting whether to issue warrants, file charges, or plea bargain a case.
While studies exist on prosecutors' behavior, research to date has typically
concentrated either on individual decisonmaking or on the organizational context
of the court. Attempts to merge the two have not been very successful due in
part to a lack of consideration of appropriate organizational and cognitive
models. Dr. Rauma seeks to integrate individual and organizational perspectives
by investigating prosecutors' use of schemas, or cognitive models, in their
processing of criminal cases. It is hypothesized that these schemas are derived
primarily from the organizational context in which prosecutors work. The basic
design calls for a two-step data collection: Phase one consists of in-depth
interviews, systematic observation, and archival data drawn from approximately
1500 case files. The Phase two data collection is based on a computer-assisted
interview of prosecutors who will respond to case vignettes on a sample of real
cases. The computer will record the variables that prosecutors select to make
decisions, the order in which the variables are selected, and the time to do so,
permitting analysis of sequential decisionmaking. This research promises to
advance our understanding of the influence of organizational factors on
individual level decisionmaking in the criminal justice system. The vignette
analysis in particular tests for schema use with more complex situations and
more formal procedures than in previous studies. Also, the use of vignettes for
the study of sequential decisionmaking and information search is a new approach
that may be useful for other settings.