* 8620200
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: Practical Choice of      Multicriterion Decision-Making Techniques for Risk Analysis in Water Resources Development
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1987,08/31/1991
* Lucien Duckstein, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 08/31/1991
* USD 10,525.00

This award will support a three-year cooperative research project in risk
analysis that will involve Professor Lucien Duckstein, University of Arizona;
Professor Istvan Bogardi, University of Nebraska; and three faculty members at
the Vienna Agricultural University in Austria: H.-P. Nachtnebel, S. A. Radler,
and J. Fuerst. The collaborative effort is concerned with an examination of
multicriterion decision-making (MCDM) tools that have been applied to model the
mitigation of the hazardous effects of water resources development on the human
environment. Fuzzy set theory and Bayesian theory will be combined with MCDM
techniques to develop methodologies that take into account the existence of both
imprecision and uncertainty in water resource systems. These methodologies will
be applied to three illustrative, real-world problem areas: water-related power
systems, regional water system design, and multicriterion groundwater
management. Special emphasis will be placed on interactive computer techniques
as well as graphical display of the data, definition of the model structure, and
generation of alternatives. A clear representation of system output will be
sought, as well as the proper design of a knowledge base to aid in the decision
process. Decision makers in the water resources field and related areas are
currently without the requisite analytical tools to incorporate risk,
uncertainty, and imprecision in the decision-making process in an adequate way.
There is thus a recognized need for further development of risk analysis
methodology, especially within a multicriterion framework. The cooperating
researchers in this project will attempt to improve risk assessment and
management methodology by demonstrating how trade-offs can be made between
environmental risks and corresponding costs. Specific applications to water
resources and hazardous waste management in the United States and Austria will
be sought. The selected application areas are important in both countries, and
require the utilization of advanced methods of risk analysis for thorough study.
Both the U.S. and the Austrian partners in this effort have carried out
intensive research activity in MCDM analysis of water resources engineering
systems and in risk/reliability analysis, and the project is expected to benefit
greatly from their combined expertise.