* 8620444
* REU: Polyploidy and Reticulate Evolution in Polystichum FromWestern North America
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Pamela Soltis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 04/30/1990
* USD 89,396.00

Evolution in plants often involves polyploidy, a doubling of the genome.
Polyploidy is particularly common in ferns, where frequent episodes of
interspecific hybridization and polyploidy have resulted in the formation of
reticulate (or interrelated) species complexes in many genera. The evolutionary
relationships within such groups of closely related species are often difficult
to determine, particularly using traditional methods of analysis. Nowhere are
the results of hybridization and polyploidy more evident than in Polystichum, a
fern genus of nearly worldwide distribution consisting of 160 to 175 species. A
prime example of the interrelated species groups typical of Polystichum and many
other plant genera is found in the Polystichum complex from western North
America, which contains five diploid and six polyploid species. In this
investigation, molecular techniques (i.e., enzyme electrophoresis and analyses
of DNA sequences) will be used to unravel the evolutionary relationships of
these 11 species. This approach is potentially much more powerful than
traditional analyses of plant structure and has not yet been applied to analyses
of polyploid evolution in ferns; thus, this study may serve as a model for
future investigations of hybridization and polyploidy. Not only will this
project clarify the evolutionary relationships within the Polystichum complex
from western North America, but it will also provide valuable insights into
polyploidy, an important evolutionary process in both ferns and flowering
plants.