* 8620142
* A Mathematical Model for the Zinc/Bromine Flow Cell
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1990
* Ralph White, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1990
* USD 92,529.00

The objective of the proposed work is to develop theoretically a comprehensive
mathematical model of the zinc/bromine (Zn/Br2) cell which will aid designers in
the development of this battery. The Zn/Br2 flow battery has been receiving
increased interest in recent years as a durable, rechargeable storage battery
for use as a peak levelling device by utility companies. The need in the utility
industry for some means to reduce the surge of the daily electrical load demand
on generating facilities has existed for many years. Demand is high during the
daytime when schools, factories, and businesses are open whereas during the
night and early morning hours the demand is at a minimum. Generating facilities
need be continuously operated at 100% of their rated power to be most cost-
effective. To achieve this 100% operation and at the same time satisfy cyclic
demand, peak shaving (load levelling) devices, such as the Zn/Br2 battery, must
be employed. The Zn/Br2 battery has several attractive features for use as a
shaving device. Batteries are compact and truckable and therefore can be
optimally located at distributed sites near substations to yield a decrease in
transmission line costs. In case of problems such as transmission line outages
the batteries can supply at least enough power for vital loads in the area such
as hospitals. The Zn/Br2 battery is relatively efficient, inexpensive, and clean
compared to the conventional load levelling devices, coal fired units and gas
turbines. This model development is based on the conservation of mass and charge
supplemented by a transport equation, which includes a migration term for
charged species in an electric field, and an electrode kinetic expression. The
proposed model will be developed by augmenting a previously published model to
include a porous layer on the bromine electrode, zinc complexation, predictions
for discharge mode, a second bromine-rich phase, time dependence, and a
recirculation system. Model parameters, kinetic and thermodynamic, will be
estimated from those used in previous work and by comparing model predictions
with experimental data in the literature. Also, the model will be used to
investigate the effects of cell dimensions, physical parameters such as the void
fractions of the porous regions, and operating conditions on cell performance.
The resulting model will be a set of algebraic and three dimensional partial
differential equations, two dimensional in space and one dimensional in time.
The model development should lead to a better understanding of the physical
phenomena which affect the performance of eletrochemical cells in general.