* 8620177
* Midwest Center for Mass Spectrometry:                       Instrument and Method Development
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1987,10/31/1991
* Michael Gross, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 10/31/1991
* USD 2,094,250.00

This project is in the area of instrument development. A two- pronged effort in
development of a new generation quadruple sector mass spectrometer with
extraordinary sensitivity and the capability for collision iduced dissociation
will be conducted in parallel with a project involving Fourier transform mass
spectrometry (FTMS). In the former case the efforts of the Midwest Center for
Mass Spectrometry will be continued with the additional focus of the design,
construction, evaluation, and application of the new instrument to important
problems in chemistry and biology. Research will be conducted on three important
fronts including: fast atom bombardment and secondary ion mass spectrometry for
structural elucidation of biomolecules, collaborative research on difficult
problems in the life sciences, and chemical studies that require high sensity
and/or better mass resolution in the observation of collision products. In
addition, ultratrace analysis and ion chemistry studies will be continued. The
program in FTMS will focus on model development, tool development, and
instrumentation development directed toward solving significant chemical
problems. Continuing research will include laser-based methods for FTMS and
further investigation of tandem mass spectrometry approaches by FTMS. Thus, two
centrally important areas in mass spectrometry will be encompassed in this
project.