* 8620250
* Iteration Theories and Data Type Specifications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Stephen Bloom, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1990
* USD 38,783.00

In joint work with Elgot and Wright, the PI used the notion of iteration
theories in axiomatizing the control structure of flowchart algorithms.
Iteration theories also appear to provide an axiomatization for the functorial
description of circular abstract data types as described most recently by Smyth,
Lehmann, Plotkin, Arbib &amp; Manes, and others. The PI is now investigating the
suitability of iteration theories for the description of abstract data types. It
is being determined whether the same equational axioms can be used to describe
both the control structure of programs and the structure of the data types,
operations and domains on which the programs operate. Also in progress is the
development of algorithms for the solution of problems concerning the
equivalence of data type descriptions: Given two descriptions (as fixed points
of certain endofunctors), do they describe the "same thing"? The question is
analogous to the question: Given two flowchart schemes, do they have the save
behavior? Verification that the connection between iteration theories and data
types is as the PI expects will show that these two questions are identical. The
proposed research is expected to lead to an improved understanding of data
types. The PI has a fine record of related research accomplishments.