* 8620104
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research: Single Unit Activity in Vestibular Nuclei during Nystagmus Reversal (Neural Science)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Harvey Reisine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 08/31/1989
* USD 5,680.00

This award will support a cooperative research project between Dr. Harvey
Reisine, Department of Neurology, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine, and Drs. Volker
Henn, Urs Schwarz, and Walter Waespe, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
The general objective of the research is to elucidate brainstem neuronal
mechanisms underlying reflexive eye movements in response to passive head
rotation (i.e. the vestibulo-ocular reflex) and/or visual stimulation in the
form of illuminated full field motion (optokinetic nystagmus or optokinetic
after-nystagmus). Electrical impulses of single neurons in the vestibular
nuclear complexes of alert, trained rhesus monkeys will be recorded during a
paradigm designed to activate selectively classes of neurons involved in various
aspects of vestibular and eye movement control, and to measure certain dynamics
of the reflexive behaviors. Neuronal responses will be analyzed in relation to
parameters of eye movement and stimulation, and in terms of current models of
vestibulo-ocular and optokinetic behavior. The research is aimed at providing
quantitative answers to questions arising within the context of a generally
accepted model of the visual-vestibular-oculomotor reflex, which has the purpose
of maintaining a steady image on the retina. Standard electrophysiological
techniques will be used, and the experimental phase of the work will be carried
out in a Swiss laboratory with an international reputation for excellence.
Results may facilitate an understanding of the complex neural mechanisms
associated with eye-head coordination during normal orienting, and establish a
neural basis for motion perception. Dr. Reisine is an accomplished
neuroscientist. The Swiss scientists with whom he will collaborate have
outstanding reputations and experimental facilities. In addition to furthering
the research aims of this project, the cooperating scientists hope that this
joint effort will contribute to increased collaboration between their respective
research groups by introducing common data acquisition, analysis, transfer, and
storage mechanisms in the two laboratories.