* 8620446
* Recognition and Comparison of Records of the 1983 CaliforniaEl Nino in Anaerobic Basins off Southern California
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1990
* Richard Casey, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 04/30/1990
* USD 46,000.00

Previous research concerning the effects of the 1983 California El Nino on
living radiolarians in the plankton and the recognition of El Nino events in
sediments is proposed to be continued in an attempt to recognize that 1983
event, documented in the plankton, in the sediments from three anaerobic
southern California basins. Radiolarians from plankton tows taken during the
initiation, peak, and waning of the 1983 El Nino displayed a sequence of
radiolarian characteristics of each phase of that El Nino (initiation, peak, and
waning). Preliminary investigations of box-core material collected from the
Santa Barbara Basin in the summer of 1985 suggest that this same sequence may be
preserved in the surficial sediment of that basin. A new method of freezing that
surficial and shallow sediment immediately after coring has allowed collection
of the most complete intact sedimentary record from the three southern
California anaerobic basins (Santa Barbara, Santa Monica, and San Pedro). The
PIs propose to carefully subsample these frozen sediments in an attempt to; (1)
recognize the 1983 event in each basin, (2) compare the known radiolarian
sequence from the 1983 plankton tows with the sequences from each basin, and (3)
compare the event and sequence of each basin. This new technique will make it
possible to examine the geologic record for the frequency and history of the
large El Nino climate events off California.