* 8620111
* Influence of Nocardia Species on Foaming in Suspended       Activated Growth Wastewater Treatment Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1987,05/31/1991
* Blaine Beaman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 05/31/1991
* USD 317,005.00

This is a joint project conducted by investigators on two University of
California campuses, viz. Dr. David Jenkins at Berkeley in the Civil and
Environmental Engineering Department and Dr. Blaine L. Beaman in the Department
of Medical Microbiology and Immonology at Davis. Research will involve
determination of the causes for growth of organisms in suspended activated
growth biological treatment system for wastewater that are responsible for or
contribute to the production and stability of excessive amounts of foam. The
research will involve studies in suspended growth reactors and in chemostats
employing single and dual pure cultures. The mean cell residence time at which
Nocardias are washed out will be determined for a range of temperatures. The
effect of various substrates on Nocardia growth, foaming potential and cell wall
composition and structure will be determined. The influence of dissolved oxygen
concentration and of the installation of selector reactors on Nocardia growth
will be determined. The Nocardias present in the suspended growth systems will
be physiologically and morphologically characterized and the nature of the
foaming principle will be determined for Nocardia growth on a variety of
substrates.