* 8620147
* A Unified Approach with New Algorithms for Adaptive         Recursive (IIR) Digital Filters
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1990
* H. Fan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 06/30/1990
* USD 94,206.00

It is well known that a pole-zero structure which corresponds to an infinite
impulse response (IIR) filter models a physical system better than an all-zero
structure, or a finite impulse response (FIR) filtering structure. However, few
adaptive IIR filtering algorithms are in existence today due to the non-
linearity of the problem. Many issues such as stability and global convergence
are not well-solved. Besides, lack of adequate analytic tools makes the analysis
of these algorithms a difficult task. On the other hand, recursive system
identification, as a well-established subject, has available many well-behaved
algorithms. Although the similarities between these two fields have recently
been realized, only direct application of some system identification algorithms
to adaptive filtering problems is seen in literature. This research focuses on a
new adaptive IIR filtering algorithm and a unified analytical method which shows
some global convergence. The new method uses an ordinary differential equation
(ODE) approach for constant-gain adaptive IIR filtering algorithms which is
parallel to the ODE approach in the field of system identification. Hence
further insight into the connection between constant-gain adaptive IIR filtering
algortihms and their system identification counterparts can be gained. Using
this new approach, many existing adaptive IIR filtering algorithms are being
analyzed and compared in a unified way. Furthermore, more system identification
algorithms are being tailored for adaptive IIR filtering applications with
simplified calculation and constant gains. The observed global convergence
phenomenon is also being investigated using the same approach, and should lead
to the development of new globally convergent algorithms for certain classes of
environment. Adaptive filers are used in a wide spectrum of applications such as
noise cancellation, channel equalization, spectral estimation, and antenna array
processing. This proposal focuses research on these adaptive filters.