* 8620352
* Resource Control and Reproductive Success
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1990
* John Alcock, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1990
* USD 24,626.00

Behavioral ecology, like other rapidly growing disciplines, has developed a
body of theory that is only now being tested experimentally. Dr. Alcock's
research, although focused on one group of insects, has broader relevance to the
question of how habitat and female behavior interact and how they in turn
influence male behavior. This project employs an experimental approach to an
analysis of proximate cues and ultimate function in a resource-defense mating
system. There have been few experimental studies of the relation between
resource control and reproductive success in any animal that engages in
resource-defense polygyny. By studying a species of dragonfly, Paltothemis
lineatipes, Dr. Alcock will determine what cues males and females use to make
decisions about which areas to defend and which areas to use as egg-laying
sites, respectively. Then Dr. Alcock will examine the effects of variation in
the quantity of resources within territories on the attractiveness of different
sites to egg-laying females and territorial males. The results from experiments
using resource- poor and resource-rich locations will be used as a foundation
for a study of a population of marked males to determine if individuals
distribute themselves in ways that reduce the variation in daily or lifetime
reproductive success. The results of Dr. Alcock's research project will stand as
a test of the generality of findings on resource manipulation in a damselfly
species with a similar resource-defense mating system. The project also directly
examines the fundamental prediction of modern models of the evolution of mating
systems, namely that the distribution of resources will determine patterns of
female availability and thereby drive the evolution of male competitive tactics.