* 8620059
* Multi-valued Logics                                         (Computer and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1987,02/28/1990
* Nils Nilsson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 02/28/1990
* USD 233,396.00

This research explores the theoretical and computational properties of a formal
system that subsumes many of the inference mechanisms currently of interest in
artificial intelligence research and applications. The theoretical work proposed
involves developing a uniform framework of which various formal extensions to
first order logic are special cases. The extensions we will consider include
default reasoning, probabilistic inference, and reason maintenance systems. The
research will enable us to recognize computationally effective (or ineffective)
inference schemes in advance. We also intend to describe in a precise way the
calculational compromises made by production systems such as MYCIN in
implementing such extensions. Finally, we propose to implement a general-purpose
inference engine incorporating the theory developed and capable of being
conveniently specialized to perform inference suitable for any of a variety of
domains. The significance of this project is that it will provide a bridge for
artificial intelligence research between theoretical work on the nature of
reasoning and practical work in developing programs such as expert systems. The
benefits will include not only new theoretical insights but also new algorithms
and tools which will allow more flexible development of expert systems, and
improve the performance of such systems when they have been completed.