* 8620109
* Magnetic Domain Wall Resonance and the Electric Field Shift of the Ferromagnetic (Materials Research)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1988
* Philip Wigen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Yvette D. Jackson
* 12/31/1988
* USD 85,000.00

This proposal requests funds for continued support of investigations into the
magnetic and electrical properties of uncompensated magnetic garnet films. It
has been observed that thin films of the magnetic garnets, of which the
prototype is yttrium iron garnet can be grown in which the divalent calcium ion
will substitute for the trivalent yttrium ion forming a charge uncompensated
material. Preliminary measurements show encouraging potential for the
development of new magnetic semiconductor materials. In particular, at low
temperatures a photo-electrical effect has been observed that enhances the
conductivity by six orders of magnitude and a photomemory effect is also
observed. The magnetic properties are also unusual in that a strong decrease of
the magnetic moment is observed at temperatures below 150 K. At this same
temperature the ferrromagnetic resonance indicates a significant increase in the
internal fields of the materials. A model has been proposed in which the
population of the quadruvalent iron ion varies exponentially with temperature
having a characteristic energy of 150 K. The second area involves an
investigation into the magneto- optical properties of bismuth-thullium: yttrium
iron garnet. The thullium ion with it's large angular orbital momentum produces
a significant shift from the g=2 resonance condition normally observed in the
yttrium iron garnet like materials. It is proposed that trivalent iron ion might
be an excellent probe to further investigate the role of the angular momentum of
the higher order states of iron to investigate the origin of the Faraday
rotation observed in bismuth magnetic garnets.