* 8620122
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: Fourier Transform    Infrared Spectroscopic Study of Visual Transduction         Mechanism (Biophysics)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1992
* Kenneth Rothschild, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 07/31/1992
* USD 6,820.00

This award supports a 30-month cooperative research project in biophysics
between Dr. Kenneth J. Rothschild, Director, Cellular Biophysics Program, Boston
University, and Dr. Willem J. de Grip, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. The scientists and members of their research groups
are collaborating in a study of the detailed molecular mechanism by which
rhodopsin functions as a key component in the visual transduction process.
Aspects to be addressed include (1) how isomerization of retinal leads to
transient signal expression in rhodopsin, (2) the detailed configuration of the
retinal chromophore at different steps in the bleaching sequence, (3) the role
of photoreceptor membrane phospholipids in the visual process, and (4) the role
of rhodopsin alpha-helices in transmitting the transductory signal from the
chromophore to the transient signal sites. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
difference spectroscopy will be used to study the light-induced conformational
changes occurring in rhodopsin and photoreceptor membrane. Some of the studies
will involve modified rhodopsin samples produced in Dr. De Grip's laboratory.
These include samples with isotopically labeled chromophore, proteolytically and
chemically modified rhodopsin, and rhodopsin reconstituted into different
lipids. The experiments to be carried out here are aimed at understanding better
the fundamental processes that take place when light strikes the retina of the
eye. A combination of advanced biophysical and biochemical techniques will be
applied to detect the subtle structural changes that occur in rhodopsin
molecules in the retina in response to absorption of light. These changes
ultimately give rise to the neural excitation we interpret as vision, but the
exact mechanism is not yet understood. Dr. Rothschild is a leader in applying
FTIR spectroscopy to the study of biophysical systems. Dr. De Grip is an expert
in the field of rhodopsin biochemistry, and he will prepare many of the samples
to be studied in this project. Working together, the two scientists and members
of their respective research groups hope to increase significantly our
understanding of the photochemistry of vision.