* 8620107
* US-New Zealand Cooperative Research into the Development andApplication of a New Method for Separation of Uranium-SeriesIsotopes
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1990
* William Burnett, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 06/30/1990
* USD 14,350.00

Proposal Objectives and Relevance to Program Objectives: The U.S. investigators
will work with William James McCabe from the Institute of Nuclear Sciences
located at Lower Hutt, New Zealand, over a period of two years. The project is
aimed at the development and application of a new method for the separation of
isotopes. The radio chemistry group at New Zealand's Institute of Nuclear
Sciences has developed a new process for the chemical separation of uranium,
thorium, and protoactinium from geologic samples. The method, based on
temperature-controlled ion exchange techniques and rotating disc
electrodeposition, provides quantitative recoveries of these elements. This
project seeks to improve the method by including simultaneous separation of
polonium, radium, lead, and other elements. In addition to further enhancement
of this new technique, several applications to on-going research projects at
both institutions are planned. These projects include a study of radiochemical
contamination of ground water in southwest Florida and dating of Pleistocene
terraces in New Zealand. The combination of techniques and of expertise of the
U.S. and New Zealand scientists helps fulfill the objective of the Program of
promoting research of mutual benefit to both countries. Merit: The use of the
technique pioneered in New Zealand with the further development by the U.S.
investigators holds considerable potential for continued benefits. The
introduction of this technology into the U.S. will provide an opportunity to
expand the available dating techniques for small, low-yield samples common in
ocean sciences. The project has been recommended by the Marine Geology and
Geophysics Program for funding with high priority, and will take place with the
concurrence of the New Zealand executive agent for the cooperative program.
Relation to Other Projects and Funding: The research proposed here represents
the addition of an international collaborative effort to research currently
being supported domestically by the Marine Geology Program (OCE 85-20724) and by
the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation. There is no duplication of
funding, as this award provides only foreign travel, communication and support
for the shipping of samples.