* 8620397
* Responses of Microtine Rodent Populations to Vegetation in  Northern Alaska
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1987,08/31/1989
* George Batzli, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 08/31/1989
* USD 75,000.00

Dr. George Batzli of the University of Illinois, Urbana.Champaign and several
other ecologists have suggested that the local patterns of distribution and
abundance of microtine rodents (lemmings and voles) in arctic tundras are
largely determined by characteristics of the vegetation because plants provide
both food and cover for these animals. The research described here is designed
to test this and related hypotheses and to examine more closely some mechanisms
(availability and quality of food, protection from predators and interactions
with competitors) that might explain the patterns observed for two species of
voles. Experimental manipulations, which are being conducted on 18 sites in the
arctic tundra of Northern Alaska, include the provision of supplemental food,
the removal of shrub cover and the removal of closely related species that may
compete for these resources. Population density and demography are monitored
throughout the summer using live.trapping techniques. In addition, the relative
abundance of microtine species will be predicted with multiple regression
equations that are based upon data on trapping success and vegetational
composition. The validity of these equations can be tested by comparing
predicted abundance of each microtine species to that actually observed on sites
where the vegetation has been disturbed by man. These approaches should produce
a rigorous evaluation of the effects of vegetation on the distribution and
abundance of these widespread and important herbivores and inform us of how
revegetation of disturbed areas may best be designed to encourage repopulation
by small rodents. Also it is expected that this work will expand our
understanding of tundra food chains. The institution and individuals conducting
the research are world renowned for this kind of work. The Program recommends
funding.