* 8620011
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Stability Analysis of Adaptive Control Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,04/30/1989
* Robert Kosut, Integrated Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomasina Gray
* 04/30/1989
* USD 7,810.00

This award will support research collaboration between Dr. Robert L. Kosut,
Integrated Systems, Inc. Palo Alto, California, and Dr. Karl J. Astrom, Lund
Institute of Technology, Sweden. They plan to investigate issues related to the
stability analysis of adaptive control systems. Such systems are more useful for
dealing with uncertainty than are fixed model control systems. Adaptive control
systems allow control functions to be implemented in real time and on-line,
rather than off-line. A problem with adaptive control systems is their relative
lack of robustness and stability. The intent of the proposed research is to
develop theory and definitions of mathematical and computational tools to assist
in the computer-aided-design for the next generation of computer-aided-design of
adaptive control systems. Drs. Kosut and Astrom propose to investigate the
transient behavior of adaptive control systems and the relation between the
methods of system identification and robust control. They will try to develop a
list of computational tools that will be useful for computer-aided-design of
adaptive and nonlinear systems. They will also attempt to clarify model accuracy
in system identification, which will aid in developing methods for robust on-
line control tuning.