* 8620155
* Paleontological Study of Hemphillian (Late Miocene to Early Pliocene) Vertebrate Localities in Central Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Wade Miller, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 01/31/1990
* USD 27,200.00

Known late Hemphillian (Early Pliocene) terrestrial vertebrate sites are rare
in Mexico, and apparently, unequivocal early Hemphillian fossils (Late Miocene)
have not yet been reported from anywhere in the country (fossils of these ages
are extremely rare in all Central America). Outside the area of the presently
proposed study only three localities of late Hemphillian age have been reported:
Tehuichila in the state of Hidalgo; La Goleta in the state of Michoacan (which
probably contains more Blancan than Hemphillian age fossils); and Yepomera in
the northern state of Chihuahua. The first two sites have not been well
documented stratigraphically, although the third, and most productive site, has.
It is, however, only about 150 miles south of the U.S.-Mexican border. Inside
the presently proposed study area, which lies within the east- central part of
the state of Guanajuato in central Mexico, are two reported Hemphillian
vertebrate sites. One, El Ocote, has been discussed in several reports; the
other, Coecillo, has not been well collected or studied. A third, Rinconada, is
newly discovered. The last site contains very abundant, well preserved fossils
which appear to represent early as well as late Hemphillian forms. Knowledge of
early Hemphillian vertebrates from Central America would be important for
several reasons. These include a better understanding of the earliest times of
dispersals in the Late Cenozoic between North and South America, determination
whether dispersals were episodic rather than continual, comparison of relatively
poorly known Hemphillian faunas in Central America with well known ones in the
United States, and valuable information concerning the origin and
diversification of a number of mammalian genera and species which appeared
suddenly in the United States' Great Plains area that probably evolved on the
Mexican Plateau. These genera and species include such important groups as
horses and cricetid rodents. Additionally, data gathered during the proposed
research would provide valuable information on changing climatic and ecologic
conditions during an important time interval. The major objective of this
proposed research is to carefully collect fossils and data in a stratigraphic
context at the Rinconada and Coecillo sites. Screen washing for fossils would be
part of the operation. Fossils would then be prepared and studied in order to
obtain knowledge relevant to the items stated above.