* 8620323
* Expedited Award for Novel Research: Berry's Phase of PhotonsIn Optical Fibers:  Quantal Aspects
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/1986,05/31/1988
* Raymond Chiao, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/1988
* USD 30,000.00

Dr. Chiao has proposed an innovative experiment to test the quantum mechanical
nature of a phase factor in the quantum wave equation whose existence was
recently predicted by M.V. Berry of Bristol U. This phase factor is acquired by
a quantum system upon its adiabatic transport around a closed circuit in
parameter space, & is a topological property of the circuit. Dr. Chiao &
collaborators recently carried out an optical demonstration of the Berry phase
in the classical limit using polarization rotation in a helically-wound optical
fiber. The excitement of these experiments, which were recently published in
Physical Review Letters, was captured in an extensive news article in the
9/18/86 issue of Nature. There is currently considerable controversy that the
observed phase shifts are purely classical in nature. A test of the quantum
nature of the phase through proposed fiber-optic interferometry in the singly
photon limit could establish a novel correspondence between classical and
quantum mechanics. The photon as a particle with spin could acquire a
topologically nontrivial history dependence of its phase. Chiao points out
several potential novel applications arising from the Berry phase, such as, in
gyroscopy where this new type of optical activity could be exploited to detect
rotations with respect to a fixed inertial frame in space.