* 8620240
* High Resolution Infrared Spectroscopy of Hydrogen Bonded andvan der Waals Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1987,10/31/1990
* Thomas Dyke, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* name not available
* 10/31/1990
* USD 236,922.00

The experimental method to be employed by Dr. Dyke will be infrared absorption
spectroscopy. Diode lasers will be used to study the spectral region from 350 -
3500 reciprocal cm., utilizing both molecular beams and static gas samples to
provide varying degrees of simplicity and information content in the observed
spectra. Microwave-infrared double resonance techniques will be used to increase
the spectral resolution and to aid in assigning spectra. To access the important
spectral region below 350 recoprocal cm., a far infrared Fourier transform
spectrometer with high sensitivity detectors will be employed, allowing many of
the low frequency intermolecular modes of complexes to be directly examined.
Specific systems to be studied include hydrogen-containing dimers and mixed
complexes of monomers. Intermolecular forces manifested in hydrogen bonds and
van der Waals interactions play an important part in determining the properties
of a wide variety of condensed phase and macromolecule systems. Theories of
liquid water, aqueous solutions and macromolecule conformations are examples of
areas where these interactions are of particular interest. To understand these
systems, accurate information concerning intermolecular potential energy
surfaces is vital. One way to attack this problem is to form complexes held
together by hydrogen bonds or van der Waals interactions, and to study them by
various spectroscopic techniques. If enough spectroscopic data is in hand,
substantial information about the relevant potential energy surfaces can be
gained, and when available, combined with scattering or thermodynamic data to
give a more comprehensive view of intermolecular forces and the nature of these
weak interactions.