* 8620093
* Tropical Glaciers and Climate
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Stefan Hastenrath, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1991
* USD 196,347.00

This is a renewal of EAR8317722. The project is concerned with tropical
glaciers and their reponse to climatic forcing. Drawing on more than a decade's
work in various high mountain regions of the tropics, research over the next few
years will concentrate on the glaciers of Mount Kenya, and to a lesser extent on
the ice masses of Peru's Cordillera Blanca. A major task to be accomplished by
1990 is the mapping of all of Mount Kenya's glaciers at scale l:5,000. In
conjunction with a 1963 mapping this will document the glacier changes over the
past quarter century and serve as control for recent and future measurements of
terminus variations. This task entails the establishement of control points
through ground surveys during 1987-89, and airborne photogrammetry in 1989-90.
The Lewis Glacier shall be re-mapped for the March 1990 datum at scale 1:2,500.
The observations of preceipitation, net balance, and ice flow velocity on the
Lewis Glacier will continue. These form the basis for the quantitative
formulation of forcing-response relationships in terms of the mass and heat
budgets. Also, the decade-long net balance record along with the assessments of
bedrock and surface topography and ice flow measurements will serve as input for
predictions of the spatial pattern of ice thinning and slowdown of the ice flow.
Verification of these forecasts represents a stringent test for an understanding
of tropical climate-cryosphere relationships.