* 8620292
* Research in Gravitation Theory (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1989
* William Hiscock, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 12/31/1989
* USD 51,996.00

Research on three major problems concerned with the early universe will be
conducted: The first consists of solving the semiclassical backreaction
equations when nonconformally coupled free scalar fields are present in
homogeneous and isotropic spacetimes. Two aspects of this are of particular
interest. One is the initial behaviors of the solutions, as that will determine
whether they have initial singularities or particle horizons. The second is how
Starobinsky's inflationary models and the R models of Mijic et. al. are affected
by the presence of non-conformal fields during the inflationary phase. The
second research project consists of solving the backreaction problem for free
scalar fields in anisotropic spacetimes. It is of interest to see whether
quantum effects change the nature of the singularities in these spacetimes. Also
quantitative predictions for the amounts of anisotropy that can be dissipated in
various models via particle production will be obtained. The third research
project will be an investigation of spontaneous symmetry breaking in spacetimes
with compact spatial sections for models with N scalar fields with quartic self-
couplings. It has already been shown that spontaneous symmetry breaking for
these models in the large N limit does not occur in the Einstein universe. If
this result is more general, then it may be of great importance to cosmology.