* 8620076
* A Genetic Analysis of Yeast Golgi Function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1990
* Vytas Bankaitis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1990
* USD 270,000.00

The proposed research is a genetic approach to understanding the biosynthesis
and action of the golgi apparatus in yeast. The sec14 mutation, which causes an
apparent block in golgi function at high temperature, will be used to identify
other genes whose products contribute to correct function of the golgi.
Mutations (glg) which suppress the effect of the sec14 defect will be isolated
and characterized. Two classes of such mutations are expected: those that
obviate a need for the sec14 product, and those which allow the mutant product
to function. Preliminary data shows that glg mutations occur in at least four
different complementation groups. None of the supressors so far identified are
intragenic; some are themselves conditional lethals. Using these mutations as
starting material, the glg structural genes will be isolated and characterized.
Genetic and cytological techniques will be used to examine the role of the glg
products in normal golgi function. Secretion of proteins by eukaryotic cells
proceeds via an elaborate series of membranous structures in the cell. Following
their synthesis on the endoplasmic reticulum, proteins that are to be secreted
move to the golgi apparatus, where they are subject to a variety of
modifications, and then move on to the surface of the cell. Knowledge of golgi
function has been largely obtained through cytological observation of cell types
that are poorly adapted to genetic manipulation. Recent work has established the
utility of yeast as an experimental organism for the study of protein secretion,
and a number of mutations which affect the process have been isolated. The
proposed research makes use of a yeast mutant which is defective for golgi
function at high temperature. Selection of second-site mutations which restore
function will be used to identify other genes whose products participate in the
assembly and function of the golgi. These studies should provide important
knowledge about a fundamental aspect of cellular physiology.