* 8620427
* Quasar Research-A Joint Program of Research with the        University of Arizona
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1990
* Ray Weymann, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pol C. Delosreyes
* 07/31/1990
* USD 108,100.00

The following research will be carried out: (1) A survey of radio wavelength
emitting quasi-stellar objects (QSOs) will be carried out in an attempt to
understand the statistics and characteristics of strong carbon line absorption
in the spectra of radio-loud QSOs. (2) An extensive complete survey for QSOs
will be conducted using computer generated selection criteria based upon
digitized scans of the United Kingdom Schmidt Telescope objective prism plates.
(3) The Multiple Mirror Telescope Echelle Spectrograph will be used in an
attempt to observe absorption in the fine-structure lines of the ultraviolet
multiplets of the carbon line in moderate redshift QSOs in order to measure or
set limits on the cosmic microwave background temperature at early epochs. These
and other moderate- and high-resolution spectroscopic data will be used as
diagnostic probes of the conditions in QSO absorption line regions. (4) The
Echelle Spectrograph on the Kitt Peak National Observatory 4-m telescope will be
used to observe line profiles in high redshift QSOs. (5) A search will be made
for quasars near the line-of-sight of extremely low surface brightness galaxies.
(6) A fraction of blazars in a complete radio sample will be studied to test
unified models of radio sources involving relativistic beams. The energetics of
individual beamed sources will be studied using the energy distributions in the
fluxes observed in the X-ray to radio wavelength region of the spectra.