* 8620367
* Regulation of Contractility in Skeletal Muscle
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,02/29/1992
* Philip Brandt, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 02/29/1992
* USD 193,000.00

The goal of this research is to elucidate the mechanisms of interaction of the
proteins that make up the thin filaments of striated muscle: in particular, to
determine the physical and molecular basis of cooperative interactions between
the troponin-tropomyosin units which extend the length of the thin filaments of
striated muscle. Skinned muscle fibers are used as experimental material because
these regulatory proteins and their environment can be manipulated. Turnover
rates of the thin filament regulatory proteins will be measured to gain insight
into the intermolecular forces which hold the regulatory strands together and in
place, and to establish conditions for the nondestructive replacement of
proteins. The regulatory proteins,troponins (C,I, and T) and tropomyosin, will
be exchanged or extracted and replaced with chemically modified forms,
genetically different forms, and forms labeled with fluorescent or electon
opaque probes. The hypothesis that rigor crossbridges activate thin filaments
will be tested by decorating them with irreversibly bound myosin fragments. An
apparatus used in solution mixing, protocol execution, and data collection is
automated and under computer control. A similar apparatus built into a
spectrofluorometer correlates data from fluorescent molecular probes with
tension data. The cooperative regulation of thin filaments will be modeled using
the classical formalism for allosteric proteins (Monod el al., l965) and an
"induced shift" model. By comparing experimental calcium concentration vs
tension and substrate vs tension curves from control, extracted, and
experimentally reconstituted fibers with the model predictions, new insights
into potential mechanisms of thin filament regulation should be obtained.
Although the mechanisms that regulate the contraction of striated muscle have
been the object of much study, much remains to be learned at the molecular level
of how each of the proteins of the contractile apparatus is involved and how
these proteins interact in the process of shortening. This research will extend
our fundamental knowledge of the function of these important muscle proteins.