* 8620029
* Time-Domain Electromagnetic Wave Propagation in MultilayeredMedia
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1991
* Jin-Au Kong, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 01/31/1991
* USD 180,000.00

Recent progress in microelectronic circuit packaging technologies has begun to
require a thorough understanding of time-domain electromagnetic wave propagation
in multilayered media. Several issues in the theory and applications of the
time-domain electromagnetic wave propagation in multilayered media will be
addressed: (1) the applications of the double-deformation technique to transient
radiation and coupling problems; (2) transient propagation in anisotropic media;
(3) wave propagation along nonconventional transmission structures in integrated
circuits; (4) signal distortion and electromagnetic scattering due to
discontinuities in strip transmission lines; (5) crosstalk in three- dimensional
integrated circuit packaging. Better physical interpretation can be sought for
through the development of the double deformation technique, which is a wave-
mode approach based on transform method. On the other hand, the direct time-
domain formations such as the space-time domain integral equations, the method
of characteristics, the finite-difference method, the transmission line matrix
method help increase computation speed when early-time response is of main
concern and will also be explored. Time domain analysis of electromagnetic wave
propagation has gained much attention in place of frequency domain analysis
because of various new applications. In very-large-scale integrated circuit
design, multilayered structures are becoming more popular in light of their
capability of achieving a more condensed package, yet the crosstalk problems
caused by transient electromagnetic coupling have to be minimized. When
activated with electromagnetic pulses, adjacent strips of transmission lines
running in different directions or located at different heights can suffer from
significant crosstalk. As the rise-time becomes shorter and the clock-rate
higher, the circuit may be rendered inoperative because of excessive crosstalk.
This research will focus on finding reliable and computationally efficient
techniques to calculate the amount of crosstalk and radiation. One of the main
goals will be to develop equivalent circuit models to facilitate computer-aided
design.