* 8620099
* Mathematical Sciences: First International Conference on    Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Paris, France, June 29 -July 3, 1987
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1988
* I. Edward Block, Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 04/30/1988
* USD 32,700.00

This funding action will provide partial support to the American organizers and
participants of the First International Conference on Industrial and Applied
Mathematics. The conference is being organized jointly by four international
societies, and will be held in La Villette, Paris City of the Sciences and
Industry, from June 29 to July 3, 1987. The four societies -- Gesellschaft fur
Angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik (GAMM, Germany), Institute of Mathematics and
Its Applications (IMA, U.K.), Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
(SIAM, U.S.A.), and Societe de Mathematiques Appliqu- ees et Industrielles
(SMAI, France), are sharing in the planning of the program, the implementation,
and the other costs. SMAI is hosting the conference and Institut National de
Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique (INRIA, France) is the conference
administrator and site manager. The program features invited presentations by
leading international experts in topics such as advanced scientific computing,
robotics, geometric modeling, computer aided design and manufacturing, discrete
mathematical methods, fluid dynamics, signal processing, control theory,
biomathematics, computer tomography, aerodynamics, fluid dynamics and
optimization. There will be many minisymposia and contributed papers. Expected
attendance will be over 1200 participants. It will be a truly multidisciplinary
event, involving applied mathematicians, computer scientists and engineers. The
local organizer INRIA expects to recover most of its costs from conference
registration fees. The four sponsoring societies have agreed to seek the support
of their respective governments to offset their own conference costs such as
travel and per diem expenses of their respective invited speakers, other
contributing participants and program committee members, and other miscellaneous
costs such as the preparation and distribution of conference materials to their
own memberships. An important feature of this award are funds to support travel
of fifteen young American scientists presenting papers at the conference. The
selection of the scientists will be adminis- tered by SIAM. The award is split-
funded by the following NSF programs: Applied Mathematics, Computational
Mathematics, Special Projects, Advanced Scientific Computing - Computational
Science and Engineering Initiative, System Theory and Operations Research,
Computer Integrated Engineering, and Automation and System Integration. Program
Directors for these programs jointly recommend this award.