* 8620283
* Life History Characteristics of Desert Formicids
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1989
* Steven Rissing, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 01/31/1989
* USD 19,932.00

Individuals of many animal species cooperate with each other to the benefit of
the cooperating group. Some of the best and most obvious examples of such
cooperation occur in family groups. Indeed, selection to aid close relatives,
"kin selection", likely plays an important role in most cooperative animal
groups. Because of their small size, abundance and ease of observation, many
studies of animal cooperation have focused on insects, especially social insects
(e.g., wasps and honey bees). In both of these groups, cooperating individuals
are closely related, e.g., workers in a honey bee hive are sisters as are the
multiple queens that found some wasp colonies. In contrast to this trend, recent
research has indicated relatedness is apparently unimportant among ant queens in
those species which also found colonies cooperatively. Such conclusions,
however, are based on behavioral observations, which provide only an indirect
analysis of relatedness among such cooperating individuals. This project will
analyze directly the relatedness patterns of cooperating ant queens. Relatedness
will be determined through an electrophoretic analysis of protein patterns of
individuals from cooperating groups (i.e., foundress associations) compared with
populations as a whole. Results from this work will contribute directly to
efforts to understand selective forces that encourage cooperation among
individuals of the same species.