* 8622201
* Engineering Research Center for Emerging Cardiovascular     Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1987,09/30/1999
* James McElhaney, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lynn Preston
* 09/30/1999
* USD 22,768,477.00

Duke University and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, in
cooperation with faculty from North Carolina State University and the staff of
the Microelectronics Center at North Carolina, will initiate an Engineering
Research Center for Emerging Cardiovascular Technologies. The Center will
combine NSF and NIH support with funds from industry, private foundations, and
the North Carolina Biotechnology Center. The Center will incorporate the lastest
VLSI design concepts, biosensors, systems design and simulation to explore the
design of a new generation of cardiac interventional and medical imaging
systems. This interdisciplinary center will bring together active university
research programs of well- established engineering and biomedical researchers
with industrial investigators. The research will focus on Cardiac Interventional
Systems. Cardiovascular Imaging, Microelectronic Systems and Biosensor Systems
to create the fundamental knowledge required to design advanced biomedical
systems, devices, and instruments. Performance and quality are key to the
leadership of the U.S. in developing and marketing cardiac interventional and
imaging systems. The U.S. possesses and excellent base of basic biomedical
research, which the ERC will combine with the latest developments in high
technology in order to create, build, and assess prototypes of new
interventional and imaging systems which will be competitive in world markets.
Integral to the ERC will be the active participation of industrial personnel
through advisory boards, research affiliate and visiting fellow programs, and a
seminar series. Students, faculty, and industrial personnel will collaborate in
research, an optimum way to speed the flow of research to technology. The
Education program will focus on the involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students in multidisciplinary teams made up of faculty and industrial
researchers from diverse technical backgrounds. Industrial personnel will be
active members of the faculty in designing educational programs and advising
student research projects. The Duke ERC was approved by the National Science
Board as one of the FY 1987 ERCs in March of 1987, provided that the ERC receive
one-third support from the National Institutes of Health. This action initiates
the first year of the ERC through partial funding of NSF's commitment.
Completion of NSF's commitment will await approval by the NIH of an award to
support the ERC. The Division of Cross-Disciplinary research recommends the Duke
ERC because it provides an excellent opportunity to combine engineering and
medical skills to advance a basic field of engineering. The ERC's contribution
will be critical for the development of a new generation of interventional
imaging systems which will directly enhance international competitiveness
through new products and indirectly reduce the costs of healthcare.