* 8646563
* Neurochemical Interactions of Co-localized Transmitters in  The Inner Ear
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Douglas Hoffman, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/28/1990
* USD 98,474.00

This action is to recommend funding for three years to study neurotransmitters
in the ear. Cells in the nervous system make functional connections called
synapses; a biochemical compound used to transmit information across a synapse
is called a neurotransmitter. The synthesis, release, uptake and turnover of
neurotransmitters play key roles in information processing; the regulation of
these steps by other compounds thus modulate the information transfer. Not much
is known about the neurotransmitters or neuromodulators in the inner ear, and
this organ provides a model system with several neuroactive substances to study
their possible interactions. This project will quantify the neurochemical
interactions within the cochlea of the inner ear. The cochlea contains the
auditory receptor cells which synapse on fibers of the auditory nerve that carry
signals to the brain; in addition, there are fibers called efferents that carry
signals from certain central brain regions out to the cochlea. The efferent
pathway apparently acts to modulate the sensory transmission coming in to the
auditory pathway. The auditory transmitter release may be affected, or the
molecular receptor sites on the auditory nerve terminals may be affected by
neuromodulators released from the efferent terminals. Thus this first synapse in
the auditory pathway can be considered a "multitransmitter" synapse. The bony
shell containing the cochlea and nerve will be used in situ as a perfusion
chamber to study the release, degredation and receptor interactions of two major
classes of neuromodulator candidates: the opioid peptides and acetylcholine.
Liquid chromatography, radioimmune assays and radioreceptor assays will
unambiguously identify and quantify the neuroactive substances sampled from the
cochlear tissues. To study mechanisms of possible co- transmission, perfusion of
this space will be used to collect neuroactive substances in response to
stimulation, and to infuse specific substances that have known agonist or
antagonist actions at the synaptic receptor sites. The Program in Sensory
Physiology & Perception recommends funding this project because it uses a
cleaver, novel preparation to clarify the biochemical mechanisms involved in the
auditory system, and the principles elucidated are likely to be applicable to
other interactions of neurotransmitters elsewhere in the brain.