* 8650095
* The Thinking Gallery:  Development of an Inquiry-Driven     Gallery in a Living Museum
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1986,11/30/1989
* Leslie Kaufman, New England Aquarium Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 11/30/1989
* USD 285,141.00

The New England Aquarium will develop an "inquiry-driven" gallery for the study
of aquatic sciences in a move to go beyond the "naming" experiences in biology
and environmental education. The project will focus on seven conceptual themes:
1) adaptation and evolution; 2) habitat; 3) life cycles; 4) development and
metamorphosis; 5) species interactions; 6) energy flow: and 7) signals and
senses. The exhibits will challenge the visitor with questions, puzzles and
games. Curriculum materials will be developed for teachers along with a users
guide for visitors. Outreach activities are planned, aimed at minority students
and visitors. The Aquarium serves approximately 155,000 students and over one
million visitors every year. The redesigned gallery will house eight tanks,
ranging from a series of small tanks with accompanying video clips that display
seldom seen behaviors such as the "birth" of seahorses, lobster molting, etc. to
three 250-gallon tanks that will display ancient fishes and a variety of species
showing different kinds of locomotion, color and sound. A 2500- gallon tank
housing a school of fish will demonstrate different ways terrestrial and aquatic
animals sense their surroundings. A 4000-gallon floor to ceiling tank will
display a salt marsh on one side and a mangrove forest on the other and a
6000-gallon tank will house large groupers, moray eels and small gobies. The NSF
award represents $273,971 out of a project total of $857,986.