* 8650060
* State Strategies to Support Science and Mathematics Curricu-lum and Assessment Development at the School and District   Level
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1986,06/30/1988
* Jane Armstrong, Education Commission of the States
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1988
* USD 132,539.00

This project will be designed to answer three research questions: 1) what are
effective strategies at the state level that will improve science curriculum
content through the use and articulation of state curriculum standards, the
selection of instructional materials and student assessment; 2) under what
conditions does state action on curriculum standards, instructional materials
and assessment work effectively to support improved curriculum content in
schools and districts; and 3) how do these strategies define the role and
responsibility of the state education agency in improving the quality of science
curriculum. Three states will be studied to identify effective strategies and
make comparisons among them for their varying degrees of state initiatives in
curriculum and instructional reform and assessment. Five local school districts
within each of the three states will be studied to develop a better picture of
how state and local strategies are implemented in schools. In addition, two
surveys will be conducted to identify existing information on current policies
in all 50 states that are designed to upgrade science and mathematics curriculum
and assessment; and to identify existing curriculum and assessment practices and
state roles in all districts within the three states selected for in-depth
analysis. These two survey results will be used to select the three states and
15 local districts that will be included in the study. Districts will be
selected to reflect varying levels of success on the state's science assessment,
SES and size. They will also be selected based on the extent to which they are
implementing state strategies based on the State Education Agency
recommendations as reflected in the district survey findings. A five member
advisory committee comprised of a nationally recognized academic science
educator, two state education agency science supervisors, a representative of a
regional educational laboratory, and a state assessment director, will be formed
to guide the development of the field researcher's strategy and to select the
states and districts that will form the basis of the study.