* 8650179
* Science Workshops for Elementary Teachers and Principals
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1986,02/29/1988
* Gerald Skoog, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 02/29/1988
* USD 199,421.00

This project will increase the knowledge of science of K-6 teachers, improve the
teachers' knowledge of the methodology associated with teaching science, explore
recent science-related societal issues, and improve the ability to teach science
to exceptional students (gifted and talented, bilingual, and physically
disabled). The activities for elementary school teachers will be accompanied by
in-service activities for principals, directed toward a quality K-6 science
program and the role of the principal in developing and implementing the
program. Three different, but related, programs will be offered. Fifty
elementary school teachers will be selected for two of the programs. Twenty-five
from within commuting distance of Lubbock will attend sessions on the Texas Tech
University campus one night a week during the 1986-87 academic year and one six-
week summer session in 1987. The other 25 participants, living beyond commuting
distance, will attend corresponding sessions at Lamesa. Principals will
participate in the third program consisting of two all- day workshops conducted
in October and November of 1986. The objectives and description of an in-service
program for teachers, the use of assessment instruments to evaluate K-6 science
programs, and the role of principals as leaders in curriculum development will
be presented. All sessions will include special programs and techniques to
assist project participants in helping their colleagues in planning and teaching
science. Selected teachers will meet with principals to formulate staff
development strategies and plans. All activities will be based on the assumption
that science in grades K-6 can be taught without elaborate equipment and
supplies.