* 8650694
* Computer-Interfaced High Performance Liquid Chromatography  and Differential Scanning Calorimetry in Undergraduate      Analytical Chemistry Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1986,08/31/1988
* Phoebe Dea, California State University-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 08/31/1988
* USD 38,295.00

During the past fifteen years, there have been significant technological
advances in analytical instrumentation. Laboratory experience is an integral and
important component of undergraduate education in chemistry and biochemistry.
This project will provide on-line computer-aided data acquisition and analysis
capabilities necessary to equip students with skills required in real-world
professional practice. It will outfit the undergraduate chemistry
instrumentation laboratories at California State University-Los Angeles with
equipment to carry out experiments in two additional areas: high performance
liquid chromatography and thermal analysis. Both systems will be interfaced to a
computer controlling the equipment and processing the data. The requested
equipment will enable students to become familiar with techniques frequently
encountered in modern research and industrial laboratories. Furthermore, they
will gain both a broader perspective and a deeper appreciation of modern
technologies, which will increase their enthusiasm for chemistry, and help them
become better prepared chemistry graduates. With vigorous undergraduate research
activities and honors programs, this department makes a noteworthy contribution
to chemistry education of minority students.