* 8650522
* Equipment to Establish a Microcomputer-Interfaced           Laboratory for Teaching Psychology to Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1986,10/31/1988
* Hunter McAllister, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 10/31/1988
* USD 19,661.00

The aim of this project is to establish a microcomputer laboratory in psychology
in order to improve undergraduate students' research experiences. Due to the
large number of students and the relatively small number of faculty members it
has not been possible to give undergraduate students at Southeastern Louisiana
University research experiences that they require if they are to gain an
accurate appreciation of how research is conducted in psychology. There are two
aspects to this project -- one for students in lower level psychology courses
and one for students at the upper level. In the lower level courses,
commercially available software packages allow students to conduct replications
of some of the classic experiments in this discipline. In the upper level
courses, microcomputers are being used in original research projects involving
precise measurement and control. Many of the projects involve interfacing the
microcomputer with experimental equipment already existing in the department.
Students are introduced in the intermediate program to the process of delimiting
questions, posing falsifiable hypotheses and designing tests of their validity.
More advanced students are able to conduct individual research studies or to
participate in faculty projects.