* 8650950
* Optical Pattern and Motion Analysis:  Applications in       Experimental Psychology
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1986,08/31/1988
* Thomas Brozoski, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Frances Chesley as Backup AA
* 08/31/1988
* USD 40,000.00

The most fundamental of experimental psychology's foundations is the
quantitative measurement of behavior. Recent improvements in intelligent
instrumentation have made systems for quantitative image and motion analysis
commercially available. The more sophisticated of these instruments enable rapid
high-resolution quantification of multiple moving objects. At the same time a
host of laboratory problems in experimental psychology require the accurate
quantification of behaviors that can be measured readily by optical means.
Examples are the coordinated movement of a limb as it is affected by
maturational changes; the locomotor sequence of test animals as they are
affected by stimulant drugs; the interactive dynamics of children in a preschool
classroom as they are affected by varieties of play activities; the exact
location and volume of brain lesions as they relate to observed behavioral
changes. A single high-quality quantitative image and motion analysis instrument
is being applied in a wide range of laboratory problems similar to these. The
major objectives are three-fold: a) immediately enhancing the rigor of existing
lab work in several advanced courses as well as ongoing student-faculty research
projects; b) improving the variety and quantitative rigor of laboratory work in
the majority of second, third, and fourth-level laboratory courses; c)
developing a library of instructional applications, as well as a library of
applications software, for quantitative image analysis. Quantitative image and
motion analysis provides a quantum methodological advance for experimental
psychologists in that it confers the capability to measure unobtrusively and
simultaneously multiple dimensions of the behavior of multiple organisms. This
project brings a state-of-the-art instrument into undergraduate laboratories in
a way that invigorates a set of upper division courses. The novel applications
this faculty has designed have the potential of serving as a model for other
high quality undergraduate psychology programs.