* 8651985
* Project Leadership in High School Science and Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 01/15/1987,09/30/1990
* Frank Pomilla, CUNY York College
* Continuing Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 09/30/1990
* USD 840,141.00

This Leadership Activities project provides current and relevant content and
methodology to 200 science and mathematics teachers in the 22 high schools of
Queens County, New York City over the next three years. The 200 teachers
involved directly will, in turn, serve as leaders in the enhancement of their
colleagues in subject matter and classroom instructional strategies and methods.
60 mathematics, 60 biology, 40 chemistry, 20 physics and 20 earth science
teachers will be the direct beneficiaries of the program during the time of the
project. These teachers will then work with the 550 remaining science and
mathematics teachers in the Queens County high schools. The project activities
include 4-week summer institutes in 3 of the subject areas each summer, 6
follow-up workshops during the academic year, inservice activities at the high
schools by the participating teachers, and periodic visits, collaboration and
consultations among the project faculty, participating teachers, and their
peers. A Science Resource Center will be developed at York College during the
term of the project and serve as a means of continuing the project activities
once NSF funding ceases. A thorough needs assessment was completed prior to the
submission of the proposal. The personnel involved included a representative
sampling of the client population who expressed a felt need for the content and
methodology update because of the new Regents science and mathematics curricula
which are to be implemented in the immmediate future. Further several teachers
had not participated in such renewal activities for several years.