* 8651591
* The Psychology of Physics Problem Solving:  Theory and      Practice; July 21-23, 1986; New York, NY
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1986,12/31/1986
* Seth Chaiklin, Bank Street College of Education
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 12/31/1986
* USD 28,954.00

The past nine years have yielded a large research corpus on the psychology of
physical-science problem solving. Several research approaches have developed
analyses of problem solving in physical science, emphasizing such aspects as
qualitative conceptions and search strategies. It is now appropriate to evaluate
what we have learned and what remains to be done in developing a coherent
theoretical approach that supports physical science education. Funds are being
provided for a four-part working conference that will enable major researchers
in the area of physics problem solving and education to address this problem.
The first part will attempt to confront and coordinate different research
approaches to develop a core model of problem solving by novices in physics. The
second part will develop the educational implications of the core model. The
third part will critique the core model by considering what science educators
need from a theory of problem solving to advance the effectiveness of physics
instruction. In light of the critique, the fourth part will discuss
methodological and conceptual approaches that would better coordinate
psychological theory and educational practice. The conference is scheduled to
meet from July 21-23, 1986. Working papers prepared beforehand will be used to
focus and initiate discussion. The results of the discussions will be
disseminated through an American Educational Research Association symposium and
three papers for appropriate research and education journals that summarize the
current understanding of novice physical-science problem solving, the
limitations of that understanding for educational purposes, and directions for
future research.