* 8651998
* Biotechnology Research Seminars for Leaders in Secondary    School Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1987,06/30/1989
* John Frey, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Continuing Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 06/30/1989
* USD 204,946.00

This Teacher Enhancement project will increase the expertise of 20 high school
biology teachers per year in the areas of biotechnology, biological research,
problem solving and scientific writing. These twenty teachers will return to
their schools, following a 6-week summer program, to enrich their instructional
program, to provide inservice experiences for their colleagues, and to exert
leadership in curriculum reform and laboratory development. Teachers will be
selected from school districts in the upper midwestern states of Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Iowa, North and South Dakota. Follow-up activities will assist the
teachers in both their instructional modifications and leadership activities.
Teachers selected meet in the spring to consider their summer research project
with the appropriate college faculty. The project is planned and partially
developed by the time they arrive for the summer. During the summer, in addition
to working on their project, they attend seminars on contemporary topics in
biology and develop activities for their own classrooms related to both the
research activities and seminars. In addition, they will develop the outline for
the inservice activities which they will conduct. During the academic year,
university staff will make visits to the participant's schools and conferences
will be held at the University or other appropriate settings to further the
knowledge of teachers or to report research results. The proposal is an
outgrowth of an honors workshop for high school teachers conducted in the past
two years. The PI is well-qualified to conduct the program, being a research
biologist, but also having prior experience in directing teacher development
activities. The other staff are research biologists from the University. Experts
in biotechnology from the private sector will be used as speakers and
consultants.