* 8651678
* Renewal Activities in Science Education for Elementary      Teachers in Central Pennsylvania
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/1987,08/31/1990
* Peter Rubba, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 08/31/1990
* USD 128,542.00

Pennsylvania State University will renew and further develop the science
knowledge base, science teaching competencies and attitudes toward teaching
science of 55 K-6 teacher leaders from diverse central Pennsylvania school
districts during a cooperative two year project which includes a five week
Renewal Institute, five academic year teacher planned meetings and, in the
second year, dissemination to fellow teachers by teacher leaders with assistance
from the project staff. After the two year NSF funding cycle this cadre of 55
science teachers will be utilized by Penn State in the training of preservice
science teachers to demonstrate science lessons and be recommended to assist
university faculty for inservice activities for an area in which 39% of the
elementary teachers teach little or no science. Responding to the explicit
request of the targeted participants four junior high school science teachers
will deliver the science content and process based instruction for this program
during which teachers will present, videotape, review and critique science
microteach lessons and create their own materials for a curriculum which
includes Life and Earth science, Chemistry and Physics. Pedagogical instruction
will be provided by the senior personnel. In order to establish a supportive
environment required for elementary science instruction, a week long Principal's
Workshops required of all participating schools will provide a model of a good
science program, the role of the principal in developing science programs and
research findings on elementary school science. Evaluation will include
examination of the instructional components and follow-up of the participants in
their classroom as they teach science. Cost sharing for Renewal Activities in
Science Education for Elementary Teachers in Central Pennsylvania is assumed by
Penn State, the school districts, and the Pennsylvania Department of
Education.Participants from this economically depressed, rural area will receive
five hours of graduate credit in science. Dr. Peter Rubba, Director of the
Center for Education in Science, Technology, and Society is an associate
Professor with nine years experience as a science educator. Mr. David
Kleindienst, a science curriculum coordinator is the assistant director. Ms.
Patricia F. Keig is a doctoral student at Penn State teaching elementary science
methods. The outstanding experienced school teachers, Ms. Barto, Ms. Johnstone,
Mr. Shope and Mr. Eysenbach have been chosen because of their competence in
using hands-on, inquiry approaches to science instruction.