* 8651039
* Ultra High Vacuum Techniques and Experimentation in         Materials Science
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1986,08/31/1988
* James Lloyd, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/1988
* USD 27,749.00

Ultra high vacuum (UHV) techniques are becoming standard for the study of
materials and surface problems. This project will develop a high quality UHV
facility so that Colgate can introduce training in these important techniques
and experience with materials science problems into their upper level laboratory
program. They intend to incorporate a carefully supervised training module into
the experimental methods course, provide experimental exercises to support the
Solid State Physics course, and use the system as a major station in the
advanced laboratory program. In addition, there is a wide range of research
problems in materials and surface science that are manageable for talented
undergraduates to accomplish as independent projects. The basis for the project
is a UHV system with a stainless steel test chamber that can be configured to
accept a variety of experiments. Additional features to be incorporated are: (1)
an ion sputter gun to get surfaces atomically clean, (2) a residual gas analyzer
to support the training program in UHV techniques, and to do experiments in
desorption of gasses from surfaces, (3) a means to prepare high quality thin
films by evaporation, and (4) a reflection high energy electron diffraction
system to investigate the structure of prepared films in situ, and make possible
electron diffraction experiments.