* 8651995
* The Science Behind Medicine:  The Shape of Things to Come
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1986,02/28/1991
* Thomas Krakauer, North Carolina Museum of Life and Science
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 02/28/1991
* USD 515,889.00

This project at the North Carolina Museum of Life and Science, Durham, North
Carolina, will create a 2000 square foot permanent exhibition, "The Science
Behind Medicine", using recent advances in medical science and technology to
illustrate basic science concepts. It will engage visitors through their strong
interest in health and medicine, present valuable information about medical
subjects, and use their interest to present underlying scientific concepts they
would otherwise avoid. The exhibition will be organized around four topics:
organ structure and function and organ replacement and transplantation; advances
in medical imaging, including infrared, ultrasound and x-ray technologies;
pharmaceutical pharmacology, biological receptors and molecular design; and
sickle cell anemia and its molecular biology. Over five years, more than one
million people will use the exhibit, including both highly educated residents of
the Research Triangle area, and a Durham population that is disadvantaged and
50% black. Extensive subject area consultation and formative evaluation will be
used in exhibition design. A close consulting relationship is planned with two
museums with similar exhibit interests, and exhibit research and plans will be
offered to other interested museums to encourage wider use of the project's
results. A strong regional health sciences focus will benefit the project
through academic, business, community and industry membership on a project
planning committee, and from 50% local matching funding. Two corporate planning
grants have been awarded to the project, and a major facilities expansion funded
in part by a recent bond issue.