* 8651468
* A School-Industry-Community Approach to the Development of  Scientific and Technological Literacy Among Elementary      School Pupils
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1986,07/31/1990
* Frederick Staley, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Vanski
* 07/31/1990
* USD 449,535.00

This project is designed to implement and sustain a scientific-and
technological-literacy-for-all-students approach in elementary schools in
Arizona. An action plan will be developed by each school community and will
include the following features: a) designation of the school principal as the
facilitator of school community change, b) selection of a science instructional
leader who will receive special preparation in a science, technology, society,
and science education academy, c) design of vehicles for the sharing of up-to-
date science and technology information by the science instructional leader with
other teachers and children, d) development of interdisciplinary, instructional
thematic units which provide up-to-date technology learning experiences to
supplement the existing science and social studies programs, and e) involvement
of community businesses, industries, informal education agencies and key
parents. A variety of useful products and outcomes will be developed including:
a)A Science, Technology, Society Curriculum Data Bank which will enable sharing
of such resources as: thematic units developed by teachers; newsletters on
science and technology; reviews of relevant video- cassettes; reviews of
relevant television programs; reviews and suggested use of locally available
curriculum materials; information about community resources, computer software
programs, pamphlets, brochures, and films. b)A report about effective strategies
and approaches for creating thematic units that utilize local resources, deal
with societal issues, and have local and community relevance and practicality
for students. c)Suggestions about effective strategies and techniques for
implementing thematic units with children in classrooms. d)Descriptive,
longitudinal and comparative research data about the process and effects of
attempting to bring about substantial change in the science curriculum utilizing
two different sequences of teacher preparation and implementation.