* 8651502
* Leadership Workshop in Field Biology and Geology for        Secondary Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1986,05/31/1988
* Charles Ritter, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 05/31/1988
* USD 98,893.00

This Leadership Activities project will provide professional development for 20
outstanding junior and senior high school science teachers. The grant provides
support for the continuation and further development of a six-week field biology
and geology workshop conducted by University of Dayton scientists. Emphasis will
be on applied biology, field ecology, and environmental geology. During the
first three weeks the principles of ecology and geology will be introduced with
intensive field trips to natural sites within the local environments of the
schools. The final two weeks of the summer program will include intensive work
at high altitude ecological and geological sites. Several high altitude
researchers will be involved in working with the teachers during this time.
Earlier versions of this workshop have been very successful, and this summer
program will emphasize the importance of field-based activities for students in
their own environment. Among other things, the project directors will talk with
the principals of each participating teacher to ask for administrative support
and to emphasize the importance of field trips for students. The program
includes an extended academic phase that will result in the preparation of
instructional modules. Participants will meet together during the academic year
to discuss progress, there will be several field trips to local resource sites,
and the participants will be expected to provide workshop outreach to others in
their schools and communities. In addition, they will receive 10 semester hours
of graduate credit, certificates of achievement, and will be honored by local
media.