* 8651685
* Honors Workshop for Middle Grade Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/1986,06/30/1989
* Glenda Lappan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 06/30/1989
* USD 224,917.00

This project offers twenty-five selected teachers of Mathematics in Grades 6, 7,
and 8 the opportunity to participate in a four-week Honors Workshop at Michigan
State University during the summer of 1987. This will enable these teachers from
the Midwest to earn 6 hours of credit in Mathematics Education. The participants
will be provided with a special intensive program designed to update their
knowledge of mathematics and its uses. They will also study ways to improve
their instruction of mathematics at the middle grade level. An interesting
"multiplier" effect of the program is the attendance of two proteges of each
participant during the fourth week of the program. These additional teachers
will also be active participants of the Workshop. All participants will be
provided with materials and plans with which to return to their communities as
leaders in Mathematics Education. Materials used will be principally those
developed through the Middle Grade Mathematics Project, an NSF-funded curriculum
development project. Excellent support has been generated from local school
districts to ensure implementation at the school level. During the second
summer, the participants, with considerable local support, will conduct
workshops for their peers under the guidance of the project staff. Throughout
the project the focus will be on building a local network of teachers to
continue the project activities in addition to exchanging ideas and providing
broader support. Dr. Fitzgerald has extensive experience in Mathematics and
Mathematics Education having worked at the secondary as well as at the
university level. He has organized and conducted many conferences on various
topics in mathematics and served in the capacity of staff member and director
for several NSF-funded programs. Dr. Lappan, Co PI, has an equally impressive
background, but, in particular, was Project Director for the NSF-funded Middle
Grades Mathematics Program. These materials are an integral part of this
proposal. With a highly qualified staff, a feasible program design, an
appropriate set of materials and supportive school districts, this program
stands an excellent chance of impacting positively on the Mathematics Education
of the region.