* 8651582
* Using Errors as Springboards for Inquiry in Mathematics     Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/1986,11/30/1989
* Raffaella Borasi, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 11/30/1989
* USD 145,876.00

This project will explore strategies for using students' mathematical errors
that will examine the potential of errors to motivate and direct activities
involving problem generating, problem solving, and critical thinking. This is in
contrast to the current practice that focuses solely on obtaining correct
answers and eliminating errors as quickly as possible. A combination of
conceptual and empirical investigations will be employed. This approach will
include the in-depth study of several errors to unravel their potential to
motivate creative activities; the development of instructional material which
makes use of such potential; a conceptual analysis of the possibility of using
errors as motivation and means for inquiry with different audiences; the
analysis of students' reactions to implementations of the strategy in
instructional contexts at the secondary level, both in natural classroom
settings and in "teaching experiments" with small groups. Findings from this
research should assist in understanding the role of errors in education and lead
to further occasions in mathematics instruction for crucial activities such as
problem solving and critical thinking. Though this project will focus on the use
of errors in mathematics instruction at the secondary level, it will create the
basis for the application of a reconstructed view of the educational role of
errors with other audiences and in other subject areas. This project addresses
the Directorate primary goal of advancing the quality of mathematics instruction
through exploratory research and development on a new strategy that recognizes
the epistemological value of trial and error in the historical development of
mathematical ideas and algorithms. It will also generate prototype instructional
materials that will incorporate this approach with the potential for use by
classroom teachers; consequently, co-funding is being provided by the
Instructional Materials Development Program. The PI is a young researcher who is
well-qualified to conduct this research.