* 8651988
* Helping Our Partners Enrich Science (HOPES): A Partnership in Elementary Science Inservice Training
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1986,03/31/1989
* Hector Timourian, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Charles R. Puglia
* 03/31/1989
* USD 280,470.00

This proposal will utilize the expertise of 30-50 of local science professionals
(Content Specialists) and 150 elementary school teachers in a four week
inservice training partnership. The workshop will benefit from the strength and
uniqueness derived from the active participation of two science-rich
communities. One is the greater Livermore, California area that includes 5000
practicing scientists, technologists and engineers. The other community is the
"Space Coast" area of Brevard County, Florida where the science resources are
greater than those of Livermore. The aim of "Helping Our Partners Enrich
Science" (HOPES) is to bring a high quality science program into the elementary
classroom and is based on a proven pilot program. HOPES summer workshop will
include content training, topic selection, lesson development, mentor teachers
development, follow-up activities and the development of a manual. The program
will involve scientists and teachers working together in the learning, teaching
and sharing of basic skills, strategies, methodologies and content information
for effective teaching of science. The staff for both locations of this project
is highly qualified. In addition, to the college level personnel, two Master
Teachers are included on the instructional staff. The combined team represents a
broad range of experience in science and science education. HOPES should provide
a highly refined and well documented program for teacher inservice training in
science and for training scientists and engineers as classroom resources. This
program has the potential to become a model which can be replicated in many
other science-rich communities throughout the country and is in keeping with the
purpose of the Division of Teacher Preparation and Enhancement.