* 8651600
* Exploratory Research on Critical Aspects of LOGO Learning   A Collaborative Project with Teachers as Observers
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1987,09/30/1988
* Molly Watt, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 09/30/1988
* USD 162,004.00

This project will conduct a 15-month exploratory research effort to examine the
feasibility of working with experienced LOGO teachers as collaborative
researchers in their own classrooms, to define critical aspects of LOGO
learning, and to develop a methodology for assessing and enhancing critical
aspects of LOGO learning in elementary classrooms, grades 4-6. The Principal
Investigators plan to accomplish the following specific tasks: 1.To develop a
well-defined set of approximately ten critical aspects of LOGO learning,
articulated in developmental sequences informed by observations in elementary
classrooms, grades 4 - 6. 2.To develop a draft set of observation, data
collection, and enhancement techniques, suitable for use by classroom teachers,
with respect to these critical aspects of LOGO learning. 3.To develop and
document a methodology of teacher/research seminars designed to enable
practicing teachers to observe, enhance and report on critical aspects of LOGO
learning in their own classrooms. 4.To conduct a preliminary study of the
professional development of participating teachers, as the basis for a testable
plan for teacher enhancement, using the research seminar methodology developed
by this project. 5.To develop a plan for the next phase of development of a
guidebook for teachers on observing, assessing and enhancing critical aspects of
LOGO learning in their classrooms, and for the development of any other
educational materials needed to use this approach with less experienced LOGO
teachers. 6.To develop a plan for further research based on these methods, in
the areas of teacher development and student mathematical learning. The
potential of LOGO as a tool for teaching and learning mathematical (numerical
and geometrical) problem solving is vast but unrealized in elementary school
classrooms. This exploratory research holds high salience for the Research in
Teaching and Learning Program in its effort to generate knowledge of high
utility for the development of programs and materials of national significance
for teacher education. Because the propotype teacher education materials and
strategies being developed have potential for national utility, the project is
co-funded by the Instruc-tional Materials Development Program. The Principal
Investigators have extensive experience with teaching LOGO. They are well-
qualified to conduct this project and will be assisted by a distinguished groups
of LOGO research experts.