* 8651512
* A Model for Statewide Mathematics Assessment in Virginia    Based on the Second International Mathematics Study
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1986,01/31/1990
* Edgar Edwards, Virginia State Department of Education
* Standard Grant
* Herbert E. Wylen
* 01/31/1990
* USD 197,523.00

The Department of Education of the Commonwealth of Virginia has proposed to
replicate the methodology and findings of the Second International Mathematics
Study (SIMS) by designing and conducting a comprehensive survey of the eighth
and twelfth grade mathematics programs for the Commonwealth of Virginia and for
two selected school divisions within the Commonwealth. The findings will be used
to identify strengths and weaknesses of the mathematics curriculum at the state
and division levels, in light of SIMS data available on the national and
international levels. The resulting information will be taken into account in
curriculum reform activities in the Commonwealth. This application of the SIMS
methodology is expected to provide a powerful model for assessing mathematics
programs that will be used elsewhere within Virginia and could have utility in
other states and regions of the United States, as well. The main objective of
the study is to develop a model for program assessment and evaluation at the
state and local levels in order to provide detailed, high quality data for
curriculum supervisors, classroom teachers and school administrators in
assessing their current curriculum and in identifying new directions for
improvement. The project will be carried out in three phases: (i) Curriculum
Analysis Phase: An analysis of the curriculum will be conducted for the two
target populations: (1) all eighth grade students and (2) those students in
twelfth grade college preparatory mathematics classes. This curricular
information will be used to assess the adequacy of the item pool of the Second
International Mathematics Study for program evaluation in Virginia. If
necessary, the item pool will be augmented to adequately reflect major content
areas in the Virginia curriculum. (ii) Testing Phase: Probability samples of
classes will be drawn from the entire state for each of the two target
populations. Concurrently, two school divisions will be targeted for study. The
students will be tested (attitudes and achievement) at the end of the 1986-87
school year. Data will be obtained from teachers on "opportunity-to-learn," that
is, the extent to which the subject matter on the tests has been taught to the
students being tested, and on classroom processes used for selected topics in
the curriculum. (iii) Analysis and Reporting Phase: Data will be analyzed and
reports will be generated for use of classroom teachers and supervisors and
personnel at the Virginia Department of Education. Reports will also be prepared
that will be of interest to professionals at corresponding levels of
responsibility outside of the Commonwealth.