* 8651508
* Rocky Mountain Geography Teachers' Leadership Network
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1986,05/31/1989
* A. David Hill, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 05/31/1989
* USD 165,043.00

This Nation needs more and better geographic education, and it needs teachers
and systems well prepared to deliver that education. This Leadership Activities
Project responds to these needs. Intensive summer workshops will offer the
development of special skills for school district teams consisting of curriculum
specialists, master geography teachers, and inexperienced geography teachers.
These teams will design, pilot, and evaluate instructional materials that are
based upon the most recent developments in geography education. Subsequently,
the teams will meet throughout the academic year in special workshops and the
staff of the project will visit the participating school districts, visiting
classrooms and providing support to the local team members. In the process,
teaching modules, syllabi, and in-service geography teacher education programs
will be developed, used in school classrooms with students, and evaluated. These
programs will be based upon the Guideline for Geographic Education prepared by
the Association of American Geographers and the National Council for Geographic
Education in 1984. Both the instructional materials and the teacher education
models will be evaluated throughout this project. This project builds upon an
NSF-supported project that was successfully conducted in the summer of 1985.
This two-year project will work with larger numbers of participants, ultimately
reaching 30 middle/junior high school teachers and 60 high school teachers. The
project will create a Great Plains-Rocky Mountain network that is linked to the
Geographic Education National Implementation Project. It will contribute to the
growth of a regional network of geography educators who will motivate, support,
and learn from each other. School districts will share some of the support
costs.