* 8651996
* Development of Science Related Exhibits for Young Children
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1986,02/28/1989
* Jeffrey Bonner, St Louis Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 02/28/1989
* USD 301,217.00

The St. Louis Science Center is a major metropolitan science museum serving a
population of 2.3 million people. One year ago they moved into a new facility at
a new location and attendance at the museum has tripled, reaching 600,00
visitors this past year. The center will develop a "Science Playground" in order
to teach basic science principles and process through a series of 45 outdoor
participatory exhibitions around the major areas of motion, energy, light, sound
and the natural environment. The physics of motion will be explored through
exhibits such as a friction slide, lunar gravity swing, double-axis human
pendulum, etc. Energy exhibits will provide experiences with watermills and
water power, fulcrum leverage and solar energy. Light exploration includes a
solar column, prisms and rainbows, soundwheel and whisper discs. A weather
station will have a rain gauge, anemometer, a variety of barometers, etc. This
contemporary playground concept was developed as a response to limitations of
indoor facilities and to extend use of outdoor space in a creative manner. The
exhibit will be a model for extending science learning opportunities for
schools, parks, other science museums and similar institutions. The center
surveyed 31 science centers, 82 parks and 85 school districts to gauge interest
in use of science playground exhibits, and found a clear interest in this type
of project by all sectors surveyed. Exhibit designs will be published and
furnished at cost to any facility wishing to replicate all or any part of the
exhibition.