* 8651670
* Integrating Problem Solving Into Mathematics Teaching:  A   Model and Demonstration Project
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/1986,12/31/1989
* Jerry Becker, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 427,333.00

This two-year project for teacher development is offered at Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale for the purpose of enhancing mathematics education in
the southern half of the state of Illinois. Sixty teachers, elementary and
secondary, broken into appropriate grade level groupings, will be given the
opportunity to receive on-campus instruction in Mathematics, problem-solving,
the use of microcomputers in teaching, and to integrate the training received
into classroom teaching. This project is based on a successful pilot program
recently completed at SIU-Carbondale. In addition to the above objectives, a
"community of scholars" will be created among these competent, enthusiastic
teachers to continue the collegiality established and to maintain the impetus
for improved mathematics education. A four-week program is planned for the first
summer with a follow-up during the school year of twelve Saturday meetings, for
the purposes of sharing experiences with each other and meeting with project
staff and guest instructors of mathematics. Local school districts, the Renewal
Institute for Practicing Teachers and the Education Service Centers are lending
their support, financial as well as programmatic. This collaborative effort will
result in teachers having the opportunity of earning sixteen credits from the
University and benefiting from a good support system for the improvement of
their classroom teaching. Dr. Jerry P. Becker is Professor of Mathematical
Education at SIU- Carbondale and has had extensive experience in working with
teachers through National Science Foundation funded programs and institutes in
the United States and India. His responsibilities at the University include
working with preservice teachers of mathematics. His Co-PI, Dr. Neal Foland has
excellent credentials in Mathematics. They have assembled a very creditable
staff of mathematicians and educators. This project offers a wide range of
approaches aimed at the improvement of mathematics education throughout the K-12
grades through a collaborative project which involves important elements of the
Southern Illinois educational community.