* 8651464
* Program for the Enrichment of Science Instruction in        Elementary Schools in Rural Tennessee
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1986,12/31/1989
* George Drew, University of Tennessee Martin
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 12/31/1989
* USD 388,261.00

The Center of Excellence for the Enrichment of Science and Mathematics Education
at the University of Tennessee at Martin is charged with the responsibility of
rendering service to public schools in mathematics and science education in the
state of Tennessee. This project is designed to provide that service in
elementary science in three Educational Service Centers in rural settings. Teams
consisting of one primary teacher, one intermediate teacher, one principal, and
one supervisor, all from the same school, will be formed. A major effort will be
made to find minority participants and those interested in mainstreaming
handicapped children. Three of these teams will be formed in each of the three
Education Service Centers. These teams of exemplary educators will participate
in an intensive eight-week summer session designed to increase competency in
content and teaching strategies. Once trained, they will redesign the elementary
science programs in their home schools. When that task is complete, the teams
will move on to serve other institutions. These involvements will take the form
of team members working in classrooms as trainers of teachers and with
appropriate administrators. Support for the teaching teams during the academic
year will be provided by "Level III" teachers who will serve as field
supervisors, the science consultant for the State Department of Education, and
the project staff.