* 8651569
* Improvement of Chemistry Teaching in Central Iowa Through   the Use of Integrated Microcomputer Learning Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1986,11/30/1988
* Ann Thompson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 11/30/1988
* USD 54,273.00

This Leadership Activities project will provide enhancement and professional
development experiences in the use of the computer as an instructional tool for
25 chemistry teachers in central Iowa. The goals of the project are to upgrade
the knowledge of basic and applied chemistry of the teachers, to assist them in
effectively utilizing the microcomputer in teaching chemistry, and in developing
25 microcomputer lessons which augment their existing chemistry curricula. These
25 teachers will subsequently provide in-service activities to other chemistry
teachers in their geographic area utilizing the skills and knowledge attained.
The network of 25 chemistry teachers currently exists. They have been actively
involved in the planning for this project. The group will meet for six Saturday
sessions during the 1986-87 academic year and for two weeks during the summer of
1987. The teachers will be supported by a science educator, a college computing
specialist, a research chemist, and a 1984 Presidential Awardee in Science
(Chemistry). Follow-up visits will be made by the staff to the teachers in their
schools. The activities in which teachers are engaged will range from lectures
and laboratories to interactions with computers. Active participation is
assured, and there will be frequent referencing of activities to the high school
chemistry curriculum.