* 8651656
* Geology of New York State: A Synopsis for Precollege Science Students and Their Teachers; A Model for Other States to Emulate
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1991
* Yngvar Isachsen, The University of the State of New York
* Standard Grant
* Patricia A. Ferguson
* 08/31/1991
* USD 120,100.00

Geology of New York State will be a well illustrated, two-partpublication
designed to lead the precollege student into the world of natural science
through geology, an approach that capitalizes on the fascinating natural
laboratory that is just outside every classroom. A sixty-page booklet will give
an up-to-date synopsis of the State's remarkably varied geology. A large, full-
color sheet, with a number of maps on both sides, will present the essence of
the subject through graphics. It will feature a geologic highway map of New York
and a space-satellite photomap printed a the same scale. This pair will display
dramatically the control of geology on physiography, thus reinforcing the
connection between the students' science courses and the familiar world. This
publication will enhance precollege science learning by (1) piquing the
students' curiosity about natural phenomena and providing a practical guide to
accessible examples; (2) helping elementary and secondary earth science teachers
prepare a more interesting course by providing them with insights into the local
geology; and (3) creating a cadre of teachers to hold workshops for their
colleagues throughout the State. The project has potential for significant
impact in a number of areas. These include: raising the awareness of future
voters about their geological environs and the impact of technologies upon
these. The use of the publication by interested adults will improve the public's
awareness and appreciation of science - a condition necessary for science to
flourish in the schools. Further, the project will provide a high quality model
for other states to produce similar materials.