* 8651683
* Comfortable Approach to Teaching Science (CATS)
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1987,09/30/1990
* George Martinek, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 09/30/1990
* USD 383,090.00

This project is designed to increase the comfort levels of elementary teachers
on science and technology topics in a four week residential setting followed by
an academic year program which will include weekend retreats and networking and
technology up-date conferences. Fifty-seven teachers and twenty-eight school
administrators from Southern California will participate in the workshop each
year during the two year project. Teachers selected to attend the workshop will
be mentor or outstanding general subject teachers with little or no formal
training of science. The school administrators will accompany their teachers and
participate two days during the summer session followed by one day during the
school year and attendance at the up-date conference. Their instructions will be
based on the California State Department of Education, Science Unit model. The
program's goals to implement and give direction to this project will be: (1)
Strengthen the content background and teaching of selected elementary teachers
in science and technology and (2) Strengthen the background of elementary school
administrators relative to science planning, instructional strategies and
program evaluation. The objectives to obtain these goals will use a variety of
effective teaching strategies and techniques to accomodate a number of different
learning modalities. The staff is highly qualified with a broad range of
experiences in teacher education and in the science disciplines. The program
will be enhanced by the utilization of the resources of the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory and the California State Polytechnic University of Pomona.
"Comfortable Approach to Teaching Science" follows the Guidelines of Teacher
Preparation and Enhancement and should further its aims by providing appropriate
continuing educational developement opportunities for elementary teachers who
lack science backgrounds for the courses they teach.