* 8652427
* Statewide Urban Teacher Enhancement Project
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1987,12/31/1989
* Robert Rosenbaum, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 12/31/1989
* USD 244,158.00

This statewide urban partnership project will provide two intensive residential
summer workshops followed by two academic year programs for the mathematical and
scientific development of forty elementary and middle school teachers in
Connecticut's five largest urban school systems - Hartford, New Haven,
Bridgeport, Waterbury and Stanford. The goals are to: - Enhance the teachers'
content knowledge, teaching skills, and leadership talents; and - Effect long
term improvements in minority student access to science and mathematics
instruction. The targeted urban school districts enroll 61% (approximately
60,000) of all minority students attending Connecticut's public schools. For two
successive summers (1987 and 1988) the same forty teachers will attend three and
a half week institutes either in mathematics or science on Wesleyan University's
campus. From the perspective of the urban student, the curriculum, teaching
techniques, use of manipulatives, and use of calculators-computers will be
explored. The science institutes will focus on the basic ideas of earth science,
biology, chemistry and physics. The mathematics institutes will focus on
concepts of number, measurement, estimation, geometry and computers. During each
of the following two academic years, program staff will hold five one day
workshops at Wesleyan, and conduct five special programs in participating school
districts. The Project Director will be Robert Rosenbaum, University Professor
of Mathematics at Wesleyan and Director of PIMMS (Project to Increase Mastery of
Mathematics and Science). The Project Team will consist of Betsy Carter,
mathematics consultant for the State Department of Education; Jorge Pezo,
mathematics teacher in Bridgeport; Ralph Yulo of Eastern Connecticut State
University; and Wilma Toney, science teacher in Hartford. They represent a
diverse cultural and ethnic background. PIMMS, with cooperation of the State
Department of Education, will evaluate attitude and performance of targeted
students. This project has the organization and logistical plans in place to
establish a long term public and private partnership for strengthened
mathematics and science instruction in the urban cities.