* 8652379
* Improving Science in Grades 6-9 in Iowa
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1990
* John Penick, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 09/30/1990
* USD 341,092.00

This program is designed to assist the middle school science teachers of Iowa in
moving toward a curriculum emphasizing the interactions of science, technology,
and society. During the summer of 1987 the first 60 teachers, in two sections of
30 each, will study either life science or physical science. The second and
third summers will involve 60 teachers in pairs of workshops emphasizing life
science, physical science, or earth science, depending on demand and need. These
six-day workshops will update participant's content knowledge and provide
opportunities to be a member of an S/T/S learning environments. Teachers
attending the summer course will receive one semester hour of graduate credit.
Each group of 60 teachers will be joined by an additional 60 teachers in
attending 2 two-day Chautauqua programs. Each year four Chautauqua Conferences
will be organized for different geographical areas throughout the state. The
initial meeting will focus on such topics as developing a S/T/S rationale, model
teaching examples, and on evaluation techniques. A follow-up session six months
later will review teacher products, teaching activities, and evaluation efforts.
During the period between Chautauqua programs follow-up will be provide by
fifteen area Education Consultants. The area Consultants will visit Chautauqua
participants in their areas. These follow-up visits will supplement visits by
University of Iowa staff. In addition, a monthly newsletter will provide
continuing links to staff and other participants. Those attending the Chautauqua
series will receive three semester hours of credit. During each summer,
following the NSF Summer Workshop, a one week Leadership conference will be
hosted by the various utility companies of Iowa. The workshop is designed to
provide additional background, as well as specific planning for the Chautauqua
series held during the following academic year. These teachers will provide
examples and expertise in curriculum development and implementation. One
semester hour of graduate credit will be awarded upon successful completion of
the Leadership Conference.