* 8652070
* Northern Arizona University's Science Learning Center       Middle School Teacher Preparation Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/1986,03/31/1992
* Raymond Tamppari, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* ryan smith
* 03/31/1992
* USD 822,039.00

Northern Arizona University will develop a five-year model program for the
preparation of middle school science and mathematics teachers. The proposed
effort will involve the teaching of strong content courses in science and
mathematics in agreement with NSTA and NCTM guidelines, and the development of a
series of courses, referred to as "integrated laboratories", that attempt to
help students tie the science and mathematics content to the realities of the
middle school curriculum. The focus throughout the program is on integrating the
mathematics and science and helping students to apply the formal content to the
middle school. The proposed program represents a coordinated effort involving
scientists and mathematicians, science and mathematics educators, teacher
educators, master teachers and school personnel. This program will prepare a
teacher who has both content knowledge and skill with methods of teaching in the
middle school. Numerous experiences with middle school children are planned. A
capstone experience, following student teaching, is a summer "camp" in which
students teach middle school children full-time under the guidance of master
teachers and university personnel. Part of the evaluation of the project is to
compare the content knowledge and teaching performance of teachers in this
program with a matched control group. Dr. Gordon P. Johnson will direct the
project. Dr. Johnson is a Professor in the Department of Physics and is very
well qualified to direct this major effort. During the first year the project
will be co- directed by Dr. Ray Tamppari, Professor of Biology. The critical
staff involved in program development hold academic appointments in science and
mathematics departments or are science and mathematics educators. The links with
the public schools are evident and the necessary school personnel are intrically
involved in all aspects of the project. This is a very strong project and will
serve as a model for those institutions desiring to prepare middle school
teachers having exceptionally strong science and mathematics content knowledge.