* 8652421
* Quantitative Literacy:  Leadership Training for Master      Teachers and Mainstream Educators
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1991
* Gail Burrill, American Statistical Association
* Continuing Grant
* Ivo Lindauer
* 07/31/1991
* USD 686,228.00

The Quantitative Literacy Project, sponsored by the American Statistical
Association will promote the teaching of statistics in the K-12 mathematics
curriculum by providing detailed curriculum frameworks; by training 240 middle
school and high school teachers to implement these frameworks using carefully
planned strategies which are supported at the local level; and by using
materials and methods collected and tested by the participants. Advice will be
obtained from a group of mathematics supervisors, district mathematics
coordinators and experienced teachers of statistics. This group will meet at a
Supervisors Conference for three days in order to define the scope and sequence
of topics and address the related needs of materials development for teacher
training. With the framework in place a five-day model teaching program will be
developed in one contiguous geographic region in which a support network can be
developed. This network, supported by the state supervisor will include 20
"master" teachers of middle school mathematics, 20 "master" teachers of high-
school mathematics, local statisticians from universities and industries, and
mathematics education professors. Each teacher will be selected from a school
which will assure that a unit on statistics can be taught in the fall term, and
will allow the master teacher to attend six follow-up two hour discussion groups
every two weeks. In the second year of the project five additional institutes of
40 teachers will be hosted by resource statisticians. At the end of the third
year, when the follow-up and evaluation are completed, the project should
produce: A list of resource persons, including teachers of statistics,
statisticians at universities and in industry, and mathematics educators;
materials to conduct in-service training in statistics; a manual on how to teach
basic topics in statistics; computer software for all basic topics; references
for topics not covered by Quantitative Literacy materials; curriculum materials
that cover all basic topics; a detailed scope and sequence document for teaching
statistics, grade K through 12.