* 8652383
* SEA Experience:  A Theoretical and Practical Summer Program of Teacher Enhancement in Marine Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Susan Humphris, Sea Education Association
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 01/31/1990
* USD 155,000.00

This program offers an intensive five-week summer educational program in Marine
Sciences for upper elementary, junior high and high school teachers. The program
is designed to provide teachers with a general knowledge of Marine Sciences,
ideas for field and lab work that they could implement in their classrooms and,
most importantly, a practical experience of working and living at sea that would
build confidence in their understanding of the subject. The shore-based, three-
week component will be held in Woods Hole and will consist of an intensive
50-hour course of lectures, labs, workshops, and field trips in Marine Sciences.
This course will emphasize the basic concepts in physics, chemistry, geology,
and biology that can be conveyed to students through studies of the oceans. It
will be directed towards development of curricula to be implemented in the
classroom. In addition, two short lecture series -one entitled "Massachusetts
and the Sea" and the other on various topics in Nautical Science - will be
presented in order to enhance the subsequent experience that the teachers will
have at sea. The final two weeks of the course will be spent on board a fully
equipped oceanographic research vessel, the R/V Westward, where the practical
hands-on experience of carrying out research projects and participating in the
operation of one of the few remaining "tall ships" that practice marine research
will build confidence in the scientific knowledge the participants have gained,
and will refresh and revitalize their teaching.