* 8652423
* Leadership Program in Physical Sciences for Elementary      Teachers and Principals
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1990
* Stearns Rogers, McNeese State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 09/30/1990
* USD 93,845.00

This Teacher Enhancement project is designed to improve the quantity and the
quality of elementary physical science education in the Calcasieu Parish schools
of Louisiana. The project is comprised of two components. The first is a year
long workshop in concepts and activities designed to broaden and update the
knowledge of physical science for 60 elementary teachers and 12 principals. The
workshop will also foster the teaching of elementary science in an "inquiry"
mode. The second component of the program is a series of eight in-service
activities carried out by the teachers and principals in their particular
schools, whereby they share with colleagues the knowledge and teaching expertise
which the workshop provided to them. At the end of two years, there will be a
teacher/teacher or teacher/principal team in each of the thirty six elementary
schools in the Parish which will provide both formal and informal leadership in
the teaching of physical science. All principals in the Parish will also
participate in an inservice program focused on the role of the principal as an
instructional leader in the teaching of science. Participants in the project
will have ample opportunities to actively engage in science activities and
develop and plan appropriate science lessons and units which are consistent with
the curriculum in the Parish schools. Elementary science supervisors and college
staff will assist the participants in both implementation of inquiry science
within their classrooms and the development of the inservice programs for the
staff. Videotaping facilities will be available to participants for self-
evaluation of their classroom instruction and their inservice programs. The PI
has developed a sound evaluation model to assess the impact of the project. The
school districts, parent-teacher groups and McNeese State University are
supporting the project beyond the funding provided through the NSF grant. The PI
and staff are eminently qualified to conduct this project, having been involved
for some time in teacher enhancement activities in science education. An
Advisory Committee comprised of representatives of the constituencies involved
will provide direction to the project and assist in the assessment of its
impact.