* 8652415
* USCA Science Education Center
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/1987,12/31/1990
* Richard Pryor, University of South Carolina Aiken
* Continuing Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 12/31/1990
* USD 506,690.00

The purpose of this project is to enhance science education within the schools
of the Central Savannah River Area. Two workshops will be offered by the Science
Education Center, a cooperative effort of the University of South Carolina at
Aiken, E.I. DuPont de Nemours and Company, Savannah River Laboratory and the
Aiken County School District. The programs offered by the Center as its initial
offering will focus on grades 5-8. Twenty participants will attend a four week
Summer Science Institute. During this workshop the participants will prepare
modules and teaching units to be used and tested during the fifth week of the
summer. During this period ten selected teachers will implement the units during
a Center sponsored Student Science Day Camp. An academic year Institute in the
Life Sciences will be held on ten Saturdays during each of the Fall 1987 and
Spring 1988 semesters. The original twenty teachers will continue as
participants during the academic year program. One Saturday each semester will
be devoted to physical science projects. Scientists from DuPont and other local
industries supporting the Science Education Center will participate in the
Institutes on a daily basis. These scientists will serve as resource persons and
in addition will make presentations on current issues and on the practical
applications of science in industry. The funding of this proposal is predicated
on the success of the PI in fulfilling the following specific program
requirements: The approach can be used by other communities; the project
encourages joint activities between business/industry, school system, and an
university; the partnership has analyzed the needs of the community, developed
strategies to assist and have begun specific activities; the project bridges the
gap between practicing scientists and educators; and the level of activity will
be increased as a result of NSF funding.