* 8652157
* Complex Dynamics and Computer Experimentation
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1987,03/31/1990
* Robert Devaney, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alice Moses
* 03/31/1990
* USD 140,031.00

The availability of the computer as a tool for research has enabled
mathematicians to make great progress in understanding chaotic behavior in
nature. The resulting body of knowledge is fascinating not only because it
models physical phenomena but also because it leads to colorful, visually
appealing, geometric forms. Moreover, the knowledge of mathematics required to
explore these ideas is minimal. Anyone with an understanding of elementary
algebra and access to a modest microcomputer can create computer images of
chaotic sets and can study their structure. This project will create a textbook
that will make these ideas and activities available for secondary school
students. The book will introduce students to the ideas of complex dynamics,
fractals, and chaos. It will include simple computer programs that will enable
students to generate their own fractal images. Several very high resolution
computer generated images will be featured in the book, many in color. Each
chapter will contain a series of projects or exercises designed to involve
students in the exploration of the relevant mathematics. The book will be field
tested at sites in Massachusetts, Virginia, and Minnesota. It will be published
by a commercial publisher. The project director, Robert Devaney, is a well known
researcher in the field of complex dynamics.