* 8652049
* A Model Program for Preparing Pre-Service Middle School     Science and Mathematics Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1986,02/29/1992
* Linda Schulman, Lesley University
* Continuing grant
* David E. Jones
* 02/29/1992
* USD 993,972.00

Lesley College, a women's undergraduate college, proposes to develop a program
for preparing preservice middle school science and mathematics teachers that is
founded on the belief that the best middle school teacher combines expertise in
her subject area with strong pedagogical and diagnostic skills. Following the
recommendation of the National Middle School Association, the program will
provide content concentration in two areas, science and mathematics. The project
will design a sequence of 40 credits in mathematics and science, including nine
with a unique interdisciplinary focus. In all, five science courses, five
mathematics courses, three interdisciplinary content courses, and five
professional courses will be developed or modified. The interdisciplinary
component will make explicit the implied interrelations between mathematics,
science, society, and the teaching profession. The emphasis will be on methods
of inquiry, criteria for truth in different disciplines, and an understanding of
the nature and limits of knowledge. The interdisciplinary component will
culminate with a student research project in the natural sciences that calls for
the use of scientific and behavioral science methods. The 29-hour professional
education component will culminate in an integrating seminar which will
challenge students to create new visions and alternatives for curriculum
development and education. The program will be developed by teams of scientists
and educators. The project will take advantage of collaborative relations with
the public schools and a science laboratory resource center at the college. The
project will also develop strategies for recruiting talented women into the
middle school teaching profession. The entire project will be carefully
evaluated through the Program Evaluation and Research Group at Lesley College;
information about the program and its efforts will be widely disseminated.