* 8652311
* Making Natural History Exhibits Multi-Sensory;  Improving   Learning for Disabled Visitors
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1987,05/31/1991
* Charles Howarth, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 05/31/1991
* USD 199,528.00

The Museum of Science in Boston proposes a major modification of its permanent
New England Wildlife Zones exhibition hall in order to improve its effectiveness
with visitors with impaired sight, hearing, or mobility. They will document and
share with other museums the successful methods and techniques used in the
exhibition development process is an effort to improve barrier free access in
the country's more than 600 science and natural history museums. The museum has
completed a preliminary needs assessment with the assistance of handicapped
consultants, developed alternative design solutions to problems of limited
accessibility and effectiveness for the hall's existing dioramas, and organized
a design team that includes senior museum exhibition and education staff and a
handicapped scientist and educator as Co-PI. The Massachusetts College of Art's
Adaptive Environments Center will provide assistance in design for the
handicapped and evaluation will be under the direction of George Hein, head of
Lesley College's Program Evaluatlion and Research Group. Following an extensive
design and evaluation process, new exhibit units will be constructed as
educational adjuncts to the existing hall of dioramas, and the impact of the
changes will be assessed, as part of a dissemination plan that will include
popular and professional papers and a "how to" work book distributed to science
museum exhibit designers with the assistance of the Association of Science
Technology Centers and the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
This is a challenging project with the opportunity for a significant impact on
handicapped individuals who are often excluded from the motivational and
informational resources of science and natural history museums by unnecessary
design limitations. The Museum of Science's commitment is strong, the project
staff are highly qualified, and there is active participation by handicapped
individuals in the project.