* 8652276
* Symposium on "The Policy Implications of International      Studies in Mathematics Education"
* EDU,EDU
* 10/01/1986,03/31/1988
* Marcia Sward, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 03/31/1988
* USD 80,682.00

The National Research Council, the principal operating agent of the National
Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering, has established a
36-member Board on Mathematical Sciences Education (MSEB). Its primary purpose
is to provide a continuing national assessment capability for mathematical
sciences education at all levels. The Board will provide leadership, service,
and coordination through a variety of activities and work products focussed on
issues affecting the quality of instruction in the mathematical sciences. The
purpose of two previous National Science Foundation grants was to provide
initial and supplemented support for activities in two targetted problem areas,
"Framework and Alternative Models for School Mathematics Curricula" and "Study
of the Impact of Testing on Mathematics Education K-14." Considerable progress
has occurred during the past five months in each of these areas of activity, and
it is now appropriate for the MSEB to undertake other initiatives in its
original plan. This grant will provide support for the MSEB to begin activities
in another important domain of national issues and problems resulting from
international comparisons of mathematical sciences education. In recent years
several such studies have been conducted. These have been reported without ample
opportunity for deliberation of implications for federal, state, and local
policies. Through the conduct of this special national symposium the MSEB will
stimulate and coordinate a major effort to: --interpret significant results from
various international investigations; --develop policy implications and specific
recommendations for improving mathematics education in American schools; and
--foster effective dissemination of these ideas through special materials
produced for, and subsequent to, the symposium. The National Academy of
Sciences, acting through the MSEB, provides the context and prestige necessary
to attract significant researchers, educators, governmental officials, and
concerned citizens to this important activity and to assure a nationwide
attention by educational policy makers.