* 8652002
* Improvement of Mathematics Instruction at the Grade 5-9     Level in Kern, Inyo, and Mono Counties
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/1986,03/31/1988
* William Stannard, California State University-Bakersfield
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 03/31/1988
* USD 112,746.00

This project addresses the expressed needs of local teachers of mathematics at
the Grades 5-9 level in an area of California where opportunities for enhancing
their teaching skills and content updating are not readily available. The
program is set up to run during the spring, winter and summer semesters at times
that were indicated as being preferable by the teachers who were polled for this
information. A second level local effort has been constructed to guarantee that
the concepts identified and learned in these courses get to other teachers and
students. Two to four teachers per school comprise a "team" from each of fifteen
participating schools for a total of 45 participants. These teachers will act as
"mentor teachers" for their colleagues. Instruction for these mentor teachers
will include leadership strategies as well as discipline course content. Two
Cooperating Teachers, chosen by the first group of participants, will work along
with their colleagues in their schools. The follow-up program at each school,
subsidized by the Teacher Education and Computer (TEC)Centers and the school
districts, centers on participant-given workshops for their peers. Project
instructional staff will attend and provide resources for these workshops.
Mentor teachers will conduct at least two workshops and work closely with their
two Cooperating teachers. Credit will be awarded for participation in this
program, and women and minority applicants who will be good role models for
their colleagues and students will be identified and selected. An Advisory
Council made up of two participants, one staff member and one school
administrator will provide on-going feedback and information to the Project
Director, faculty and participants. Dr. Stannard has thirty-three years of
experience with Mathematics Education which includes Directorship and Co-
Directorship of eight NSF grants in Mathematics and/or Computer Education. He
has assembled a very impressive staff for this project. This project has the
potential of impacting on a substantial number of schools in a rural area of
California whose teachers have expressed strong needs in Mathematics. Therefore,
a grant award in the amount of $117,628 for the requested period of one year is
recommended.