* 8652294
* Interdisciplinary Teacher Enhancement Program Utilizing     Science Fiction Films
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1987,10/31/1989
* Leroy Dubeck, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 10/31/1989
* USD 66,250.00

The purpose of this proposal is to improve the teaching of science at the junior
high and senior high school levels by training teachers to use science fiction
films as a supplement to the regular curriculum. Such an approach supports the
classroom teachers' efforts to teach science and its relationships to technology
and society and to motivate pre-college students to study science. Two recent
NSF grants funded the preparation of a teacher's guide describing the physical
principles illustrated or violated in a number of science fiction films deemed
suitable for use in a ninth or tenth grade general science course. This proposal
will make use of both the materials and techniques developed under the prior
grants. Master teachers and non-master teachers will receive intensive
instruction in the use of science fiction films and in a number of substantive
topics in physics and biology related to the films during a two-week institute
during the summer. Each team of three teachers will have the support of one
master teacher as they implement the program in their classrooms during the
school year. The principle investigator has a great deal of expertise in this
area. He was awarded an NSF grant in l978 under the Local Course Improvement
Program to develop an introductory level science course at Temple University
using science fiction films to introduce students to science. This popular
course has since been taught nine times and has reached hundreds of students,
many of whom have stated that they would never have enrolled in a traditional
science course. In l984 an additional NSF grant allow him to expand the effort
to include precollege students. The teachers guide written as a result of that
grant will be used to support the training of teachers in the current grant.