* 8652297
* A Program of Coursework and Long-term Professional Support  for Multiple Discipline Secondary Science and Mathematics   Teachers
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1987,08/31/1989
* Douglas Brothers, Benedictine College
* Standard Grant
* Jean Vanski
* 08/31/1989
* USD 173,939.00

Benedictine College will conduct a four week workshop for 140 teachers in Iowa,
Kansas, Missouri, and Nebraska. The workshop will emphasize instruction in:
physics, chemistry, biology, and mathematics. Each teacher will participate in
one of the four major areas of program. The instruction will focus on content
and the development of materials that are to be implemented in the classroom.
All teachers will participate in a series of interdisciplinary workshops. An
optional computer workshop will be provided for teachers who want to learn or
practice basic computer concepts. The staff is composed of master secondary
teachers and college faculty. The participants will conduct inservice activities
during the academic year for other teachers in their school system. Over a two
year period the college staff will make site visits to each participant's
school. Teachers will be encouraged to attend professional meetings and make
presentations at these meetings. Some finiancial support will be provided for
teachers who attend these meetings. The school districts, from whom participants
are chosen, are being encouraged to provide support for inservice activites and
to purchase additional equipment and materials that will enhance their
mathematics and science programs. The professional organizations in the states
will cooperate in coordinating and providing support for this project. The
concerns of many small and rural schools will be addressed.