* 8652145
* The Revision of the CHEM Study Films
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/1987,01/31/1990
* Glenn Seaborg, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia A. Ferguson
* 01/31/1990
* USD 600,255.00

During the past twenty years, the twenty-seven CHEM study films have become
classics among the chemistry films of the world. They were produced as an
integral part of the Chemical Education Material Study and continue to be widely
used. This is evidenced by the sale of more than 27,000 prints and more than
82,000 rentals since they were released in the early sixties. They maintain
scientific integrity and are correlated to the texts currently in use. No other
series of chemistry films has its subject matter authenticated by such
outstanding chemists as Glenn T. Seaborg: Linus Pauling, Henry Eyring, Bryce
Crawford, George Pimentel and J. Arthur Campbell. The films were produced for
the high school level. The basics of chemistry, since they were produced, are
still valid. They bring to the classroom demonstrations and abstract concepts in
animated pictorial form which would be difficult for the teacher to present in
any other way. Unfortunately, teachers look at copyright dates and observe
anachronisms of instrumentation, hairstyling and method of presentation and are
deterred from using the films. Relatively minor revisions can bring them up-to-
date at a modest cost compared with making new films. Revisions will include the
use of modern instrumentation, discussions of current industrial uses for the
concept, and the employment of underrepresented groups in film presentations.
The useful life of these films can be significantly extended for some time.
Since they can now be made available in low cost video cassettes, teachers will
be able to have CHEM Study video materials available in every school. Without
revision, these valuable teaching aids will be lost. Funding is provided for
making these revisions. This project address the goal of the Instructional
Materials Program to support the development of improved instructional materials
for our precollege classrooms. Both training and track record make the Project
Director eminently qualified to conduct the activities.