* 8652300
* "Walking on Water":  A Presentation of the PBS American     layhouse Series
* EHR,DRL
* 01/15/1987,06/30/1988
* Kate Long, East Side Productions
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 06/30/1988
* USD 172,019.00

This project, WALKING ON WATER, chronicals the success of Jaime Escalante's
nationally acclaimed mathematics program at Garfield High School in Los Angeles.
Overcoming crime, poverty and a 50% drop-out rate, Mr. Escalante transformed
Hispanic students with deficient scholastic backgrounds into the top calculus
students in the country. As a result of this success, Garfield High School is
now a magnet school for math and science in the Los Angeles School District. Mr.
Escalante's story will be told in a 90 minute film docudrama which will air
nationally on public television's American Playhouse series, the 14th most
popular program on PBS reaching 1.2 million homes. The film is designed for
general theatrical release, for educational distribution on cable, for
videocassette release and will be dubbed into Spanish for airing in Spanish
theaters. In addition, Eddie Olmas, the Emmy award winning star of Miami Vice
who portrays Mr. Escalanate in the film, will use the film in personal
appearances. Reviewers all agree that this story will inspire and motivate
students and teachers alike. They also agreed that it is equally important to
reach other significant audiences such as parents, school administrators and
opinion leaders so that they will understand and support these types of
education efforts.