* 8652312
* Project STEPS - Science Textbook Extensions through Problem Solving
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1987,02/28/1991
* Edward Pizzini, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 02/28/1991
* USD 384,663.00

STEPS (Science Textbook Extensions through Problem Solving) focuses on the
implementation and testing of two approaches to developing peer teachers for
middle school teachers. Emphasis will be placed on the Search, Solve, Create and
Share model of problem solving developed by the Principal Investigator. During
the spring of 1987 forty middle school teachers from school districts
surrounding the University of Iowa will attend both a two day Awareness
Conference and six one-half day workshops. The workshops will emphasize content,
methodology, and problem-solving. During the summer of 1987 twenty-five of the
teachers will be invited to attend an intensive three week Leadership Training
Workshop. The purpose of the workshop is to present additional science content,
learn research methodology, interact with research scientists, review curricular
material and develop the procedures necessary to conduct inservice activities.
During the school year of 1987-88 the Leadership Teachers will attend nine
seminars which will enforce the work presented during the summer. The staff will
work with the teachers to utilize the methods and materials developed during the
summer. The same twenty-five teachers will attend a two week facilitator program
designed to finalize the design of the inservice program. During the 1988-89
school year the Peer Teachers will work with other teachers in their districts.
A comparison group of Peer Teachers will be developed through an accelerated
program, consisting of a two-week concentrated workshop during the summer of
1989. These Peer Teachers will conduct inservice activities during the school
year of 1989-90. An extensive evaluation program will compare the effectiveness
of the two groups of Peer Teachers. In addition to the problem solving
techniques, the program will result in the production of the following: a
Facilitator Training Handbook for implementing, evaluating, and managing
inservice programs; Technique Training Video Tapes for learning the problem
solving approach; newsletter; and an electronic bulletin to exchange information
among the participants.