* 8652457
* A Development Program for K-6 Teachers in Multidisciplinary Science and Inquiry Skills
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1987,08/31/1989
* Bonnie Barr, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 08/31/1989
* USD 100,514.00

This project develops an inquiry oriented, quantitative science program in the
elementary school and establishes a program by which peer teachers provide
inservice guidance to other teachers. During the summer of 1987, five peer
mentor teachers trained in a former NSF project will attend a one week intensive
leadership seminar on the SUNY/Cortland campus. The purpose of the seminar is to
prepare the teachers to serve as consultants and facilitators of instruction for
teachers from the five school districts participating in the 1987-89 project. A
two day workshop will also be held during the summer for five peer/mentor
teachers, twenty K-6 teachers, ten junior/senior high school science teachers,
and elementary principals from each of the five districts. The purpose of this
workshop is to promote working relationships between peer/mentor teachers and
staff of the districts. During the 1987-88 school year the twenty k-6 teachers
will participate in sixteen 2 1/2 hour instructional sessions which will be held
every other week. During alternate weeks the project staff will visit each
participants classroom. The purpose of the staff visitation is to help these
peer teachers implement the science content instruction and the methodologies
into their classrooms. During the implementation phase (academic 1988-87) the
four teachers from each district will conduct inservice programs. During this
phase Dr. Barr will make ten visits to each of the five schools. The visits will
help facilitate implementation of the science program into all elementary
classrooms of the districts. Mini-grants, supported by local organizations,
businesses, and industry, will be available to the participants to conduct a
mini research project in their classrooms. A second unique feature of the
program is a Make It/Take It Workshop during which classroom instructional
materials will be constructed for use in the teachers' classrooms. Dr. Bonnie B.
Barr, Project Director, has conducted numerous inservice science workshops for
elementary teachers. She is author of a textbook series and has been involved in
numerous curriculum projects.