* 8652015
* The Development and Assessment of a State-of-the-Art        Integrated Programming Environment for Computer Science     Instruction
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/1987,07/31/1990
* Dennis Goldenson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 07/31/1990
* USD 1,123,646.00

How to effectively teach computer programming is a national problem facing many
schools today. Considerable progress has been made in recent years in developing
integrated programming environments that combine under a single uniform user
interface the functionality of traditionally separate tools for the editing,
translation, testing and execution of high level code. Both the integrated
nature of such environments and their "knowledge" of high level language rules
relieve students from needless attention to what fundamentally are extraneous
details. Hence the students are freed to concentrate on the essentials of
problem decomposition and program structure and better understand the
fundamentals of programming. Previous work has produced the necessary mechanisms
for several key features of a state-of-the-art structure editing environment.
The current aim of this project is to develop a powerful, integrated system that
will significantly improve the quality of computer science instruction and make
it widely available at minimal cost. The system will include the innovative use
of flexible program visualizations to aid the programmer in mapping visual
representation to code. It will include an Intelligent Computer-Assisted-
Instruction (ICAI) system capable of individualized tutoring on high level
aspects of procedural and data abstraction. An integral part of this project
will be the systematic evaluation of the system in a variety of middle school
and high school settings.