* 8652030
* Rice University School Mathematics Project
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1987,03/31/1991
* Raymond Wells, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 03/31/1991
* USD 587,211.00

This project will establish a working relationship between high/middle school
mathematics teachers and university research mathematical scientists, in the
Houston area, by establishing a research mentor/master teacher program. There
will be intensive summer institutes and academic year programs taught by the
master teachers, mathematical scientists and educators. The Houston Independent
School District is the fifth largest school district in the nation with 60% of
the students and 50% of the teachers from minority groups. The goals are to
develop a school system/university model in which the participating teachers'
mathematical scholarship and teaching strategies are enhanced and sustained by
their interactions with research mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and mathematics educators. The mathematical content will include
current topics in linear algebra, probability, statistics, numerical methods,
number theory, algorithms, geometry, logic and computers. The impact of
mathematics and computer science on contemporary science, technology and society
will also be explored. The project will develop and publish pre-college level
teaching units, videos of demonstration lessons and related material, and a
mathematics newsletter. For three successive summers (1987,1988,1989), 48
teachers will participate on Rice University's campus in six intensive weeks of
lecture/problem solving workshops, seminars, colloquia, group study, peer group
presentations and preparation of secondary level teaching units. The instructors
of the workshops will be six master high school teachers, who developed the
content/teaching strategies with six mentor university mathematical researchers
and educators during the Spring of 1987. At the start of the project,
participants will be instructors who teach in a gifted/talented program. In the
second and third phases, teachers of regular classes will also be selected.
During the academic year there will be monthly workshops, seminars and a yearly
conference on Rice University's campus. This project will be a high quality
mathematical model for a long term school system/university researcher
partnership to improve pre-college mathematical instruction.