* 8652437
* National Science Leadership Program
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1989
* Carolyn Wilson, Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 09/30/1989
* USD 613,975.00

The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation (WWNFF) will conduct a four
week summer institute for fifty high school physics teachers each year (1987-88)
on the Princeton University campus. During the academic year, each teacher who
participates in the institute will conduct regional workshops for other physics
teachers over the nation. The WWNFF staff will provide support for teachers
conducting regional workshops. The goals of this proposal are to engage teachers
in the development of Curriculum materials in cooperation with university
faculty, develop leadership skills, and to design teaching strageties which will
concentrate on developing students' ability to make use of knowledge within the
discipline and in related disciplines. During the academic year, the WWNFF will
provide support for local and regional workshops conducted by the summer
institute participants. Funds for these activities will be awarded on a
competitive basis. The institute staff will assist teachers in the development
of regional projects to ensure that they are designed to be conductive for use
in teachers' classrooms. Also, the WWNFF staff will coordinate request for mini-
institutes to be conducted by the institute participants for precollege
mathematics and science teachers at regional, state, and national meetings. The
foundation will monitor, coordinate, and disseminate the activities of this
year's participants; and those who were trained in previous institutes. These
activities will be accomplished by staff visits, a monthly newsletter, and
correspondence between the director and participants.