* 8652448
* Physics Resources, Instructional Strategies and Content     Workshops
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1988
* Timothy Cooney, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Peirce Hammond
* 09/30/1988
* USD 140,042.00

This project is centered around 2 three-week summer workshops for 30
participants each selected from among physics teachers in the uppermidwest. The
workshops will stress use of PRISMS--Physics Resources and Instructional
Strategies for Motivating Students. This teacher's guide has been developed and
field tested by the Iowa Physics Task Force. Conference telephone calls and
videotaped lessons will be part of follow-up activities. Each of the 2 three-
week sessions will include instruction in mechanics, thermodynamics, optics,
electricity and magnetism, and atomic and nuclear physics. Participants will
also study and apply learning models and integrate the PRISMS learning cycles
with the texts that they use in their classrooms. During the academic year
following the summer's activities, participants will be linked in small groups
via telephone conference calls. In addition, each participating teacher will be
required to supply one videotaped classroom lesson during each 12-week period.
These will be evaluated by project staff. Requirements for selection include an
assignment to teach physics in 1987-88, less than 18 semester hours of credit in
physics, and a commitment to use PRISMS materials in their teaching. Statements
of support from the school administrator must accompany the application. This
includes the availability of certain video and telephone equipment. Participants
will be housed at the University of Northern Iowa, the location of instruction,
and their expenses will be borne by the grant. Each will receive a stipend of
$200 per month. Three semester hours of graduate credit will be awarded for the
summer workshop and another hour of credit will be awarded on completion of the
academic year outreach activities. The primary administrative and instructional
responsibility for the program will be lodged with Professor Unruh of the UNI
physics department and Professor Cooney of the education department. Content
lectures will also be given to seven physicists from the host institution. Six
master teachers have been identified, and two will be in residence at all times
during the summer workshops. In addition, they will assist in the evaluation of
the videotaped lessons produced by participants during the academic year. This
is a promising project which builds on demonstrated effectiveness.