* 8652290
* Honors Institutes in Computing for Precollege Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Charles Martin, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1991
* USD 369,899.00

This state/academia partnership will develop a three year honors institute in
computing which will offer intensive summer residential program and academic
year follow-up for 30 southeastern teachers, grades K-12. The goals are to: o
prepare master teachers to meet certification requirements to (1) incorporate
use of computers into content area instructions; and (2) become a computer
technology specialist in the school system; o create a resource pool of leader
teachers who will hold in-service workshops for their colleagues. The academic
courses, which include experience with microcomputers especially designed for
the teachers are (1) Utilities; (2) LOGO; (3) BASIC; (4) Applications to K-8
Curriculum; (5) Computer Concepts in Programming; (6) Data Structures; (7)
Application to High School Curriculum. The K-8 teacher will take courses (1)
through (4); high school teachers will take (1) through (3) and (7); while
Advanced Placement programming teachers will take (1) through (3), (5) and (6).
Courses will be offered during six weeks of the summer and bi-weekly meetings on
Saturday during the academic year for the local teachers. In the two academic
years, monthly on-site visits to in-state teachers will be made. There will also
be a computer network and newsletter for all participants. Moreover, ten
workshops per year will be held by the lead teachers, who are given released
time by their schools to help colleagues meet certification requirements.
Academic credit will be awarded by Western Carolina University (WCU) for those
who complete the work.