* 8652310
* Institute for New Science Centers
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/1987,02/28/1990
* Ellen Horowitz, Association of Science-Technology Centers
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 02/28/1990
* USD 63,735.00

The Association of Science-Technology Center (ASTC), a non profit organization
of science museums and related organizations, has received numerous requests
from museum members to develop an in-depth professional development program for
top science museum administrators and board members. The largest number of
requests is from science centers which are in the planning stages or are newly
opened. More than established museums, new and developing science centers face
dozens of basic decisions that will affect the character of their museums and
their chances for success. The volume of requests for technical assistance,
coupled with the absence of any organized program to meet these needs led ASTC
to develop an Institute for New Science Centers. The course is aimed at those
who have made a commitment to start a science center or whose doors have opened
within the past five years. The grant will cover preparation and evaluation of
materials and programs. Participants will pay half the cost of the course.
Reviewers of the project agreed that strengthening the infrastructure of the
museum community is as important as developing programs for the general public.
The National Science Foundation has the opportunity to support an important new
venture and one that will have an impact on the number and quality of programs
reaching the general public.