* 8652378
* National Workshops for Introduction to College Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1989
* Dorothy Doyle, North Carolina School of Science & Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 06/30/1989
* USD 143,652.00

The North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics will conduct National
Workshops for Introduction to College Mathematics for 44 high school teachers
from 11 districts nationwide. Eight of these districts are members of the Urban
Mathematics Collaboratives program sponsored by the Ford Foundation, which will
assist in support of the participants in their schools. Building on materials
for fourth-year high school mathematics developed by the staff under Carnegie
Corporation of New York funding, the participants in this program will have an
intensive 12 day summer training in mathematics and leadership skills and then,
based on their academic year experience and schoolroom use of the materials,
help to develop new materials for in-service workshops which they will conduct
in their districts for over 200 mathematics teachers of grades 7-12 in the
second summer. The primary goal of this project is that middle and high school
teachers experience a professional opportunity which will result in growth and a
greater involvement in mathematics education along with a change in the
perception of themselves with regard to mathematics education. The new Carnegie
funded syllabus used for the workshops exposes participants to six modes of
mathematical thought: geometry, analysis of data, probability and statistics,
mathematical models of the real world, computers and finance. With a focus on
application, reflecting advances in technology, this new course, which includes
mathematics of contemporary importance, will provide better preparation for
students who will encounter the changing role of mathematics in a wide range of
college majors and careers. The PI, Dr. Steve Davis is Head of Mathematics and
Computer Science at NCSSM and has received grants in previous years from NSF-
NIE, Apple Foundation, Carnegie and IBM to develop tool packages of use in
mathematics and science, educational applications of clustering and a syllabus
for Fourth Year High School Mathemtics. Other staff members are Daniel J.Teague,
Mathematics Instructor who has also been an Instructor in the Woodrow Wilson
Institutes on High School Mathematics; Helen Compton and Julia Graves are
Mathematics Instructors at NCSSM. NCSSM is eminently qualified in terms of
staff, faculty, facilities, and institutional commitment, to act as a national
leader in the development of new ideas in instruction. The NCSSM syllabus
responds to the challenges posed by NCTM'S Agenda For Action and other reports.
The PI has conducted numerous successful workshops in the past five years and
has developed materials which are suitable for them in scope and philosophy.
Each teacher will receive training in four areas: 1) Units in unfamiliar
mathematics; 2) Motivating applications; 3) Effective use of a single computer
in front of a classroom to deliver instruction; 4) The philosophy behind the
syllabus. The training materials will provide better problem solving skills and
increase the breadth of mathematical experience.