* 8652460
* Science and Mathematics Initiative for Learning Enhancement (SMILE)
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1987,04/30/1993
* Earl Zwicker, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 04/30/1993
* USD 532,416.00

A long range cooperative effort between the Illinois Institute of Technology
(IIT), the Educational Service Region of Cook County (ESRCC) and the Chicago
Public Schools (CPS) initiated in the summer of 1986 to meet the educational
needs in mathematics and science identified by teachers and administrators at
the Chicago Board of Education will continue for three years. The key features
of Science and Mathematics Initiative for Learning Enhancement (SMILE) are an
emphasis on the phenomenological approach to the subject matter, a format in
which teachers in grades 4-12 work together to develop and critique mini-teach
presentations of specific topics and the establishment of a permanent teacher
based interactive network of 450 teachers to further program objectives. In each
of three summers 60 Chicago area teachers will take part in an intensive five
week summer program where participants are separated into two groups, either
Biology+Chemistry or Mathematics+Physics. Each group is supervised by a senior
IIT faculty member and two high school teachers who are members of the project
staff. Activities include plenary lectures, shop and preparation sessions,
computer awareness, cross disciplinary interactions and mini-teaching in three
member teams reinforced by college faculty members. This project is designed to
increase expertise and communication skills as well as an attitude shift to
increase classroom effectiveness. In the academic year four courses will be
conducted paralleling the staffing and structure of the summer program with an
increased enrollment up to 100 teachers. At the end of the three year program it
is anticipated SMILE will have developed a cadre of master teachers who would
play key roles in a teacher enhancement activity focussed on elementary science
and mathematics. The Illinois Institute of Technology has a long record of
commitment to and successful implementation of programs for high school teachers
directed by PI Dr.Earl Zwicker, Professor of Physics and coPI Dr. Kenneth Schug,
Professor of Chemistry and Department Chair. In addition Dr. Arthur Devito,
Associate Professor of Mathematics at Loop College and Dr. Daniel Koblic,
Associate Professor of Biology at IIT will be consultants for mini-teach
presentations and develop and maintain teacher networks in their respective
discipline areas. Four master high school teachers will coordinate the direction
of day-to-day activities and serve as role models who understand the
phenomenological approach: Steve McVeigh (Biology), Val Dyokas (Chemistry),
Larry Freeman (Mathematics), Roy Coleman (Physics).