* 8652001
* Science for Every Elementary School Child:  The Ball State  University/Ft. Wayne Plan
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/1986,03/31/1989
* Susan Johnson, Ball State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 03/31/1989
* USD 203,481.00

This Leadership Activities project will increase the science and the teaching
competence of 80 public and private school teachers of grades K-5 in the Fort
Wayne area. The project's principal goals include developing and assessing a
model for increasing the quality and quantity of science taught by all regular
elementary school teachers within a school district. The teacher education will
occur within an investigative context; the teachers will receive support in
consultation while they incorporate investigative science activities in their
own classrooms; subsequently the lead teachers will work with the other teachers
within their buildings and reach into all classrooms in the 36 elementary
schools in the Fort Wayne community school system and in the Lutheran private
school system. A team of 2 excellent teachers, one from grades K-3 and one from
grades 4-5, will serve as catalysts for the improvement of science teaching
within each school. The project is based upon a needs assessment, pilot study,
and recommendations from the science education literature. The model includes
significant cost sharing and partnerships with the cooperating school district,
the university, and local industry. The leadership team includes scientists,
science educators, and school administrators. The model includes the development
and support of plans and programs designed to sustain the results of this
project well beyond the period of funding from NSF. Plans are also underway for
thorough documentation and the dissemination of results. The project includes
summer activities involving academic work in science and in curriculum
development and a series of activities throughout the academic year that build
upon these summer activities. The model also includes special workshops
conducted for administrators working with the teachers in their schools.