* 8652404
* University of Washington Precollege Chemistry Teacher       Program
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1987,03/31/1991
* Darrell Woodman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 03/31/1991
* USD 318,418.00

Under this project, the department of chemistry of the University of Washington
will conduct a four-week in-service institute for 30 precollege chemistry
teachers from Washington and other states in the Pacific Northwest, during each
of the summers of 1987, 88, and 89. Follow-up activities, aimed at establishing
a lasting network for regional teachers, will include the development of
curricular units and various modes of inservice teaching by institute graduates,
the creation of academic year minicourses, and the continuing exchange of new
institute materials. The content of the workshop, based on experience in the
summer of 1986, will feature lectures on "The Interactions of Energy with Matter
and a second series of lectures which will address different themes in each of
the project years: "The Chemistry of Metals," "Chemistry of Non- Metals," and
"Environmental Chemistry." In addition, each summer will feature a component on
the Frontiers of Chemistry, including lectures and site visits on such subjects
as Enviromental Chemistry, Modern Analytical Chemistry, Surface Chemistry, and
Medical Imaging. Three afternoons per week will be devoted to laboratory work,
participants will receive assistance in preparing and presenting demonstrations,
and there will be an introduction to the use of computers in chemistry. In
addition, all participants are expected to give pedagogical presentations to
their colleagues, to prepare a library report, and to participate in workshop
sessions devoted to issues in teaching. Thirty teachers (estimated to be 27 from
high school and 3 from junior high school) will be selected each year from
applications solicited from Washington and other states in the Pacific
Northwest. Non-commuters will be housed and fed at the University, with expenses
covered from the grant, and all will receive stipends of $200 per month. The
teachers will receive nine academic quarter credits for their participation in
this institute, and another two on completion of a curriculum unit. Outreach and
network activities are expected, and will be supported by academic year
minicourses.