* 8652333
* Computing and Algorithmic Mathematics for Secondary School  Teachers
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1987,02/28/1990
* John Bruno, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 02/28/1990
* USD 516,999.00

This national leadership project for superior level computer science/mathematics
instruction of high school mathematics/science teachers combines two six-week
intensive summer instruction in computers, Pascal and algorithmic mathematics
with individualized guided home study operation and a two day meeting at mid-
year during the intervening academic year. The participating teachers will run
in- service workshops/seminars for their schools, upon completion of the
program. The goals of the project are to assist high school teachers to: o be
proficient in teaching the essence of computer science, namely the construction
and testing of algorithms; o experience intensive supervised hands-on
instruction; o become lead teachers and run workshops for their school
districts; The first summer (1987) 60 teachers, half from California and half
from a national applicant pool, from a varied demographic and ethnic
backgrounds, will meet at the University of California, Santa Barbara. They will
study: structured programming in Pascal; data structures in Pascal; and
algorithmic mathematics. During the intervening academic year, there will be a
nine month program of guided home study under the direction of project faculty
and staff via a hot line telephone, mail-in assignments and a mid-year mini-
conference at the UCSB microcomputer laboratory. The next summer (1988) the same
60 teachers will return to UCSB to study: computer systems; programming language
organization and implementation; and topics in algorithmic mathematics. The
teachers will also take seminars on how to develop computer workshops for
colleagues in their school districts, and how to translate their course work
into materials for class use. The project director is Marvin Marcus, professor
of mathematics and computer science and a vice-chancellor at UCSB. Marcus is
recognized internationally for his work in the mathematical sciences. The senior
personnel will consist of Ralph Shively, professor and chairman of the
department of mathematics and computer science at Lake Forest College, senior
mathematical scientists, research learning expert, and evaluators from UCSB and
Lake Forest. Cost sharing by UCSB consists of paying the administrative costs of
the director of university extensions, and exclusive use of the micro- computer
laboratory.