* 8652078
* The "DIRECT" Middle School Science and Mathematics Project
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1987,12/31/1992
* Terence Mills, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1992
* USD 1,220,237.00

This middle school mathematics and science preservice teacher education program
builds on existing secondary and elementary teacher education programs.
Certification with middle school science or mathematic endorsements will be
possible at either the elementary or secondary level. At the elementary level,
36 semester hours of science or 27 semester hours of mathematics courses will be
required. This will be accomplished by redirecting up to 20 semester hours from
education courses to science and mathematics content courses. At the secondary
level, 20 of the 52 semester hours of science content courses will be specific
to the middle school, in addition to two specially designed psychology courses.
Other specially designed program elements will include: laboratory sections for
existing science courses; three capstone courses in earth, biological, and
physical sciences; companion methodology courses coupled with appropriately
placed field experiences, a mentor teacher system, and informal learning
activities incorporating applied mathematics and science concepts from "the real
world" developed for the new programs. A special mathematics modeling and a
mathematics history course will be developed to be used in both mathematics
tracks. In all, fifteen new courses will be developed: 3 in science, 2 in
mathematics, 2 in psychology , 2 in methods, and 6 for field experiences. The
project takes advantage of an existing Entry-Year Assistance Program in Oklahoma
to provide support to graduates during their first year and feed back to the
university on the effectiveness of the new programs. The project director, a
science educator is joined by an applied mathematician and an inorganic chemist,
these two people will serve as co-directors. The project staff draws heavily
from the disciplinary departments of the university and local school systems.