* 8652351
* The SIU-C - MSU Elementary-Middle School Issue Articulation Project
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1987,11/30/1989
* George Fraunfelter, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 11/30/1989
* USD 257,008.00

This teacher enhancement project is designed to prepare 80 intermediate
grade/middle school teachers, from schools in Illinois and Kentucky, to
incorporate social issues in the teaching of science through a case study
approach to ecological and geological phenomena. Middle school teachers from 40
school districts have already participated in the program and have begun to
implement the case study approach to science in their classrooms. This project
will extend the approach to intermediate grade teachers and provide time for
articulation between the two levels of the school system. The proposal writers
have definitively described the differences in approach to be used at each level
and have well developed plans for articulation of the two approaches in the
schools. Principals of the schools from which the teachers come will also be
involved and there will be an outreach to involve the communities in which the
schools are located. The intermediate teachers will be involved in a four week
summer program which will upgrade their knowledge of ecology and geology and
introduce the case study approach to the study of social issues in these fields.
Each will be required to develop an original case study to teach during the
academic year. At the end of the workshop, the middle school teachers who have
participated in the past two summers will join the intermediate teachers and
work on articulation issues involved between the two levels. Extensive follow-up
from college staff and a resource teacher, provided by the project, will assist
in the academic year implementation of the project. A two day conference will be
held in the spring. Personnel from regional environmental/ecological
organizations will serve as consultants to the teachers and staff. The project
staff is qualified to conduct the program, given its background in science as
well as in the case study methods. Both institutions involved have a history of
working closely with teachers in the region to foster and improve science
education at the precollege level. Local school districts were involved in the
planning of the proposal and are supportive of the activity.