* 8652092
* Travel Grant:  Support of Participants to the International Conference on Physics Education; Tokyo, Japan; August 24-29,1986
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1986,06/30/1987
* Jack Wilson, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 06/30/1987
* USD 36,000.00

The project will support the attendance of 20 physics educators (6-8 college and
university physicists and 12-14 high school physics teachers) at the
International Conference on Trends in Physics Education, to be held in Tokyo,
Japan, August 24-29, 1986. The conference will primarily be concerned with: (1)
problems of classroom implementation of the results of recent research in
physics education, (2) the impact of technology on physics teaching, and (3) the
problem of motivating students to the study of physics. These problems will be
considered at both the secondary school and the introductory undergraduate
levels. The Conference is the first of its kind in the Far East, and a large
fraction of the participants are expected to be physics teachers at the high
school level. The intent of the project is for U.S. Physics educators to share
ideas and gain new insights about physics teaching from International
colleagues. These insights will be disseminated to other physics educators in
the U.S., especially those involved with curriculum development. Participants
will be required to develop specific reports based upon their involvement at the
International Conference. A major topic of concern will be assigned to each
participant as a primary theme for the report. Topics will be under two major
categories: (1) How is modern physics integrated into the curriculum in other
countries? (2) How have other countries designed teacher support and
intervention programs? The participants will reassemble in Jaunary 1987, in San
Francisco to present these reports at the annual joint meeting of the American
Physical Society and the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT).
Specific reports will be made to Physics Teaching Resource Agents, and to the
Modern Physics Curriculum Improvement Group. Following these sessions, selected
participants will be prepared for working with the same groups in June 1987, to
implement ideas for improvements gleaned from the reports. The Modern Physics
Curriculum Improvement Group is already developing curriculum materials for
physics teaching in high schools and introductory college courses. The input
from the International Conference participants is likely to lead to significant
changes based upon specific reports. Also, the reports will be published in the
AAPT Announcer and in The Physics Teacher.