* 8652434
* Inservice Training of Intermediate School Teachers in       Physical Science Education Using Collaborative Teams of     Master Teachers
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Thomas Potter, Tucson Unified School District
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 11/30/1989
* USD 144,747.00

This teacher enhancement project seeks to improve physical science education of
students in the intermediate grades (3-6) of the Tucson Unified School District
by increasing the physical science background of 142 intermediate school
teachers. The project will also provide knowledge of, and experience with,
instructional methodologies for teaching science to elementary students,
especially activity based science instruction. College scientists and science
educators will work with three four member teams, each including one HS
chemistry teacher, one HS physics teacher, a middle school teacher and an
elementary science specialist in an 11 day summer workshop. During these
workshops the team members will enhance their science background and prepare
materials for the inservice program which they will deliver to the intermediate
teachers during two duplicate workshops of 14 sessions each during the academic
year. One member of each team, the middle school teacher, will provide follow-up
support to the intermediate teachers as they implement the program in their
classrooms. Principals will also participate in an inservice program which will
enable them to provide support and leadership for the science program in their
schools. The ESS science materials will be focal ingredients of both the
inservice program and the science teaching in grades 3-6. The project involves a
unique collaboration of college and university scientists and science educators,
local industrial scientists and school district teachers and supervisors from
all levels. The vita of the staff indicate that they are well qualified in terms
of both background and experience to carry out the project successfully. The
Tucson Unified School District is committed to the project as evidenced by a
considerable amount of cost-sharing. The project will be evaluated utilizing
both internal and external evaluators.