* 8652336
* Regional Summer Workshop for High School Chemistry and      Physical Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1989
* Vaughn Vandegrift, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Peirce Hammond
* 09/30/1989
* USD 199,030.00

The major element in this project is an intensive six-week summer workshop for
24 high school teachers of chemistry and physical science drawn primarily from
Kentucky. The workshop will consist of formal chemistry coursework in the
fundamentals of chemistry, with particular emphasis on inorganic chemistry,
laboratory work, the development of demonstrations, computer assisted
instruction, and a component focussing on the teaching of science in secondary
schools. Follow-up activities in the academic year include monthly meetings of
groups of 4-7 participants and four general meetings of all participants. The
project will be conducted in each of two project years, with a separate set of
participants in each year. Teachers having the least formal or poorest training
in chemistry will be given top priority in the selection process. Priority will
also be given to those who have not had recent experience or instruction
updating their knowledge of the discipline. Individual commitment will be
assessed by telephone interviews with the applicants, and institutional support
will be generated through a special conference for the principals of the
teacher/participants. Participants will receive graduate credit in both
chemistry and education. Except for the commuters, participants will be housed
at the site of the workshop, Murray State University. Room and board and a
weekly stipend of $200 per teacher will be provided from grant funds.
Contributions of $250 per teacher during the first year and $500 per teacher
during the second have been assumed in developing the budget. This project is
carefully planned, well balanced, and has the potential of being of considerable
benefit to the participants and their colleagues.