* 8652005
* Maine School Science and Natural History Enrichment Project
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1986,03/31/1989
* Dean Bennett, Maine Audubon Society
* Continuing Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 03/31/1989
* USD 178,516.00

This two year project of the Maine Audubon Society will develop 320 Master
Science Teachers in order to improve science teaching and learning in elementary
and secondary schools across Maine. Through eight local workshops followed by
one-on-one consultations with the project staff, assisted by teacher/volunteer
teams drawn from the pilot year already completed, the paticipants will learn to
develop and incorporate inquiry-based learning activities in physical, earth,
life and ecological science into the curriculum. In the first year, 160 science
teachers identified as promising by their administrators in 16 school districts
will be provided with new instructional materials in the form of a SCIENCE AND
NATURAL HISTORY: A MAINE STUDIES SOURCEBOOK produced by the Maine Audubon
Society. Each teacher will team with a volunteer who will assist in every aspect
of teaching this material throughout the year. In the second year these 160
teacher/volunteer teams will begin to train their peers and strengthen their
schools' curricula. By the end of the academic year 320 teachers will be
qualified to extend the network to neighboring towns. The SOURCEBOOK, developed
with the advice of teachers, principals, scientists, Audubon members and the
faculty of the associated college and university will be refined by the staff
and teacher/volunteer teams. Teachers will be eligible for either 3.5 or 5
recertification credits. They can also apply the time spent in workshops to the
requirements of a three-credit graduate course on curriculum development they
may elect at the University of Maine, Farmington. Dr. Charles E. Hewett,
Executive Director of the Maine Audubon Society, and Dr. Dean Bennett, Associate
Professor of secondary education at the University of Maine, Farmington will be
Co-Principal Investigators. Dr. Bennett is the author of the SOURCEBOOK and Dr.
Hewett is an outdoor educator with experience in the applicaiton of the natural
sciences and economics to resource problems of private industry. The three other
staff members include Leslie J. Hudson, the director of environmental education
at Maine Audubon Society, Twig George, a researcher/writer in environmental
education and Peter Corcoran, a naturalist/administrator at the College of the
Atlantic. A marine biologist and a wildlife biologist are resource persons.