* 8652010
* Elementary Science Outreach Program:  A Massachusetts       Museum Network for Elementary Science Kits and Training
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1986,09/30/1988
* Inabeth Miller, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 09/30/1988
* USD 244,520.00

The project will disseminate an elementary science outreach and kits program
through a network of eight museums in Boston, Massachusetts. The Museum of
Science successfully piloted this approach in four communities in 1984-1985. The
approach involves developing elementary science kits and conducting teacher
training workshops in the use of kit materials. Kits emphasize the use of
manipulative materials, and choices of kit topics are based on reviews of
curricula and texts in elementary science, museum strengths in terms of
collections, and major topics that will be represented at the museums. Each kit
is a complete set of instructional materials, including all supplies required.
Kits are rented to schools for five weeks for a reasonable fee. Consumables are
resupplied each time the kit is returned. In the effort to expand the program
statewide, the Museum of Science, Boston, will provide development and
production of new kits; distribution of kits to regional science centers;
curriculum development to accompany kits; central coordination and accounting;
development of workshops accompanying kits; training of staff from other
museums. The network of museums will provide creative input into the development
of new kits; workshops for teachers in how to use the kits; kit distributions to
local users; site visitations to assist teachers; marketing efforts to local
communities.