* 8652399
* Teacher Development Program for Underprepared High School   Chemistry Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1989
* John Carrabine, Notre Dame College
* Standard Grant
* Peirce Hammond
* 09/30/1989
* USD 60,886.00

Key to this project is a three-week summer workshop for 24 high school chemistry
teachers, selected from northeastern Ohio. In this intensive workshop, they will
study chemical structure and bonding, energetic aspects of chemistry, and
biochemistry. In addition, they will participate in a course component in
science education. Features of the program include lectures, laboratory
exercises, instructions in video- taping science demonstrations, and exposure to
computer applications. The program will provide an introduction to the "real
world" of applied chemistry through laboratory and industrial tours and lectures
by industrial scientists. Problem sets, computer software, and videotaped
materials will be tested by the teachers in their classrooms during the
following academic year, and the results of these piloting activities will be
shared in follow-up Saturday workshops. The 24 participants will be selected
from those with less than five years of chemistry teaching experience at the
secondary level and/or those unprepared for chemistry teaching. Special
consideration will be given to applicants from the Cleveland school system, to
members of under-represented groups, and to teachers of students from under-
represented groups. The teachers will receive stipends of $200 per week and
their living expenses at Notre Dame will be covered by the grant. They will be
eligible to receive academic credit in the form of continuing education units.