* 8657323
* Presidential Young Investigator Award  (Computer and        Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1987,05/31/1993
* Michael Carey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 05/31/1993
* USD 312,000.00

This research is focused on improving database system performance, particularly
for distributed databases, distributed transaction management and real-time
database applications. The performance of concurrency control algorithms,
distributed join algorithms and load balancing techniques for distributed
database systems are all investigated, in addition to techniques such as main
memory databases for achieving high performance. Another major aspect of the
research is the development of extensible database systems, including the
necessary storage management facilities and programming tools. The EXODUS
system, under development with this research, is intended to support the rapid
implementation of database management facilities for database applications that
are poorly served by current relational database systems. The EXODUS group is
building "database system generator" software, including a set of versatile
kernel database facilities and software tools to simplify the construction of
customized database management systems. Research on distributed database systems
and their performance is vital for guiding the designers of future database
systems. While relational database systems are now a commercial reality, and
their distributed counterparts are starting to become available, significant
challenges remain for understanding and improving their performance. Extensible
database systems such as those investigated here are essential to go beyond
relational databases and support a wide range of emerging database applications:
computer assisted design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM), computer-aided software
engineering, scientific data management, image/voice data management, and data-
intensive AI applications. The success of large-scale efforts in these areas
will depend on flexible, high-performance data management facilities such as
those developed in EXODUS project.