* 8657835
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  The Dynamics and    Control of High-Speed Direct-Drive Manipulators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1987,02/28/1993
* Kamal Youcef-Toumi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* K. (Cheena) Srinivasan
* 02/28/1993
* USD 312,000.00

This proposal is for support of research under the Foundation's Presidential
Young Investigator (PYI) Awards program. Dr. Youcef-Toumi's research is directed
toward the dynamics and control of high-speed direct-drive manipulators for
manufacturing applications. The direct-drive manipulator is a robotic arm where
high torque motors are direct coupled to the joint axes of the arm. The
elimination of gearing between the motors and their corresponding loads results
in an arm that has no backlash, low friction and high mechanical stiffness. All
of these characteristics are desirable for fast, accurate and versatile torque
controlled manipulators. His early research succeeded in developing a direct-
drive arm using high torque brushless motors. The maximum speed and acceleration
achieved were 10 m/sec and 5G respectively, which are an order of magnitude
faster than existing robots. Research issues to be addressed under this grant
include the development of control techniques for high performance servoing,
analysis of the arm dynamics, and high speed high-accuracy trajectory control
using nonlinear feedback/feedforward compensations. Additional research issues
to be addressed include modeling and control systems design, hardware
implementation, and software development for torque/force control applications.
The objectives of the PYI program are to provide support to the Nation's most
outstanding and promising young science and engineering faculty. The awards are
intended to improve the capability of U.S. academic institutions to respond to
the demand for highly qualified scientists and engineers for academic and
industrial research and teaching. In accordance with those objectives, a
Presidential Young Investigator Award for Dr. Youcef- Toumi is recommended. This
is a five-year continuing award. Annual funding will be at the base level of
$25,000 with a supplement of up to $37,500 to match industrial support obtained.