* 8657629
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1993
* R. J. Dwayne Miller, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/1993
* USD 312,000.00

The main theme of Professor Miller's research is to understand the primary
processes involved in electron transport and energy transport in condensed
media. Currently, his group is investigating the dynamics of interfacial
electron transfer at a single crystal liquid interface and the subsequent effect
of the charge transfer on the solution structure. The time resolved dynamics of
this process are intimately related to the mechanism for the electron transfer
step, a detailed understanding of which is important both for its fundamental
nature and its application in surface chemistry. Interfacial electron transfer
occurs on a picosecond timescale (10-12 sec) over spatial dimensions of only a
few angstroms. In order to study this phenomenon, they are taking advantage of
recent developments in picosecond laser spectroscopy and semiconductor
technology. With the advent of efficient semiconductor liquid junction
photovoltaics, it is now possible to optically trigger the interfacial electron
transfer process with high quantum yield. Ultrasensitive techniques such as
picosecond transient grating or electro-optic sampling are being used to
selectively study, in-situ, the electron transfer dynamics. Studies in the
future will involve the use of recently-developed quantum well semiconductor
liquid junction devices that provide monoenergetic electrons to study
exclusively the phenomena of outer sphere (solvent) or inner sphere
(intramolecular) repolarization that accompanies electron transfer at a liquid
interface. The ultimate goal is to provide a detailed study of interfacial
electron transfer dynamics which will serve as a valuable testing ground for
microscopic models of electron transfer. Concurrently, Professor Miller is
interested in how excess energy is repartitioned during an exothermic reaction
in the solution phase. This interest is intimately linked to his optical studies
of interfacial electron transfer which involves dissipation of 1 eV excess
energy on an extremely fast timescale. Vibrational energy relaxation pathways to
the solvent lattice are very different for different molecular systems. These
differences are only now beginning to be understood. New approaches to this
problem involve the use of picosecond transient thermal grating formation and
Antistokes Raman studies of vibrationally highly excited molecules.