* 8657093
* PYI:  The Representation of Attitudes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1992
* Steven Breckler, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 12/31/1992
* USD 144,500.00

Attitudes are mental and neural states of readiness to respond to objects and
events in the social world. The traditional areas of research in attitude theory
have included attitude management, attitude development, attitude structure and
function, attitude change (persuasion), and the relationship beetween attitudes
and behavior. Contemporary attitude research relies heavily on the use of
verbally or semantically-based measurement techniques (the self-rating scale).
This researcher is investigating aspects of attitude that do not make contact
with the verbal knowledge system. The initial phases of this research will focus
on assessments of attitude that do not require verbal reports. Special emphasis
will be placed on the measurement of affective or emotional components of
attitude, using techniques such as Ekman's Facial Action Coding System, and the
analysis of voice quality as an indicator of vocal affect expression. As part of
this research, the Principal Investigator is studying rational versus emotional
control of blood donor behavior (with partial support from the American Red
Cross). Although people often provide rational explanations for their failure to
donate blood, nondonation behavior is best predicted by emotional components of
attitude. The products of this research will simultaneously aid the Red Cross in
their recruitment of blood donors, and contribute to an important area of social
psychological inquiry.