* 8657422
* Presidential Young Investigator Award/Electronic            Spectroscopy, Photochemistry, and Photophysics of           High-Valent Organometallic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1988,06/30/1993
* Michael Hopkins, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/1993
* USD 328,000.00

This grant provides the base funding for the first year of a five-year
Presidential Young Investigator award. The research is in the area of
organometallic chemistry and focuses on light-induced reactions of compounds
containing multiple bonds between the metal atom and one of the surrounding
ligands. The research will consist of two projects. In the first of these,
photochemical reactions of high-valent organometallic complexes containing
multiple metal-ligand linkages will be investigated. Of particular interest are
photochemical reactions of complexes in which the metal has two d electrons and
is either triply bonded to a nitride ligand or doubly bonded to either an
alkylidyne or an alkylidene ligand. The lowest-lying electronic excited states
of these species, which are pi-antibonding with respect to the multiply bonded
ligand, should facilitate reactions at these moieties. The second project will
involve the synthesis and physical characterization of heterobimetallic
compounds in which the metal centers are joined by an inorganic substrate.
Emphasis will be on the reactions of electronically unsaturated early transition
metal complexes with compounds of the later metals containing a ligand which can
serve as a bridge to the early transition metal. Specifically, the reaction of
16-electron hydride complexes with electronically saturated complexes ligated by
dinitrogen, carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide should yield dimers with these
ligands as bridges.