* 8657043
* PYI:  Mammalian Physiological and Nutritional Ecology                                                                                                                              ,
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1994
* Robert Lochmiller, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/1994
* USD 327,721.00

Robert L. Lochmiller of Oklahoma State University is the recipient of a
Presidential Young Investigator Award. This grant will enable him to initiate
new studies in the area of animal nutritional ecology and population ecology.
For a very large number of mammalian herbivores, the most fundamental resource
limiting population expansion is nutrient availability or forage quality, as
these directly affect recruitment and survival. Dr. Lochmiller's interest is in
elucidating the mechanisms by which nutritional status influences immune system
function and disease resistance in adult animals, passive transfer of immunity
to offspring, and immune system ontogeny (or development), and how all of these
relate to population dynamics. Initial efforts will be focused on assessing
immunocompetence of newborn young (in deer and in cotton rats), determining the
influence of protein nutrition on development of immunity in the cotton rat, and
measurement of mortality rates of young in both species. The methods used in
this research include state-of-the-art techniques in immunology,
histomorphology, and ecology (including radio- telemetry and ultrasonic
detection). Laboratory and field studies are involved. Much of this scientist's
previous work has dealt with various aspects of the biology and ecology of the
collared peccary (Tayassuidae), resulting in a prolific publication record also
notable for its outstanding quality. Funding is provided for a five-year
duration.