* 8657010
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Sub-Triple Liquids  and Crystallization in Supercritical Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1987,06/30/1992
* Pablo Debenedetti, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1992
* USD 311,769.00

Research Summary: Sub-triple liquids (metastable liquids below their triple
point): This project includes an experimental study of the phase transition
(unique to sub-triple liquids) involving simultaneous boiling and
crystallization, completion of a theoretical study of tensile instability (loss
of tensile strength), and investigation of the molecular origin of density
anomalies (liquids which contract when heated). The connection between tensile
instability and density anomalies was derived by the PI. Crystallization in
supercritical fluids: This portion of the project involves completion of
equipment construction and preliminary experiments in which continuous
precipitation occurs into a fluid whose temperature, pressure, and composition
can be independently manipulated. Novelty/Innovation: Sub-triple liquids are an
unexplored state of matter (the term was coined by the PI). Their behavior
includes tensile instabilities (a decrease in tensile strength as the
temperature is lowered, an experimentally observed anomaly first explained by
the PI) and a phase transition involving rapid crystallization and boiling
coupled with liquid disappearance, a phenomenon not to be found elsewhere in
nature. Crystallization from supercritical fluids is a novel method for the
production of uniform crystals and monodisperse polymer particles. The most
innovative concept in this project is the attainment of uniform, controllable
conditions within the fluid where nucleation occurs through a manipulation of
pressure instead of temperature. Pressure perturbations travel at the speed of
sound, thus guaranteeing uniformity throughout the fluid medium and are applied
to a highly compressible fluid near its critical point, thus giving rise to
large changes in density and hence solvent power. Technical Impact/Practical
Significance: Tension generated when a degassed liquid is cooled inside a rigid
container is ideally suited for the non-destructive testing of adhesion on flat
surfaces. This is a problem of vital importance in microchip manufacture (e.g.,
photo-resist adhesion testing). The experimentally observed equilibrium of a
sub-triple liquid and a crystal suggests the novel idea of creating solids which
are uniformly stressed. Since it is otherwise impossible to subject a solid to
isotropic tension, this process (tension crystallization) could lead to the
production of materials with unique properties.