* 8657480
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Design and Control  of Servo Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1993
* Jeffrey Stein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin I. Sewell
* 08/31/1993
* USD 319,850.00

This proposal is for support of research under the Foundation's Presidential
Young Investigator (PYI) Awards program. Dr. Stein's research is directed at
design and control of servo systems. The work is divided into six projects. Four
of these areas are concerned with machine development for factory automation.
The other two areas are concerned with the development of improved prostheses
for lower limb amputees. The specific projects are as follows: Control of DC
Servo Machine Tool Drive Systems for Machine Diagnostics, Design and Control of
Pneumatic Servo Systems for Factory Automation, Expert Systems Applied to Model
Based Diagnostics of Servo Systems, Models of Machine Tool Drive Train
Components for Machine Diagnostics, Design and Control of Prosthetic Limbs, and
Development of Microprocessor Controlled Above-Knee Prostheses Simulator. The
objectives of the PYI program are to provide support to the Nation's most
outstanding and promising young science and engineering faculty. The awards are
intended to improve the capability of U.S. academic institutions to respond to
the demand for highly qualified scientists and engineers for academic and
industrial research and teaching. In accordance with those objectives, a
Presidential Young Investigator Award for Dr. Stein is recommended. This is a
five-year continuing award. Annual funding will be at the base level of $25,000
with a supplement of up to $37,500 to match industrial support obtained.