* 8657548
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Large Particle      Fluidization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1993
* Richard Turton, West Virginia University
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 06/30/1993
* USD 279,031.00

Narrative: During the 5 years of this Presidential Investigator Award, the
following areas wil be investigated: (i) The lubricating effect of small
particles on large particle fluidized beds. The addition of a very small amount
of fine particle solid lubricant such as graphite or molybdenum sulfide can
significantly reduce the amount of attrition that occurs when larger brittle
particles are fluidized. Examples of such particles are zeolites with low
proportions of binder material. By utilizing greater amounts of binder some
zeolite catalysts can be used in moving bed operations, e.g., fluid bed
catalytic cracking. However, by using more binder, intraparticle diffusion is
affected and this may be undesirable. If the erosion of low binder content
zeolite catalysts can be significantly reduced, then a whole family of fixed bed
processes could be implemented in fluidized bed reactors. (ii) The
characterization of gas-solid heat transfer and particle mixing using changes in
magnetic properties of tracer particles. When solids are fed to a fluidized bed,
either in batch or continuous operations, it is important to know how quickly
these solids mix and obtain thermal equilibrium with the bed. For small particle
systems this information is difficult to obtain since the processes occur
quickly and the particles are too small for temperature sensing probes to be
inserted in them. A technique has been developed to measure these processes by
using the change in magnetic properties of a tracer material and this technique
will allow detailed information about the heating and mixing of particles to be
obtained. (iii) Modeling large particle fluidized systems. The widespread use of
fluidized bed waste incinerators and combustors in the last 15 years has given
rise to a renewed interest in large particle fluidized systems. Considerable
experimental information is available on these systems but as yet there are few
reliable flow models to predict the behavior of such systems. There are several
similarities between solid-gas turbulent churning fluidization and liquid-gas
churning flow. The latter has been modeled quite successfully using a
phenomenological approach and it is believed that a similar approach to gas-
solid systems could be fruitful.