* 8657899
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1987,11/30/1992
* Lyle Ungar, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1992
* USD 312,000.00

This grant is to provide research support for Dr. Lyle Ungar under the National
Science Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Awards program. Dr. Ungar's
research is in two areas: (1) the application of artificial intelligence
techniques to automate reasoning about chemical plants and (2) the modelling of
transport in systems with moving boundaries and phase transformations. In (1),
the area of design and control, he is writing knowledge-based expert systems
which use causal models and first principles to gain a "deep" understanding of
plant behavior which is applicable to a broad class of processes and problems.
The underlying reason for this work is that to be as useful and reliable as
possible, expert systems should be able to work from descriptions of processes
such as flow sheets, and not need extensive customization for each new process.
As part of this project the PI is developing an expert multivariable controller
which diagnoses process malfunctions and makes appropriate structural changes to
the controller structure, control algorithms and control parameters in order to
acheive as tight control of the process as possible. He is working on isolating
as much plant-independent knowledge about equipment and control algorithms as
possible and on formalizing notions of causality used by engineers i~ design and
trouble shooting. In (2), the area of transport through multiphase media, he is
using analytical and finite element based perturbation methods to characterize
the effect of solidification conditions on melt/solid interface shape and solute
segregation and, in particular, to map out the transitions between interfaces of
different morphology. A detailed understanding of the solidification process is
important for a variety of emerging techniques in electronic materials
processing. Pulsed laser annealing is one of these techniques. Pulsed lasers can
be used to rapidly melt thin layers (&lt;1 micron) of semiconductors and metals
which resolidify at rates of up to several meters per second. At these
velocities - some 10 times normal crystal growth rates, the melt/solid interface
is no longer at equilibrium and dopant segregation is radically altered. Defects
can be removed and nonequilibrium (metastable) alloys formed. However,
nonuniform solute segregation often limits the usefulness of the alloys. He is
incorporating results from atomic scale modelling of rapid solidification into
macroscopic transport models, and studying the resulting growth morphologies.