* 8657304
* Presidential Young Investigator
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1994
* Jonathan Kenoyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1994
* USD 182,664.00

This Presidential Young Investigator award provides five years of support to Dr.
Kenoyer. It permits him to develop and gain experience in techniques in
archaeometric research; to continue his own work in Pakistan and India; and to
develop new teaching frameworks. Dr. Kenoyer will learn to: prepare ceramic thin
sections and apply techniques of petrographic analysis; prepare samples for
S.E.M. analysis; conduct micro.wear analysis using binocular microscopes;
conduct trace element analysis using S.E.M. and electorn probe; carry out
metallurgical analysis, including experimental replication using traditional
ores and smelting procedures; and develop methods of ceramic replication and
analysis. With these techniques he can both determine the methods of production
of ceramic, metal and other materials, and in some cases also determine points
of origin of raw materials. Dr. Kenoyer is currently involved in a major
archaeological excavation at the site of Harappa in Pakistan. Specific studies
will be conducted to source shell, stone and metal ores as well as finished
objects used in external and internal trade. He will also study modern pottery
manufacture in Pakistan and bead working in India to record traditional
technological aspects of these industries and types of adaptations, both
technological and social that have occurred through the introduction of imported
technology. This will help him to understand past cultures and the role of
innovation in change. This work is important because it will improve Dr.
Kenoyer's archaeological skills, contribute to our understanding of the past,
and aid in the development of innovative teaching programs.