* 8657493
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Dynamic Properties  of Concentrated Suspensions (REU Supplement)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1992
* David Leighton, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 12/31/1992
* USD 315,491.00

Narrative: The use of concentrated suspensions of non-colloidal particles in
such diverse applications as the flow of blood in arteries and artificial organs
and of coal-oil slurries in mixed fuel furnaces makes the detailed understanding
of their properties imperative. Several aspects of the behavior exhibited by
these types of suspensions which are, as yet, poorly understood are being
investigated. SHEAR INDUCED MIGRATION: It has been shown that when concentrated
suspensions of non- colloidal particles are sheared, the particles will drift
across streamlines due to gradients in concentration. The mechanism proposed as
an explanation for this migration suggests that shear induced migration may
arise from gradients in shear stress as well. Preliminary experiments provide
indirect evidence for this source of particle drift; however, the results to
date are far from conclusive. Experiments aimed at proving or disproving the
existence of migrations arising from gradients in shear stress are being
conducted. THE EFFECT OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS ON SUSPENSION RHEOLOGY: Recent work
has demonstrated that the behavior of a concentrated suspension of non-colloidal
particles is critically dependent on the surface properties of the particles.
This is primarily due to the closeness of the approach of the particle surfaces
in a suspension undergoing shear. Preliminary analysis suggests that the most
significant non-Newtonian properties manifested by these suspensions result from
the presence of a small degree of surface roughness on these particles. Using
both experimental and numerical simulation, it is being attempted to quantify
the relationship between surface roughness and the rheological properties of
concentrated suspensions. FLOW INDUCED MICROSTRUCTURE IN CONCENTRATED
SUSPENSIONS: The microstructure of a suspension plays a critical role in
determining important rheological properties. While much progress has been made
in determining the microstructure in dilute systems, for concentrated
suspensions it remains poorly understood. A key question that is as yet
unanswered is the degree to which particles aggregate in concentrated
suspensions of non-colloidal particles. Numerical simulations suggest that the
lubrication forces between interacting particles may lead to the formation of
large structures in concentrated suspensions; however, the formation of
aggregates should be a strong function of particle surface properties and the
existence of large aggregates has yet to be confirmed experimentally. Using a
novel experimental technique, it is being attempted to determine the degree of
aggregation by measuring both the particle distribution function and particle
velocity distribution of a concentrated suspension of non-colloidal spheres
undergoing simple shear flow. Eventually, this study will be expanded to include
the complete determination of the microstructure of concentrated suspensions as
a function of the flow geometry, particle surface properties such as surface
roughness, and particle shape.