* 8657057
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Loop Detection in   Surface Patch Intersections
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1987,07/31/1993
* Thomas Sederberg, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 07/31/1993
* USD 226,199.00

This Presidential Young Investigator's research in geometric modeling focuses
on four areas: surface patch intersections, cubic algebraic surface patches,
local surface implicitization, and approximate parametrization of algebraic
curves. For surface patch intersections, he plans to continue work on computing
the curve of intersection of two parametric surface patches. He has already
found a method to determine if there are any closed loops in an intersection
curve and plans to develop a general intersection algorithm which takes
advantage of this loop test. In cubic algebraic surface patches, he plans to
investigate methods of modelling with third order algebraic surface patches.
Previous work proves that they can be pieced together with C1 continuity and
that a rational parametrization can be imposed on them. He is working on
creating the computer environment for modelling them. The problem of local
surface implicitization involves finding how closely a parametric surface patch
can be approximated by an implicit surface of low degree and developing an
algorithm for computing such surfaces. For example, a bicubic patch generally
has an implicit equation of degree 18, but it is hoped that most bicubic patches
can be approximated with a degree four or five surface. Finally, an exact
implicit equation can be found for any parametric curve, but the reverse is not
true. Professor Sederberg is working on developing an algorithm for fitting a
piecewise rational cubic curve to an algebraic curve.