* 8657614
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Advanced Catalytic  Processes and Materials Fabrication Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1987,01/31/1993
* Henry Foley, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 01/31/1993
* USD 320,000.00

This Presidential Young Investigator award includes three areas of research: 1.
Selectivity control with ultramicroporous materials. This effort concentrates on
the design, fabrication, and application of inorganic-oxide-modified carbon
molecular sieves. These composite materials have the molecular sieving
properties of polymer-derived carbon and the high surface areas and other
properties of inorganic oxides such as silica, alumina, titania, or zirconia.
The initial project is to prepare a catalyst system to produce gasoline-range
hydrocarbons from syngas (carbon monoxide and hydrogen) by incorporating sites
that catalyze Fischer-Tropsch synthesis and hydrocracking inside an envelope of
sieve. A model will be developed to describe the coupled mass transfer and
chemical kinetics in this system. The model and the physical system will then be
redesigned iteratively to locate the optimal system for this purpose. 2.
Advanced catalytic materials. The fabrication of porous piezoelectric materials
is being studied; these may be useful both as catalysts and as catalyst supports
for the activation of saturated hydrocarbons. Also, the physical and electronic
structure of the active site on the surface of rhodium-molybdenum on alumina is
under investigation; this very active heterogeneous catalyst appears to
chemically mimic homogeneous rhodium catalysts. 3. Electronic materials
processing. The kinetics and mechanisms for pyrolytic, photolytic, and catalytic
decompositions of organometalloid compounds of groups III and V are being
studied; such reactions are central to CVD processes. Also, a system is under
design for production of zinc-oxide films by oxidation of alkylzinc precursors;
it is hoped this will lead to a method for the fabrication of two-dimensional
superconducting oxides.