* 8657974
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  An Empirical and    Theoretical Analysis of Macroeconomic Issues
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1987,08/31/1993
* N. Gregory Mankiw, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1993
* USD 312,000.00

This award provides support to Dr. N. Gregory Mankiw under the National Science
Foundations's Presidential Young Investigator Awards program. The objectives of
this program are to provide research support to the Nation's most outstanding
and promising young science and engineering faculty. The awards are intended to
improve the capability of U.S. academic institutions to respond to the demand
for highly qualified science and engineering personnel for academic and
industrial research and teaching. Dr. Mankiw has already made significant
research contributions to the field of economics, and he has the potential to
become a leader in academic research and education. This award will allow the
investigator to pursue his research interests in the study of macroeconomic
issues and questions. Much of Dr. Mankiw's empirical research involves the
application of time-series analysis and other econometric techniques to a
variety of topics. Among the topics are testing the permanent income hypothesis,
investigating the term structure of interest rates, studying stock market
volatility, and studying the demand for money and the effect of real interest
rates on consumer spending. At the theoretical level, Dr. Mankiw is especially
interested in investigating the importance of capital market imperfections for
macroeconomic issues. In addition, he will also explore the interaction between
macroeconomics and industrial organization, and the role of imperfect
competition in explaining both price rigidity and the impact of fiscal policy on
aggregate expenditures.