* 8657262
* Presidential Young Investigator Award/Metal Complexes of    Polyhedral Siloxane Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1993
* Frank Feher, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1993
* USD 301,460.00

This five year continuing grant is for the support of Professor Feher as a
Presidential Young Investigator. The major project for which these funds will be
used is aimed at understanding at the molecular level the way in which an
important group of heterogeneous catalysts function. The major thrust of the
research program is the development of new methods and strategies for modeling
reaction processes that occur on silica-supported metal oxide catalysts. The
model compounds which have been chosen, and some of which have been synthesized
already, are large polyhedral siloxane ligands which approximate the
coordination environments of surface catalytic sites. Current studies are
focused on a new class of compounds called polyhedral
oligometallasilsesquioxanes (POMSS), which are designed to model the chemistry
of isolated metal atoms coordinated to three surface hydroxyl groups. A large
number of examples of POMSS will be synthesized with different metals, the
oxides of which are used as catalysts. Spectral data for these will be compared
with data which have been reported from surface studies, both to test the
validity of spectral assignments from actual surface studies and the validity of
the compounds as models. Examination of the chemical reactivities of POMSS and
studies of reaction mechanisms for these compounds are expected to provide a
more detailed description of the reaction processes that can occur on a silica
surface.