* 8657527
* PYI:  Mathematical Foundations of Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1987,01/31/1993
* Shafrira Goldwasser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 01/31/1993
* USD 312,000.00

PYI: New Foundations for Cryptography Research is in progress in the general
area of computational complexity. The focus of this research is on cryptography
and computational number theory. During the decade of the eighties cryptography
was developed into a formal discipline in which notions such as "one-way
function" and "proving that a protocol is correct" have a precise yet natural
meaning. Rigor was accomplished by concrete proposals which were shown to comply
with the new complexity standards under a few complexity assumptions.
Unfortunately, the complexity assumptions made, for example the existence of
one-way functions, are likely to remain unproven for quite a while longer. This
situation provides motivation for establishing a new foundation for
cryptography. Instead of making intractability assumptions about functions,
physical assumptions about the model in which cryptography is being done (for
example the kind of channel or layout used for communication by the network
participants) are being made. Unconditionally secure communication protocols for
the new model are sought. Results already achieved that involve proof- systems
with a "distributed" prover may have applications to fault tolerant distributed
computing. Such applications are being explored. Work is continuing on
interactive proof systems. Using tools developed in this area an attempt is
being made to clarify the complexity of previously unclassified optimization
problems. Work in computational number theory is also continuing. Simpler and
faster algorithms for primality testing and other algebraic computations are
sought. The P.I. has been judged to be an outstanding computer scientist by the
Presidential Young Investigator Panel.