* 8657345
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  An Integrated       Approach to Design for Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1987,09/30/1994
* Abhijit Chandra, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Pius J. Egbelu
* 09/30/1994
* USD 292,233.00

This proposal is for support of research under the Foundation's Presidential
Young Investigator (PYI) Awards program. Dr. Chandra's research efforts aim at
developing a knowledge- based system that will rationally arrive at an
integrated design of the actual manufacturing process. The ability to make
rational decisions based on the synthesis of various pieces of information and
to eventually arrive at an integrated design plays a very important role in
everyday engineering practice. Accordingly, the proposed project aims at
developing a conceptual framework for manufacturing design from a causal
perspective. This framework is then used in developing a knowledge-based system
that will gain insight into the process from a few detailed analyses and
experiments on simplified models and will rationally arrive at an integrated
design of the actual process using a hybrid axiomatic- algorithmic approach for
design synthesis. The fundamental principles are quite general and may be
applied to any manufacturing process such as metal cutting, metal forming,
casting, welding, etc. This project on manufacturing design has three primary
components: (1) establishment of a conceptual framework from a causal
perspective and identification of general principles and axioms for
manufacturing design, (2) identification of functional and physical hierarchies
through a causal analysis, and (3) integration of manufacturing design based on
the conceptual framework according to the identified hierarchies. The objectives
of the PYI program are to provide support to the Nation's most outstanding and
promising young science and engineering faculty. The awards are intended to
improve the capability of U.S. academic institutions to respond to the demand
for highly qualified scientists and engineers for academic and industrial
research and teaching. In accordance with those objectives, a Presidential Young
Investigator Award for Dr. Chandra is recommended. This is a five-year
continuing award. Annual funding will be at the base level of $25,000 with a
supplement of up to $37,500 to match industrial support obtained.