* 8657764
* PYI: The Electrophysiology of Human Attention
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1987,06/30/1991
* Daniel Barth, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Comer
* 06/30/1991
* USD 113,600.00

This action recommends a Presidential Young Investigator Award for Dr. Daniel
Barth. Dr. Barth's primary research interest is in the mechanisms regulating
brain cell excitability and their role in normal and pathological human cortical
function. For his dissertation he conducted a series of studies to explore the
neuromagnetic fields produced outside of the head by both normal sensory
processing and pathological epileptic discharge. This work used a newly
developed superconducting biomagnetic sensor called the Superconducting Quantum
Interference Device (SQUID) to map extracranial magnetic fields. From these
neuromagnetic maps, Dr. Barth demonstrated that it was possible to accurately
localize restricted electrical brain currents within the cranium. Dr. Barth
pioneered the use of neuromagnetometry to study human focal epileptic disorders.
Neuromagnetic field maps were effectively used to determine the location of an
epileptic focus within the brain for neurosurgical evaluation, and to
noninvasively study dynamic interactions between brain regions during epileptic
seizure discharge. Dr. Barth's neuromagnetic investigations also extend to
animal studies where he is exploring the neurophysiological basis of brain
magnetic fields and using this knowledge to study slow and rapid changes in
cellular electrical currents that may underlie changes in cortical excitability.
Here, the response of the brain to sensory and direct cortical stimulation are
under investigation as well as the brain's response to drugs that induce or
reduce focal epilepsy. Dr. Barth presently holds a joint appointment in the UCLA
Departments of Neurology and Psychology, with neuromagnetometry laboratories in
both departments. His work has included the improvement of mathematical models
for interpreting human neuromagnetic fields, for localizing pathological brain
activity and studying multiple simultaneously active brain regions. Dr. Barth is
continuing his investigation of the physiological basis of slow changes in brain
excitability in animals and relating this work to recent neuromagnetic studies
of information processing in the human brain.