* 8657907
* PYI:  The Sharing of Data in Distributed Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1987,12/31/1992
* Mahadev Satyanarayanan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 12/31/1992
* USD 312,000.00

The focus of this research is the sharing of data in distributed environments.
The Andrew File System addressed the issue of providing a secure, location
transparent name space in a large distributed environment. This system is now
operational and widely used on the CMU campus and elsewhere. As dependence on
such systems grows, it becomes increasingly important to be able to access data
at all times. The inaccessibility of data due to server and network failures
causes considerable inconvenience in a system such as Andrew. Replication of
data at multiple sites is a technique that has been the subject of much recent
theoretical investigation. The project's goal is to use these algorithms in the
design and implementation of CODA, a distributed file system that is resilient
to server and network failures. In normal operation, the performance of this
system should be no worse than that of an equivalent non-resilient distributed
file system. Since replication involves data transfer to multiple servers, the
development of parallel network protocols is an essential part of this effort.
The evaluation of alternative replication algorithms, the development of
techniques to handle network partitions, and the analysis and modeling of such a
system are necessary parts of the project.