* 8657524
* PYI:  Toward The Realistic Modeling of Electromagnetic            Scattering Problems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1987,06/30/1993
* Hao Ling, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/1993
* USD 329,080.00

The PI describes his work under the Presidential Young Investigators award as
follows: In formulating electromagnetic scattering problems, one is often forced
to choose between tow conflicting requirements: rigorous analysis vs. realistic
modelling. In the past, much emphasis has been placed on the rigorous analysis
at the expense of realistic modelling. More recently, several classes of
problems have arisen in which the effect of the geometry on the scattering
characteristics is of prime importance. Two such problems will be addressed in
this study: (1) Radar cross section analysis of partially open cavities.
Minimizing radar returns from jet engine intakes is one of the major challenges
in stealth technology. A novel ray launching technique will be applied to
analyze the effect of shaping or coating the intake interior. (2)
Characterization of microstrip discontinuities. Accurate electromagnetic
characterization of microstrip transmission structures is essential in the
design of monolithic microwave integrated circuits. A time-domain finite-
difference approach will be applied to various discontinuities in order to
extract scattering parameters/circuit models crucial to the development of CAD
tools. This PYI award will study theoretical modelling problems in
electromagnetic scattering. The emphasis will be on realistic modelling
approaches in which the geometry of the scatterer is of prime importance. Areas
of emphasis will be on analysis of (1) radar cross sections for partially open
cavities such as in jet engine intakes, and (2) characterizations of microstrip
discontinuities which are of importance in developing computer aided design
tools for monolithic microwave integrated circuits.