* 8657316
* Presidential Young Investigator Award (Computer and         Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1987,09/30/1993
* Thomas Dietterich, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 09/30/1993
* USD 311,546.00

A machine learning program is a program that improves its performance over
time, usually by acquiring new knowledge about the tasks it is performing. This
research seeks to improve our understanding of both the foundations and the
practical aspects of building machine learning programs. The focus is in three
directions: (a) finding ways by which learning programs can use the knowledge
they already have to learn additional knowledge, (b) understanding the role of
active experimentation in aiding the learning process, and (c) analyzing the
constraints that different representation languages place on the learning
process. To make progress in each of these areas, controlled experiments are
conducted to compare different learning methods, experimentation strategies, and
representation languages. The importance of this research lies in the fact that
the production and debugging of software systems and expert systems is the
principal cost of using computers - hardware and personnel costs are small in
comparison. Machine learning techniques hold the potential for significantly
enhancing the way computers can be used. Rather than programming the computer,
step by step, we would like to give the computer an approximate, incomplete, and
inefficient procedure for a desired task. This approximate, incomplete, and
inefficient program could then be debugged, perfected, and made more efficient
automatically, through the use of machine learning techniques. Computers could
be efficiently taught, rather than laboriously programmed.