* 8657206
* Presidential Young Investigator:  Seismology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1993
* Jeffrey Park, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Marvin E. Kauffman
* 06/30/1993
* USD 157,500.00

Observations of the earth's free oscillations and the seismic structure of the
earth's interior. Improved algorithms are required to resolve lateral structure
to the accuracy and resolution required to make definitive judgements on deep
earth geology and thermal structure. Current studies of upper mantle structure
using low-frequency ( &lt; 5mHz) surface waves have used inversion algorithms
that are valid only for long-wavelength ( &gt; 4000km) aspherical structure. Dr.
Park has developed an asymptotic coupled-mode formalism that is valid for weak
perturbations at all wavelengths. He intends to pursue both a long-wavelength
inversion using this technique and a "controlled" synthetic-seismogram study of
the effects on low- frequency waveforms of "sharp" lateral gradients in seismic
structure e.g., continent-ocean boundaries. These projects will entail the use
of advanced computer hardware available through Yale's Computer Science
Department and the NSF supercomputer centers. The spectral content of high
frequency seismic codas caused by reverberations in the crust. Preliminary
investigations of frequency-dependent particle-motion polarization suggest that
many codas decompose into distinct waveguide resonances with independent
propagation histories. Dr. Park anticipates further collaborative research using
existing regional array data, with application in lithospheric structure
problems and seismic test-ban discrimination questions.