* 8657151
* Presidential Young Investigator Award: Computer Science:    Extending the Capabilities of Robotic Systems (Computer     and Information Science)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1987,06/30/1993
* Peter Allen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 06/30/1993
* USD 318,500.00

The focus of this research is to explore the integration of vision and tactile
sensing in complex robotic tasks such as manipulation and assembly. The research
is being carried on in two separate projects. The first is the creation of a
multi-arm robotic test bed that utilizes high speed, frame-rate vision sensing
to track a moving part. The visiion system is mounted on a robotic arm and the
servo control of the arm is modified by the vision sensing. The vision system
will utilize pyramids and scale-space in order to segment and track the objects
in real- time.Attached to the robotic arm is an intelligent tactile
sensor/gripper that can monitor contact forces and moments, resulting in the
secure and stable grasping of the moving part by the visually-servoed gripper.
Once the object is grasped, it can be used in coordinated assembly tasks using
the two robotic arms. The second project involves the Utah/MIT dextrous hand.
The first task is to build a set of higher-level primitives have been defined,
they can be combined into a grasping language to create programs of
grasping/manipulation sequences. The next task is to develop and evaluate new
tactile sensors to be used with the hand in order to support the requirements of
intelligent grasping. With the addition of tactile sensory feedback, a hybrid
control algorithm will be developed for the hand that utilizes position, force
and tactile feedback for hand control.