* 8660614
* Carrageenan Immobilization of Glucose Isomerase
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1987
* Robert Henkens, Enzyme Technology Research Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1987
* USD 39,981.00

Enzymes can be used as catalysts to make or modify products. Fructose syrup, a
sweetener competitive with sucrose used in food, is produced by isomerization of
glucose using an immobilized form of the enzyme glucose isomerase. This
represents the largest commercial application of an immobilized enzyme. The PI
plans to design and develop an improved immobilized form of glucose isomerase to
produce pure fructose syrup that can be used directly in soft drinks. The
criteria for measuring performance of an immobilized glucose isomerase is its
productivity in terms of total amount of fructose produced per unit of enzyme,
determined by the combined effects of stability and activity. Activity and
stability are very dependent upon both pH and temperature. For continuous use in
fixed bed reactors, catalytic stability is the primary factor in determining the
practical productivity of immobilized enzymes. The PI plans to design
carrageenan-based supports for immobilized enzymes which should increase
productivity and yield. The hypothesis is that carrageenan gels entrap the
enzyme such that multiple sites on the gel interact with multiple sites on the
surface of the enzyme by means of ionic bonds. Under such conditions the multi-
point attachment of enzymes to solid supports conditions the multi-point
attachment of enzymes to solid supports makes the enzyme more rigid and thus
less susceptible to unfolding. This phase I work will involve: (1) Measuring the
effects of pH and temperature on the stability and activity of the enzyme. (2)
Determining sensitivity of the enzyme to O2 inactivation and Ca++ inhibition.
(3) Measuring fructose yield under optimum conditions for productivity. The
staff and instrumentation are more than adequate and funding is recommended.