* 8660933
* Non-Contact Pencil Probe for Advanced Manufacturing         Inspection
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1987
* Steven Case, CyberOptics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1987
* USD 39,446.00

This proposal is aimed at the ultimate development of a high accuracy,
miniature probe capable of inspecting manufactured parts with complex
geometries. A novel laser based, non-contact inspection technique will be
employed and the device is called a non-contact pencil probe because of its
planned shape and size. The optical system is divided into two subsystems; these
are illumination and viewing subsystems. A triangulation method will be used.
Conventional optical components are not well suited for the pencil probe because
of their large relative size. Radically different optical techniques are
required to reach the proposed goals. The use of graded index (GRIN) lenses is
planned. The GRIN lenses behave optically like conventional lenses but have
constant thickness with varied index of refraction instead of the conventional
constant index of refraction with varied thickness. GRIN lenses can be obtained
in small diameter sizes. The illumination and viewing optics of the proposed
device will consist of long narrow GRIN rod lenses. A laser diode will be used
as the illumination source and a detector array or a lateral effect photodiode
as the detector. The Phase I research plan is to design and build a prototype
device and experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of the non-contact pencil
probe. A Phase II is planned which will modify and optimize the pencil probe to
meet the largest number of inspection needs. If this research is successful,
Phase III will obtain funding to commercialize this device. The pencil probe
should increase inspection capabilities and lead to improved quality.
Application would be to inspection of complex geometries, such as profiling
turbine blades, detailing piston ring grooves, viewing parts hidden from
external view, and looking at threads within a hole.