* 8660757
* Electroimpact Robot End Effector
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1987
* Peter Zieve, Electroimpact Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1987
* USD 39,996.00

This proposal will develop design rules and database for use of "electroimpact"
technology in conjunction with a robot end effector (gripper). The Electroimpact
Tool is powered by the phenomenon of eddy current repulsion. Recoilless
operation is achieved by transferring the eddy current reaction force into a
movable recoil mass which imparts a impulse force at the point of contact. The
low recoil and powerful output force pulse of the device could broaden the
functional range of robots, which currently have low payload capacity. Functions
such as metal forming, punching, shearing, dimpling, chipping, anchor setting
and interference fit assembly potentially could be performed. The device should
be economical, compact and safe making this a practical technology for robots.
The capabilities must be determined in performing a range of job functions in
view of the accuracy, load and dynamic limitations of current industrial robot
technology. The Phase I plan is to design a prototype Electroimpact End Effector
based on magnetodynamic simulation, construct the prototype and test it on a
specific robot to confirm the validity of the design rules. The research result
should be a design model which is expected to be the basis for extension to
other robots in follow-on research. Plans also include commercialization. With
the assistance of this device an end effector on a robot could press, punch,
form, anchor set, and shear with a force pulsing two orders of magnitude greater
than the payload capacity of the robot. This should vastly broaden the
functional range of robots, and hence contribute to increased productivity.