* 8660485
* Lumen-Day: A New Concept for Daylighting Design in          Commercial Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1987
* Claude Robbins, Architectural Energy Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1987
* USD 35,737.00

Building energy use is approximately 38 percent of the total primary energy
consumed in the United States. Opportunities exist to reduce energy consumption
in existing buildings by 50 percent and in new buildings by 75 percent or more
through the careful application of conservation and passive solar energy
measures. This level of improvement in energy efficiency can be achieved only by
taking advantage of innovative materials, products and design ccncepts and by
fully integrating energy ccnsiderations into the architectural and engineering
design process. The proposed project will develop a new daylighting design
method based on a "Lumen-Day" concept. The essence of the Lumen-Day method is a
statistical climatic data base, similar in concept to the heating and cooling
degree-day method of energy analysis, generated through the interrogation and
analysis of TMY/TRY weather tapes. The Lumen-Day data base would be a
statistical summary of the daylight rescurce and would be used to evaluate the
energy implications of daylighting use in buildings for a given interior light
level and electric lighting control strategy. Using the proposed method, a
building designer could readily determine the daylighting performance efficiency
as well as the lighting energy use of the building design. Currently,
daylighting design analysis is constrained by the need for cumbersome hourly
simulations or physical model testing. The proposed Lumen-Day method provides
simple design guidelines and an energy analysis procedure to efficiently
determine the potential and energy savings of daylighting in commercial
buildings. The Principal Investigator has excellent qualificaticns to conduct
this project. There is potential commercial applications of the research: (1) As
a design tool used by architects and engineers, (2) As an analysis tool used by
electric utility planners, and (3) As one component of an integrated computer-
aid design program. An award is recommended for Phase I.