* 8660931
* Automated Fabrication of Net Shape Microcrystalline and     Composite Metal Structures Without Molds
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1987
* David Hauber, ADC Acquisition Company
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1987
* USD 40,000.00

This proposal involves the development of a new technique for the generation of
complex three-dimensional structures directly from a CAD/CAM database without
the need for molds or subsequent machining. The innovation will use
independently targeted particles of molten metal or composite metal to build
structures under computer control in much the same manner that an ink-jet
printer produces images. The structure would be constructed by "writing"
multiple cross sections. Cohesion between particles would be provided by cold
welding or rapid solidification. Cemented carbides, stainless steels and
aluminum-based eutectic alloys appear best suited for use in this method. The
basic innovation has two major subsections: the material injection system and
the material delivery system. The Phase I research will study various means of
accomplishing the two major subsections, the appropriate materials to use, the
material properties to be imparted, and the applications to be addressed.
Mathematical models of the various components will be developed to gain a
quantitative understanding of the process parameters and interaction between the
individual components. The results should provide theoretical groundwork and a
clearly defined approach for follow-on research. Follow-on research plans
include developing a complete engineering design of the system and construction
of a working prototype. This research should lead to a method to generate net
shape parts with unique properties directly from a CAD/CAM database. Application
should be to various industries including aerospace, electronics and machine
tools. Method should result in decreased lead time and increased productivity.
*** 8707870 Tsach This proposal will investigate a novel robot hand which
utilizes rubber fingers which bend to grasp an object when their internal
pressure is elevated. The bending of the fingers is accomplished by employing
non-uniform wall thickness in the fingers, and the bending mechanism is
controlled by a single variable (the internal pressure). Using rubber actuators
(fingers) drastically reduces the number of control variables of the artificial
fingers without restricting its maneuverability. The novel robot hand should be
capable of gripping objects of various shapes and sizes, applying various
grasping modes, modifying the compliance of the grip, and performing limited
object manipulations. Preliminary work has shown this approach to be attractive.
The proposed research will investigate a design to enable the base angle of each
finger to be controlled independently which should significantly enhance the
object manipulation capabilities of the hand. The incorporation of tactile
sensing to control the contact forces and gripping compliance will also be
investigated. This work is needed to determine the feasibility of these two
tasks, which, if successful, can lead to development of a versatile, multiple
grasping robotic hand. This novel robot hand should be a far less complex
mechanism than other current approaches, and hence should contribute to improved
production efficiency.