* 8660733
* Multi-Robot Control for Flexible Manufacturing Systems
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1987
* Oded Maimon, Knowledge Systems Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1987
* USD 39,957.00

The proposed work would result in the development of a supervisory control
system for flexible manufacturing systems (FMS) in general, and cooperating
multi-robot systems in particular. The system, to be referred to as an Activity
Controller (AC), will be organized in a hierarchical structure where the levels
of the hierarchy correspond to the different decision types necessary to control
an FMS. As the decisions narrow from plant level to machine level, both decision
detail and communication rate increase, the latter from hours to milliseconds.
In the AC hierarchy, the real time status of the FMS is taken into account at
each level. The highest level organizes FMS components to meet short-term
production requirements and the lowest level issues commands to a robot
controller. The work for Phase I focuses on the lower level of the AC, where the
task is to assure conflict-free operation of the system. The lower level is
emphasized in this work because it is the fundamental building block for system
integration. Current solutions for conflict avoidance are ad hoc and demand
prolonged development time. In Phase I a general methodology for conflict
detection and avoidance will be developed and an efficient AC will be generated.
Interfaces to both lower (robot) and upper (production) levels will be
considered. This research should contribute important new knowledge for
development of FMS, and funding is recommended.