* 8660579
* Development of Extended-Throat Venturimeter for On-Line     Measurement of Gas-Solid Flows
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1987,07/31/1987
* Samuel Bernstein, Energy International Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1987
* USD 42,637.00

In development of coal-based energy systems, there is an acute need for
instrumentation capable of measuring flow rates of solids and gas in gas-solid
suspensions under high temperature (up to 1700oF) and high pressure (up to 100
atm) conditions. Several instrumentation concepts have been or are currently
under study (i.e., sonic Doppler meters, correlation meters, capacitive
transducers, Coriolis-effect meters, and laser-based devices). Many show some
promise, although they are quite complex, and others require considerably more
development or will be restricted to use only in limited flow conditions. This
proposal represents a plan for investigation and development of an innovative
gas-solids flow meter currently under development at Energy International, Inc.,
in cooperation with Washington State University. Preliminary technical and
system studies conducted have shown that extending the throat of a typical
venturimeter will improve the sensitivity of the device. Further experiments and
analysis have shown that the extended-throat venturimeter will be capable of
measuring flow rates for both the solids and gas phases without requiring
particle size information. The principal investigators are well qualified to
conduct this research, and a grant is highly recommended. This is for Phase I of
the Small Business Innovation Program Solicitation, NSF 86-19.