* 8660664
* Laser Assisted Cladding of Refractory Materials
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1987,09/30/1987
* R. Dennis Creehan, Physical Sciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1987
* USD 39,957.00

This proposal is to investigate a laser-assisted, thermomechanical process for
cladding of high melting refractory metals on low melting substrates without
melting or damaging the underlying substrates. This unique process fuses the
clad material to the substrate without gross melting of the clad layer and
substrate. Careful control of laser parameters is required to produce proper
thermal coupling for metallurgical bonding (fusion) of the clad layer with the
substrate material without thermally damaging or melting the substrate. An
analytical thermal model will be employed to establish the necessary laser
parameter requirements. In the proposed process, refractory metal foils will be
metallurgically bonded to steel substrates by bringing the foil into thermal
contact with the substrate alloy and using a scanning laser beam to heat the
foil and substrate to the alloy eutectic temperature. When the interface between
the foil and substrate reaches this temperature, a eutectic liquid will form
which will subsequently resolidify after passage of the scanning laser beam and
form a metallurgical bond between the foil and substrate material. Spring-loaded
rollers will be used to hold the foil in place and a protective gas shroud will
be employed to prevent oxidation of the clad layer during the laser treatment.
Post cladding treatments consisting of carburizing and oxidizing furnace
treatments will be investigated to demonstrate the ability to produce refractory
metal carbides and oxides on the clad surface, which should have application
where high temperature oxidation and wear resistance is required. The post
cladding treatment is necessary because currently it is not possible to clad
ceramics by direct fusion with a laser. In this Phase I research the plan is to
produce clads of a variety of refractory metals on ferrous substrates under
laser parameters established by the thermal model, perform tests to evaluate the
integrity of the bond, perform post cladding carburizing and oxidation
treatments and evaluate the oxidation behavior and wear resistance of these
surfaces, and compare the results to those of a conventional fusion-cladding
process. A Phase II is planned which will investigate specific applications of
interest to potential Phase III sponsors. If the research is successful, Phase
III will investigate commercialization of this process. This process has the
potential to produce clads of high melting refractory metal alloys, carbides and
oxides on low melting point substrates without significant melting or thermal
damage to the underlying substrate material. The proposed process provides for
cladding of large surface areas at twice the coverage rate of conventional
fusion-cladding processes. The process has potential for use in conventional
industrial and advanced aerospace applications, such as advanced turbine
components, rocket nozzles, high temperature combustion systems, and chemical
process industry systems.