* 8660624
* Feasibility Research on a Novel Rock Drill Concept
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1987,11/30/1987
* Mohamed Hashish, QI2
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 11/30/1987
* USD 39,689.00

Drilling holes in hard rock for excavation and mining construction is generally
carried out with rotary percussion drills. While advances have been made in
percussion drilling in the past twenty years including tungsten carbide inserts,
hydraulic actuation and water jet process is till classified as slow and
expensive. New concepts of drilling with high pressure water jets containing
abrasives have shown considerable promise and could significantly improve
productivity in rock drilling. The research program will involve the design,
fabrication and testing of a novel abrasive/water jet drill capable of drilling
in hard rock at high speed with no moving mechanical components. The design
incorporates a drill head with a high pressure nozzle to form a water jet.
Abrasives are fed into the jet in the spreader section after the high velocity
jet has been formed. The design and fabricaiton of the drillhead will be
evaluated to determine the drilling parameters including water pressure, water
flow rate, abrasive type, abrasive flow rate, abrasive size and stand-off
distance for different penetration rates. Flow Industries have extensive
experience in developing abrasive water jet cutting systems for a variety of
industrial applications including turning, milling, cutting and surface
finishing. The principal investigator has over 15 years experience with water
jets and is a leading authority in the field. We anticipate a successful
development which could lead to major cost reduction in hard rock drilling
operation on an international scale. An award is recommended. 8612876 RUDNICKI
This is a cooperative research with the Department of Energy (DOE). DOE provides
the facility and technical personnel to perform experimental verfication for the
analysis on shear localization of geo-materials. The research applies recent
solid mechanics advances to understand shear localization behavior and develope
a verified approach to predict the stability of geo-materials such as rock and
concrete structures. The main goal of this work is to understand the physical
process of strain localization in geo-materials and provide a theoretical
framework for the extrapolation of laboratory observations to applications. The
research performs comprehensive studies on shear localization in rocks and other
geo-materials that exhibit sensitivity of inelastic deformation and inelastic
volume change. The studies combine theoretical analyses with computational and
experimental work. Improved constitutive relations for multiaxial and inelastic
deformation will be formulated and a framework will be developed for the use of
constitutive models in numerical codes. Specifically, shear rupture in pressure-
sensitive and inelastically compressible solids will be investigated based on
models involving bifurcation from homogeneous deformation. The investigations of
localization will then be use with experimental observations and numerical
calculations to study the performance of inelastic constitutive relations for
multiaxial deformation of geo-structures. The Principal Investigator is a leader
in this area of mechanics research applied to strain localization. This
cooperative research is cost effective and addresses a critical problem in Solid
and Geomechanics research.