* 2100568
* GOALI: Scalable Single-Step Manufacturing of High-Performance Titanium Sheet Metal Alloys by Shear-Based Deformation Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* James Mann, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 02/29/2024
* USD 360,510.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
research leading to new knowledge related to the manufacturing of metals, that
will advance the science base of manufacturing and provide competitive
technological benefits for the national economy. The process is directed at the
formation of specialty metal sheet and foil that is needed in applications
within the aerospace, energy systems, ground transportation and biomedical
sectors. Currently, the majority of metal sheet is produced by rolling processes
which, despite having attractive benefits, also have important limitations
pertaining to control of properties, cost, infrastructure and energy. The shear-
based deformation processing approach utilizes variants of machining-based
processes to create metal sheet and foil in a single step from bulk ingot, while
employing a compact manufacturing systems infrastructure. The metal sheet will
have superior mechanical properties, because of unique process capability to
control deformation parameters. Furthermore, the machining-based processing
offers important economic benefits compared to current sheet-production
technology in terms of cost and energy usage. The process will be particularly
suited for production of sheet from specialty alloys like titanium, magnesium
and aluminum, which are of interest for high-performance and/or lightweighting
applications in critical industry and defense sectors. This interdisciplinary
research requires participation of manufacturing, materials engineering and
systems science. The multi-disciplinary approach will also contribute to
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in research, and
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
establish the capability of the machining-based processing for commercial sheet
production, the university-industry team is addressing three closely related
technical objectives using titanium alloys as a model material system. Firstly,
process deformation fields will be analyzed using in situ high-speed imaging,
complemented by force/energy analysis. Secondly, sheet metal properties will be
characterized through quantitative microstructure and crystallographic texture
analyses; and strength and formability measurements. New shear-based textures,
combined with fine-grained microstructures, are of particular interest.
Correlations will be established between deformation fields, microstructure and
properties in the form of a process map. Thirdly, building on the process
mapping, process scaling and systems analysis (quality, cost, energy, equipment
design) will be used to produce sheet with enhanced mechanical properties and
commercial quality. The envisaged outcome is new process capability for
producing commercial titanium alloy sheet at less than 1/10 the cost of current
state-of-the-art processing, with future extension to other advanced material
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.