* 2100855
* Excellence in Research: Human Centered Visual Analytics for Evidence Based Decision Making in Hunger Relief
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Steven Jiang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 12/31/2024
* USD 416,000.00

Food insecurity defined as the uncertain or limited access to safe and
nutritious food for an active, healthy life is a growing problem in the United
States. Nonprofit hunger relief organizations, such as food banks, play a
significant role in providing safe and nutritious food to people who experience
food insecurity. Hunger relief operations rely on evidence based decisions and
they lack scientifically-based validated tools and resources that can assist
their decision making. This project integrates the computing power of data
analytics with human factors to improve evidence based decision making that
impacts food insecurity and hunger relief operations. This project has
substantial benefits to society. The ability to provide evidence based decisions
through interactive visualization that combines analytical power and human
reasoning will empower food banks to have better understanding of all aspects of
food bank operations including behaviors of donors and partner agencies, demand
and supply, and therefore, allow them to make informed decisions to help the
people in need. This project will enable hunger relief organizations to satisfy
greater demand by more efficiently allocating available resources, thus
impacting human life. The nature of this project has the potential to increase
participation of underrepresented minority students to conduct research in the
application of engineering to problems with societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on improving the way hunger relief
organizations interact with information and develop a systematic approach that
is human centered and accounts for human cognitive limitations to provide
interactive visual analytics toolkits that are accessible, interpretable, and
readily implementable, and are tailored to hunger relief operations. This
project will significantly contribute to the knowledge base with regard to data
analytics and visualization of in-kind donations and food need, which is an
important but understudied topic. This project will provide a framework for how
big data can be synthesized and visualized that is truly human centered in the
hunger relief sector and transform the way the operations of these organizations
interact with information and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their
decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.