* 2100513
* Cracking the Mystery of Polyelectrolyte Coacervate Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,232.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolyte complexes are
a mixture of two kinds of electrically charged, long polymer molecules, of
opposite charge. Their opposite charge causes the two kinds of polyelectrolytes,
which can be very different from each other, to nevertheless attract each other
and form an intimate mixture, or complex. An important example of a
polyelectrolyte complex is the chromosome, which contains DNA, which is a
negatively charged polymer and hence repels itself. Nature therefore uses
positively charged proteins to bind to the DNA and bundle it into the compact
shape of the chromosome. Among the many other examples of polyelectrolyte
complexes are biological membranes, underwater adhesives, drug delivery
vehicles, and food processing agents. Despite their importance and the growing
interest in them for advanced applications, basic understanding of how to
control their structure and mechanical properties remains undeveloped. The
proposed work focuses on measurements of the mechanical properties of these
complexes, such as their viscosity and stiffness, and computer simulations to
determine how these properties are controlled by the composition, including the
polyelectrolytes, salts, and pH. Understanding the relationship between the
composition and mechanical properties will provide deep insight into why
complexes have the properties they do, and how to design these properties for
future applications. There may also be connections to biological function, which
are affected by the micro-mechanical properties of these complexes. The research
will be integrated with education of graduate and undergraduate students,
outreach, and creation of software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his group will measure the
linear rheology of polyelectrolyte coacervates of widely varying composition and
containing different salts, and seek to test time-temperature, time-salt, time-
hydration, and time-pH superpositions that allow data to be collapsed onto
approximate “master curves.” Specifically, they will measure the linear
rheological properties of polycations poly(N,N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate)
and poly(diallyldimethylammonium) with polyanions poly(acrylic acid) and
poly(styrene sulfonate), and with salt ions Na+ or K+, and Cl- or Br-. They will
explore the surprising differences and anomalies among coacervates, depending on
the polyelectrolytes, salts, and the chain lengths used, including an asymmetry
in relaxation time produced by changing the molecular weight of polyanion vs.
polycation, anomalous dependence of viscosity on degree of polymerization, and a
low-frequency plateau modulus for some, but not all, coacervates. The systematic
approach will provide a comprehensive understanding of the key determinants of
rheological behaviour and overcome the limitations of existing data sets. They
will also carry out molecular dynamics simulations to determine the nature of
the local interactions among polyelectrolytes and salt ions that determine the
rates of relaxation. This will be done in part through development of novel time
correlation functions to determine whether local monomer diffusion is governed
by ion-pairing dynamics, or by collective “glassy” dynamics, or some mixture of
the two.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.