* 2100504
* High-Temperature Ultra-Wide Bandgap Gallium Oxide Power Module
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Yuhao Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 04/30/2024
* USD 368,711.00

This NSF project aims to address the knowledge gaps and challenges that are
presently limiting the advancement of high-temperature, high-density power
electronics. High-temperature power electronics can increase the power density
of transportation systems by reducing the size and weight of the cooling system,
and enabling the power converter to be placed in strategic locations with high
ambient temperatures, such as in close proximity to the engine or motor.
However, higher temperatures degrade the performance and reliability of present
power electronics components. This project aims to overcome these challenges and
develop a high-temperature gallium oxide power module. Gallium oxide is an
ultra-wide-bandgap semiconductor that is emerging as a viable candidate for
high-temperature power electronics due to its advantageous material properties.
The intellectual merits of the project include understanding of semiconductor
device and package electro-thermal interactions, solutions for high-temperature
package encapsulants and semiconductor device gate dielectrics, and strategies
for thermal management. The broader impacts of the project include insight into
the possibilities and challenges for gallium-oxide-based power electronics, and
advancements in high-temperature packaging, which could allow for more-efficient
and higher-density electric transportation and harsh-environment systems. Other
broader impacts of the project include undergraduate and graduate education on
power electronics packaging and ultra-wide-bandgap semiconductors, and diversity
and inclusion activities, such as hands-on workshops, laboratory tours, and
demonstrations for women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme temperatures challenge the limits of
silicon power semiconductors, and diminish the performance benefits of wide-
bandgap devices. While gallium oxide is a promising alternative due to its
superior thermal stability, it has low thermal conductivity, which creates
additional challenges for the package and thermal management system. Another
major challenge is the reliability of the power electronics package under high
temperature conditions. In particular, a key limitation for high-temperature
power modules is the encapsulation. The encapsulation provides essential
electrical insulation, as well as corrosion resistance and protection.
Traditional polymeric encapsulants degrade rapidly at elevated temperatures.
This work aims to overcome these challenges through four main research goals: 1)
to develop an electro-thermal, device-package co-design framework that will
enable physical insights into the device-package interdependencies, and
accelerate the design of power modules optimized for emerging power
semiconductor devices; 2) to evaluate and apply new dielectric materials for use
as the high-temperature power module encapsulant, and as the gate dielectric and
passivation for the gallium oxide power device; 3) to explore innovative heat
dissipation strategies at the device and package levels for improved thermal
performance of gallium-oxide-based power modules; and 4) to demonstrate a high-
temperature gallium oxide power module, and assess its electrical, thermal, and
reliability characteristics. The knowledge gained from this work will illuminate
the potential of gallium oxide power devices, and enable significant
improvements in high-temperature packaging, which could facilitate major
advancements in electric transportation and harsh environment
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.