* 2100780
* Research Initiation Award : Investigation of Petrographic and Mineralogical Properties of Aggregates Influencing Pavement Performance
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Maziar Moaveni, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,817.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Savannah State University will support research to develop machine
learning models that will be used as an aggregate quality classification tool by
highway agencies. The project will also develop an undergraduate research
program that will prepare undergraduate students for careers in transportation
geotechnics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to analyze
and catalogue physical, mineralogical, and chemical properties of representative
coarse aggregates used by different U.S. State Departments of Transportation
(DOTs) in pavement construction and to identify possible relationships within
those properties and pavement performance using Machine Learning (ML) approach.
Chemical, physical shape, and petrographic properties especially grain size and
composition of the minerals will be correlated to determine what influence, if
any, one property might have on another to developed ML based prediction models.
Those petrographic characteristics with the significant correlations with shape
properties will be considered the most useful predictive properties. This
comprehensive study of the fundamental properties of aggregates will help to
better understand material quality related aggregate type and selection factors
and how they affect pavement performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.