* 2100029
* Crisis as Catalyst for Change and Innovationâ€”Targeted Research on Institutional Response and Enduring Impacts on Advanced Technological Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Xueli Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 05/31/2024
* USD 958,811.00

This project will investigate changes and innovations in technician education
that were implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Over three years,
the mixed-methods research project will analyze all 16 technical colleges within
the Wisconsin Technical College System. The analysis will include perspectives
and decisions at multiple scales from the statewide system to the two-year
technical colleges in the system, and the institutional leaders and faculty in
those colleges. The research is expected to provide a comprehensive picture of
the scope and types of changes spurred by COVID-19. Results of the research may
expand both theoretical and practical knowledge about how technical education
programs respond to a crisis. This knowledge may also identify areas of
innovation in which two-year institutions lead the way, as well as identify ways
to better support vulnerable student populations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Informed by disruptive adaptation theory (McGee, 2012) and the multi-
faceted framework for understanding change (Kezar, 2018), this research study
addresses five questions about how the system, its colleges, and college leaders
and faculty: (a) engage with and address the influx of disruptions, changes, and
innovations during the pandemic; (b) view the immediate and future impact of the
disruptions, changes, and innovations on advanced technological education,
particularly on key stakeholders and vulnerable students; and (c) inform a model
for cultivating a diverse, skilled technician workforce in advanced
technological education. Deductively and inductively derived topic areas, text
mining algorithms, and social network analysis will comprise the quantitative
strand of the project. The social network analysis will capture large patterns
that depict simultaneous links among the type and timing of innovations, and
whom the innovations served across programs and institutions. In addition, the
research team will gather qualitative data from in-depth case studies to further
develop an understanding of how institutions adapt to disruptive events and
create innovative approaches to address them. Research findings will be
integrated toward meta-inference and model building that may provide new
insights into institutional change and instruction. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.