* 2100382
* Building Southeastern Pennsylvania's Advanced Technical Workforce in Gene and Cell Therapy
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Margaret Bryans, Montgomery County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 573,347.00

The number of Southeastern Pennsylvania companies that develop and manufacture
gene therapies and cell therapies has increased. As a result, a regional need
exists for highly skilled technicians in these fields, especially in the
commercial manufacturing area. This project aims to address this need by
increasing the number of graduates from local community colleges who enter this
advanced therapy field. Montgomery County Community College (MCCC) is the lead
institution in the Northeast Biomanufacturing Center and Collaborative. It has
an extensive track record in developing and disseminating curriculum for
biopharmaceutical bioprocessing technician education. In this project, MCCC will
work with local industry partners to determine skills and competencies needed in
the advanced therapy technical workforce, develop curriculum in cell and gene
therapy manufacturing, and facilitate adoption of the curriculum at local two-
year colleges. The new curriculum will provide students with a strong foundation
in the skills and knowledge for developing, manufacturing, and testing these
advanced therapies, as well as hands-on experience with industry-relevant
bioprocessing equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will assess the
competencies, skills, and curriculum needs of local biotechnology programs at
two-year institutions, provide mentorship for enhancing or building new courses
where needed, provide educators with professional development relevant to the
new curriculum, and connect them to local industry. Students from communities
that are underrepresented in the biomanufacturing sector, including students of
color and/or first-generation college students, will have increased access to
successful bioprocessing careers, as the project builds a pipeline from high
school to community college to the advanced therapy workforce. Project aims
include: (1) improving student education and training by developing and
disseminating a local industry-endorsed advanced therapy curriculum; (2)
promoting and facilitating adoption of new curriculum at local community
colleges through mentorship, industry engagement, and professional development;
and (3) increasing awareness of the biomedical/bioprocessing career path among
high school students, with emphasis on inclusion of underrepresented
populations. The project will build upon the work of the Northeast
Biomanufacturing Center and Collaborative and its current open-source curriculum
modules on biologic bioprocessing, adding new industry-guided curriculum based
on required skills and knowledge for the advanced manufacturing workforce for
the cell and gene therapy industry. Developing this skilled workforce is key for
the Greater Philadelphia region to become an advanced therapy manufacturing hub,
a possibility with significant positive economic impacts. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nationâ€™s
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.