* 2100753
* BSF-NSF: Collaborative Research: Deciphering the role of extreme rainstorms and hydroclimatic regime on arid escarpment retreat and sub-cliff slope evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Joel Pederson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2024
* USD 54,441.00

Desert scenery often includes lines of cliffs draped with boulders and debris,
presenting obstacles to hikers and highway engineers alike. Although it may not
be obvious to the casual motorist, such desert cliffs, or escarpments, contain
clues about the changing environment. For example, aprons of debris shed from
cliffs during landslides and storms tell a story of past changes in rainfall and
temperature, extending back thousands of years in the past. Until recently, it
had only been possible to read that story in its broadest outlines. Today, new
data and technologies are making it possible to decipher the story much more
clearly. Using detailed terrain maps obtained from airborne laser surveys,
together with rainfall records, new methods for dating sedimentary features, and
computer simulations, this binational US-Israel project sets out to understand
how rainfall shapes desert landforms over the long term, and to provide insight
into how environmental changes might translate into hazards to people and
adjacent infrastructure in the short term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent
National Academy report highlighted an understanding of causes and consequences
of topographic change as a top-priority research item. To this end, arid-region
escarpments provide natural laboratories in which to study connections between
precipitation and landforms, both because deserts minimize the confounding
influence of vegetation and because their distinctive landforms are thought to
reflect past changes in rainfall. This project tests the hypothesis that
landforms associated with desert cliff retreat bear signatures of rainfall
magnitude-frequency relationships. The project leverages three sites in the USA
and Israel that span a gradient in hydroclimatic regime from hyperarid to arid,
with systematically varying rainstorm properties. Analysis of high temporal
resolution rainfall data (radar and gauges), lidar topography, geochronology,
and field experiments in the Colorado Plateau (US) and the Negev Desert (Israel)
will inform a suite of numerical experiments using a landscape evolution model.
The impacts of heterogenous space-time rainstorm characteristics on escarpment
retreat will be assessed, and new methods to upscale rainstorm variability to
landscape evolution timescales will be developed. Numerical models and data
tools for this project will be developed as new components in Landlab Toolkit,
an open-source simulation software library, expanding their utility to the
broader scientific community. Analyses and results from this project will also
provide materials for two new learning modules for the Utah State University
Native American STEM Mentorship Project, which provides gateway research
experiences for freshman-level Native American
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.