* 2100418
* Adopting the STEM Guitar Curriculum to Prepare Students in American Samoa for Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Shirley De La Rosa, American Samoa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,791.00

American Samoa, located 10,000 miles from the United States mainland, is the
only US Territory in the South Pacific Ocean. American Samoa Community College
is the only college on the island. With this award, the College will establish
the Technician Education Readiness Pathway to meet the critical need for a
skilled technical workforce. Nearly all students entering American Samoa
Community College require remediation in mathematics and reading, which bars
them from enrolling in the existing Technician Education programs. Currently,
less than 5% of high school teachers are rated as ‘highly qualified’ in these
subject areas. The Technician Education Readiness Pathway will adopt the STEM
Guitar Building curriculum to enhance education in applied math, as well as
technical reading and writing. This curriculum builds on the strong cultural
connection that music plays in everyday life in American Samoa, thus providing
additional motivation for students and teachers in the technician education
pathway. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to (1) improve
student knowledge in STEM concepts, (2) increase the number of students eligible
to enroll in Technician Education programs, and (3) prepare students for
industry recognized certification exams. The Technician Education Readiness
Pathway will establish a partnership between the STEM faculty of American Samoa
Community College and teachers from Nu’uli Vocational Technical High School. The
partnership will provide professional development for 20 educators on the Guitar
Building curriculum, which will include training in AutoCAD and a laser cutting
system. The trained faculty and teachers will then work with at least 100
students over three years to integrate STEM learning with guitar building as
they prepare to enroll in the Technician Education programs. Students that enter
without the need for remedial coursework will be able to quickly earn a STEM
certificate or degree, making them eligible for employment in the STEM
workforce. American Samoa Community College will establish an advisory board
that includes the American Samoa Power authority to gain industry feedback, and
the Oceania Community Development Network to broadly disseminate the program’s
successes. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.