* 2100138
* Collaborative Research: Learning Preferences and Domain Differences in Design Fixation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Gero, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 364,261.00

Learning to design in formal engineering and design education often involves the
study of existing designs as examples. Research has shown that the use of
pictorial examples during the presentation of design problems can support the
learning of engineering principles and design constraints. But it can also bias
designers and engineering design students toward replicating the examples they
were shown, even in the presence of explicit instructions not to do so, rather
than seeking innovative alternative solutions. This phenomenon is known as
design fixation—the tendency to adhere to elements of prior ideas or solutions
to a problem. Design fixation is a significant barrier to the generation of new
design ideas and creative problem solving. Intriguingly, preliminary research on
engineering education has suggested there is a disciplinary difference in the
tendency to show design fixation to pictorial examples, such that industrial
designers are markedly less likely to fixate than are mechanical engineers. The
goal of this project, a collaboration between cognitive neuroscience researchers
at Drexel University and design scientists at the University of North Carolina,
is to focus on this difference as a means of understanding the cognitive and
neural processes underlying design fixation. The driving hypothesis is that, as
a result of their training, mechanical engineering students are more likely to
fixate because they are less apt to draw on abstract principles. The studies
will involve a combination of behavioral and brain imaging studies of first year
and fourth year undergraduate students in different design disciplines. The
results of this project will have the potential to generalize across much of
STEM education by informing the development of curricula to ward off design
fixation. This award is made by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on the research literature in cognitive
science, cognitive neuroscience, engineering education, and design science, this
project will examine the premise that there are differences between
undergraduate industrial design and mechanical engineering students in their
tendencies to show design fixation and that these differences are arise from
instruction that emphasizes the of abstraction (rule-based) learning in the
former discipline and exemplar-based learning in the latter. The project will
examine whether differences between students during concept building, captured
by both behavioral and neural measures, can predict design fixation patterns.
The researchers will collect multimodal data from first year and senior
industrial design and mechanical engineering students on a design fixation task
and a control design task. They will quantify design fixation behaviorally
through (a) the coding of sketches according to an established design
categorization scheme, and (b) the coding of verbal protocols with the
established Function-Behavior-Structure (FBS) ontology for design. The FBS
ontology segmentation and coding of verbal protocols will then be used in a
novel attempt to analyze neural responses during the design fixation and control
tasks. The behavioral and neural differences in learning tendencies – rule-based
and exemplar based – between students in the two disciplines will then be used
to predict behavioral and neural differences in design fixation. Ultimately, the
investigators aim to put forth a mechanistic account of design fixation,
grounded in cognitive neuroscience and design theory and practice, that will
inform the development of instructional interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.