* 2100370
* Developing a Biotechnology Degree Program to Train Skilled Biotechnicians in Chicago
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Clifford Wilson, City Colleges of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 348,585.00

This project aims to help fill the growing demand for biotechnicians in the
Chicago area. Biotechnology has industrial applications that range from
agriculture to manufacturing. It is also a crucial tool in the basic research
development needed for such applications. The demand for biotechnicians is
growing across the nation and these jobs pay higher than average wages.
Regardless of its specific uses, the work of biotechnology involves common
laboratory equipment, techniques, and regulatory record keeping. As a result,
trained biotechnicians can readily transfer across different application areas,
for example from basic research to biofuel manufacturing. As in many other STEM
fields, the biotechnology workforce lacks diversity. However, a diverse
workforce is an asset that can improve problem-solving and innovation.
Consequently, in addition to increasing the number of trained biotechnicians,
this project also focuses on broadening participation in
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by Kennedy King College,
a primarily Black institution in one of the most impoverished urban areas of
Chicago. The project’s major goal is to develop a new associate degree program
in Biotechnology. This degree program will enable students to gain biotechnology
skills that are needed by regional industries. To this end, the project team
will work with an industry advisory council to adapt and update existing courses
to better align with industry standards. This advisory council will also help
faculty remain current about industry needs, as well as provide students with
internship opportunities. Research shows that course-based undergraduate
research experiences can improve scientific thinking, scientific identity, and
problem-solving skills. Therefore, the project team will develop a course-based
undergraduate research experience in General Biology, a foundational course in
the biotechnology program. Active learning pedagogies will be incorporated into
courses within the program. The project team will also partner with local high
school advisors to develop a biotechnology career pathway map and advisory tools
to increase high school student interest in biotechnology. In addition, Kennedy
King College will host an annual Biotechnology Career Day for high school
students. To help recruit students from communities that are not yet equitably
represented in biotechnology, the project team will establish a summer
biotechnology program for high school students. Results from project evaluation
will inform industry and education stakeholders about how to effectively modify
and expand an existing foundation to decrease the time and expense needed to
fully deploy a new degree. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.