* 2100114
* Attracting the Next Generation Cybersecurity Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Shamsi Moussavi, Massachusetts Bay Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 598,712.00

This project will address the well-documented need for skilled Cybersecurity
technicians in the MetroWest and Greater Boston regions of Massachusetts.
Moreover, the project team aims to increase the racial and gender diversity of
the overall Cybersecurity workforce that will satisfy those local workforce
demands. A replicable and sustainable educational ecosystem will be developed
that will recruit, retain, and graduate students in the Cybersecurity program at
MassBay Community College. Through collaborations with regional industry and
high school partners, the program will encourage high school students to pursue
degrees, and careers, in Cybersecurity. Retention efforts will ensure that
students majoring in Cybersecurity achieve a mastery of the knowledge and the
practical skills needed to meet industry expectations. Students will be provided
with mentoring, career advice and support, and internship opportunities to
ensure their success and entry into the Cybersecurity workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational experience provided by MassBay will be
based on the development of a "Cyber Range," which is an Internet-based computer
network platform that provides students with hands-on experience in
Cybersecurity. Exercises will be developed to give high school and college
students practical experiences in Cybersecurity. These exercises will be
developed in collaboration with industry partners, using their security
products, to provide students with real-world experiences in Cybersecurity. The
project's Cyber Range will be used to create workshop activities for high school
students, develop training materials to instruct and educate students to become
peer-mentors, and offer train-the trainer workshops to high school teachers and
MassBay faculty. High schools, youth serving organizations, and industry
partners will use the Cyber Range to host cyber competitions, hackathons,
mentoring, and internships to make students aware of and motivate them to pursue
degrees in Cybersecurity. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.