* 2100088
* Foundations of Moduli Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jarod Alper, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2024
* USD 196,850.00

This project investigates moduli spaces in algebraic geometry and allied fields.
Algebraic geometry studies the geometry of spaces defined by polynomial
equations. In addition to being one of the most ancient subjects in mathematics,
algebraic geometry is also at the forefront of research in modern mathematics.
Its abstract foundations are vital in the study of modern number theory,
algebraic topology, representation theory, and combinatorics. At the same time,
it provides powerful tools in applied mathematics, with applications including
cryptography, theory of computation, convex optimization, computer graphics,
statistics, and machine learning. This project aims to study one of the most
fundamental questions in algebraic geometry, namely classifying algebraic
varieties. A moduli space is itself an algebraic variety whose points are in
one-to-one correspondence with the algebraic varieties that are being
classified. Moduli spaces provide us with rich information about the geometric
objects being classified and moreover have deep applications in numerous other
fields of mathematics, both pure and applied. The research objectives are
twofold: to develop abstract foundational tools in moduli theory and then apply
these tools to study specific moduli spaces. This project will also involve the
training of graduate students in moduli theory
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has developed a new approach to
construct projective moduli spaces of objects with positive dimensional
automorphism groups. While the moduli space of stable curves classifies objects
with finite automorphism groups, there are many other moduli spaces of interest
that do not share this feature. Examples include the moduli of vector bundles or
sheaves, the moduli of Bridgeland semistable complexes, and the moduli of
K-semistable varieties. Recent developments have provided necessary and
sufficient conditions for an algebraic stack to admit a good moduli space in
characteristic 0. This result has already been applied to construct new
projective moduli spaces of Bridgeland semistable objects and K-semistable Fano
varieties. This approach rests on local structure theorems for algebraic stacks
which, at the moment, are limited to characteristic 0. This project aims to
extend these results to positive and mixed characteristics. At the same time,
the project aims to apply recent advances to study specific moduli spaces of
varieties such as modular descriptions of log canonical models of the moduli
space of curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.