* 2100017
* Collaborative Research: An Evidence-Based Approach Towards Technology Workforce Expansion by Increasing Female Participation in STEM Entrepreneurship
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Eckhardt, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 983,486.00

This is a collaborative project, with the University of Wisconsin-Madison as the
lead institution and the University of Maryland as the partnering institution,
to explore the entrepreneurial proclivity of undergraduate women majoring in
STEM fields. The researchers propose a multi-method approach led by an
interdisciplinary team to (1) identify factors that influence entrepreneurial
proclivity and (2) develop and test interventions related to closing gender
disparities in STEM entrepreneurship. The research includes the analysis of a
comprehensive administrative database to identify mechanisms for potential
interventions and field experiments to achieve greater gender parity in
entrepreneurial career choices for STEM students. Results of the field
experiments will be integrated with the database to produce outcome measures.
The project will produce empirical evidence to increase the understanding of
student entrepreneurship and inform interventions that improve entrepreneurship
participation for women in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will frame
the research design and methods using the Individual-Opportunity Nexus theory
that knowledge is a precursor to entrepreneurship. There are four hypotheses:
(1) Greater entrepreneurial proclivity will be found in women in STEM fields
with higher curriculum diversity, who have taken at least one business class,
who are enrolled in STEM courses with students with higher diversity in their
courses, and who are enrolled in STEM courses with students who have taken one
or more business classes. (2) Women STEM students demonstrate higher
entrepreneurial proclivity when they are exposed to relatable role models in
entrepreneurship. (3) Women STEM students demonstrate higher entrepreneurial
proclivity when entrepreneurship is presented as a gender-neutral field. (4)
Women STEM students demonstrate higher entrepreneurial proclivity when they are
exposed to entrepreneurial success stories. The researchers will make causal
inferences about factors that influence entrepreneurial proclivity of women in
STEM by measuring self-reported activities, analyzing administrative data, and
documenting student start-ups. The core of the project is based on data drawn
from a data infrastructure that combines administrative data with results of an
annual survey. The researchers will use those data to evaluate the mechanisms
that influence the underrepresentation of women in entrepreneurship. They will
augment the data infrastructure with a field experiment to test hypotheses
informed by existing literature and findings from their data analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-supported by the EHR Core Research
program that funds fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development and by the Science of Science BPINNOVATE
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.