* 2100112
* CAREER: MIMO-Based Blind Interference Cancellation for Wireless Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 08/16/2020,03/31/2024
* Huacheng Zeng, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 03/31/2024
* USD 533,830.00

Interference management is a central theme in the design of wireless
technologies and systems as evidenced by its evolution from interference
avoidance in 2G/3G networks to interference exploitation in 4G networks.
However, most of the existing interference management techniques are highly
inefficient and not amenable to practical implementation as they require
network-wide coordination as well as knowledge of interference characteristics.
It is therefore important to develop blind interference cancellation (BIC)
techniques that can tame unknown interference in uncoordinated networks. The
objective of the proposed research is to develop BIC techniques and use them to
advance networking solutions for 5G communications. Success of the proposed
research will not only improve spectrum utilization efficiency and flexibility
by enabling transparent spectrum sharing between uncoordinated networks, but
also reduce the costs of network deployment and maintenance through
infrastructure integration for heterogeneous networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there exist many sophisticated interference
management techniques, most of them are limited to cooperative networks where
the network nodes have knowledge of interference characteristics (e.g.,
waveform, frame format, and pilot signals). The goal of this project is to
develop BIC techniques that can tame unknown interference by leveraging recent
advances in Multiple-Input-Multiple-Output (MIMO) technology, and use the BIC
techniques to advance networking solutions for 5G communications. The proposed
research will be carried out through three inter-dependent research thrusts: (1)
develop a generic MIMO-based BIC framework that enables a wireless receiver to
decode its signal in the face of strong unknown interference; (2) develop a
transparent spectrum sharing scheme that allows uncoordinated networks to use
the same spectrum at the same time; and (3) integrate a small-cell base station
into a multi-antenna Wi-Fi access point (AP) to demonstrate the feasibility of
infrastructure sharing between heterogeneous networks (e.g., Wi-Fi and current
cellular). The research effort is inter-disciplinary, utilizing communications
theory, algorithm and protocol design, as well as cross-layer optimization. The
algorithms and protocols developed in this project are complemented by a system-
level prototyping and experimentation effort aimed at guaranteeing that the
technologies developed are suitable for deployment in real-world wireless
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.