* 2100754
* Helping Earth and Environmental Science Programs in Changing Times: Virtual Traveling Workshops and Expanding the Conversation about Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
* GEO,RISE
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Reginald Archer, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2023
* USD 59,858.00

All of education is transitioning to increased reliance on virtual formats.
Distance education pre-dates the internet but has had to accelerate to near-
ubiquity since the COVID-19 pandemic began. The pandemic has highlighted and
exacerbated inequities in the educational system, including access to virtual
learning opportunities. Educators are struggling with how to address these
inequities. NAGT gained experiential knowledge about virtual events when it held
the annual Earth Educatorsâ€™ Rendezvous virtually in July 2020 and two virtual
training workshops (TW) in September 2020. The proposed TW will explore
techniques for keeping participants engaged virtually and for facilitating
difficult conversations regarding root causes of inequality and
underrepresentation in the Earth and environmental sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training workshop (TW) will help TSU, NAGT and its
participating educators and educational institutions to strengthen STEM
education, transform Earth and environmental education and prepare a greater
diversity of students to consider jobs and careers connecting the Earth and
society --a great need in the U.S. workforce. Lack of diversity is a challenge
in the Earth and environmental sciences even more so than some other STEM
fields. Consideration of the racial and societal contexts of Earth education
leads to discussion of environmental justice and can help to attract students
from underrepresented populations into Earth and environmental fields. The
project goals are to expand access by converting TWs into an online format,
incorporating more focus on diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI), transform
workshop materials and websites, and prepare facilitators to conduct these
workshops. Each TW fully incorporates evaluation by the workshop participants
that will help to determine how techniques learned in the workshop are
incorporated into facilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.