* 2100509
* Collaborative Research: Illuminating the Cenozoic Alkenone pCO2 Record
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Pratigya Polissar, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 398,673.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will improve the
foundation of a widely used geologic proxy for atmospheric carbon dioxide. To
correctly predict the magnitude of future global warming from rising greenhouse
gas (GHG) concentrations, it is essential to understand the relationship between
GHGs – particularly carbon dioxide (CO2) – and Earth’s temperature. One way to
investigate this relationship is to examine how Earth’s temperature and CO2
levels have varied together in the past. Direct measurements of atmospheric CO2
extend back only to 1958, while measurements from bubbles of atmosphere trapped
in ice cores extend back to about 1 million years (Ma) ago. Any estimate of CO2
older than about 1 Ma requires the use of a proxy for CO2 concentrations. One
such proxy is based upon how ‘picky’ marine algae are about the two different
isotopes of carbon. When algae grow with high CO2 levels they mostly take up the
isotope carbon-12, and use less of the isotope carbon-13. When they grow with
low CO2 levels they take up relatively more carbon-13. However, recent findings
show that marine algae may also change how ‘picky’ they are due to other factors
besides CO2 levels. The primary goal of this project is to investigate how these
other factors affect the algal CO2 proxy through controlled laboratory
experiments and analysis of modern ocean sediments. These findings can then be
applied to ancient ocean sediments, in order to improve interpretations of
reconstructed CO2 levels in the past. This project will train a post-doctoral
investigator, a Ph.D. student, and two summer undergraduate
interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate reconstructions of past atmospheric pCO2
levels can improve predictions of future warming by providing geologic tests
during Earth conditions that were different from the short observational record.
An important proxy for CO2 concentrations during the past 55 million years is
the carbon isotopic composition of long-chain unsaturated ketones (alkenones)
from the Noelaerhabdaceae family of algae. The crucial assumptions of the
existing proxy are that: (i) carbon isotope fractionation (Ep) by these algae is
set by the rate of diffusive supply of CO2 relative to the rate of carbon use,
and (ii) the fractionation is primarily governed by the carbon-fixing enzyme
RuBisCO, with an assumed isotope effect of roughly 25 per mil. Recent work
challenges these assumptions, suggesting that non-diffusive supply of CO2 is
ubiquitous, that kinetic RuBisCO fractionation in these algae may be as small as
about 11 per mil and that irradiance independently influences carbon isotope
fractionation. Additional information is needed to incorporate these new factors
into quantitative reconstructions of pCO2, including re-interpreting Cenozoic
alkenone Ep values. Project objectives include:&lt;br/&gt;i. Measure the
response of alkenone Ep to variations in irradiance, cell size, and pCO2 in
laboratory chemostat and dilute batch cultures,&lt;br/&gt;ii. Revise the
quantitative framework for alkenone paleobarometry, developing practical
equations to use for paleo-pCO2 reconstruction, and&lt;br/&gt;iii. Test this
revised laboratory-based framework with new sediment analyses from the modern
and Pleistocene ocean.&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to provide a framework,
based in mechanistic rather than empirical evidence, for understanding alkenone
Ep variations during the Cenozoic. This will help develop an equation relating
Ep to CO2 that uses variables that can be measured or easily estimated, and that
could be adopted readily by the paleoclimate
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.