* 2100756
* Algebraic Quantum Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Chelsea Walton, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 03/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

Symmetry is one of the oldest notions in mathematics. Many algebraic structures
have been introduced to axiomatize this notion, starting with groups in the
mid-19th century. Arguably, in each area, the mathematical tools that capture
symmetry have an underlying structure that is algebraic; structures that are
known as a bialgebra, a Hopf algebra, or a Hopf-type algebra. Nowadays,
connections between these settings are examined through the lens of category
theory that allows for the use of special structures known as monoidal
categories, which have numerous applications including quantum information,
quantum field theory and string theory. The main goal of the project is to study
symmetries of algebra objects within monoidal categories, especially
co/representation categories of Hopf-type algebras. This project will fund
undergraduate research and the PI will continue their advocacy work for members
of underrepresented groups in the mathematical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given an object X, a symmetry of X is a property-
preserving transformation from X to itself, and the collection of invertible
symmetries of X forms a group: the automorphism group of X. Since then,
generalizations of groups have been introduced to capture the symmetries of not
only objects, but also of function algebras of objects that cannot be observed
(e.g., objects in quantum physics). This move from “classical symmetry” to
“quantum symmetry” has its origins in quantum mechanics, and arises in active
research areas such as conformal field theory, low-dimensional topology, and
operator algebras. In examining the various settings of symmetry of algebras
beyond the framework of "classical symmetry", comprised of groups actions on
commutative algebras, the PI will continue their work in "quantum symmetry"
involving co/actions of bialgebras, or of Hopf algebras, on noncommutative
algebras with a trivial base. The PI will also delve further into "weak quantum
symmetry" involving co/actions of weak bialgebras, or of weak Hopf algebras, on
noncommutative algebras with a non-trivial base. Moreover, the PI will examine
algebras via "categorical quantum symmetry”: This pertains to studying algebras
in general monoidal categories, not necessarily in co/representation categories
of (weak) bi/Hopf algebras, including several types of semisimple monoidal
categories, for example, fusion categories, and modular tensor categories, both
semisimple and nonsemisimple.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.