* 2100003
* CI CoE: Demo Pilot: Advancing Research Computing and Data: Strategic Tools, Practices, and Professional Development
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Thomas Cheatham, INTERNET2
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,497,243.00

Research is increasingly dependent upon Cyberinfrastructure (CI), from
instruments and sensors to Research Computing and Data (RCD) infrastructure and
services. High Performance Computing (HPC) is an important element, however RCD
has expanded well beyond HPC into secure enclaves for data compliance; big data
management, analytics, and movement; AI/machine learning; and more recently into
heterogeneous compute models, edge computing, and cloud-based computing.
Researchers are struggling to keep pace with the explosion of data and the rapid
evolution of computing resources, and often lack the skills to make full use of
emerging tools and techniques. Developing and maintaining the needed expertise
takes valuable time from research and is often beyond the capacity of
researchers; they must depend upon partners (RCD professionals) who combine
technology expertise and an understanding of research workflows and researcher
needs. Institutions face challenges recruiting and retaining RCD professional
staff, and building effective RCD support services. This CI CoE Demonstration
Pilot (RCD CoE) will develop an RCD Resource and Career Center to advance and
enable the nation's capacity for computational and data-intensive research by
providing institutions and individuals the products, tools, services, and
community to build and sustain successful RCD operations. The project will also
provide expertise in the development of new RCD professionals, and provide a
voice and a connector for the broad community and the profession at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RCD Resource and Career Center will build upon work
that the NSF-supported Campus Research Computing Consortium (CaRCC) has done and
continues to do to develop products and tools for effective RCD support. The
Center will develop a robust and sustainable implementation of the RCD
Capabilities Model that provides an assessment framework, support for
benchmarking and strategic planning, and a community data set to understand the
landscape of RCD support. The Center will expand and disseminate resources for
RCD Professionalization, including support for adoption of an RCD Job Family
Matrix to properly classify RCD professional roles and conducting a national
census of RCD Professionals to characterize the current state of RCD staff and
programs. The Center will create and disseminate a model of Career Arcs for RCD
Professionals to explain career options and help existing RCD professionals
explore professional development and advancement. Work in the project will
aggregate resources for staff training and workforce development, including
leading practices for recruitment, onboarding, advancing diversity, equity and
inclusion (DEI), and professional development, as well as proven models for
student internship and training programs. The pilot period and the community of
communities will be used to facilitate the creation of a coordinating
organization to connect all the relevant communities and to develop a shared
voice for RCD professionals as the project plans for a full Center of
Excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.