* 2100288
* D-Modules and Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Hans Ulrich Walther, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

The focus of this project is in algebraic geometry, one of the most varied areas
of mathematics, permeating many different branches of science such as robotics,
cosmology, and computer encryption. While the origins of algebraic geometry can
be traced to the works of Euclid and Pythagoras, the focus of algebraic geometry
today is often on singularities, which are points that are unusual when compared
to their neighbors. For example, in a figure-eight, the point of crossing is the
only one of its kind on the curve – a singularity. Singularities appear
frequently in nature, as the tip of a funnel cloud, in a black hole, or in
abrupt changes of physical states such as a ball bouncing off a wall. They
typically indicate states in which a given physical system becomes anomalous or
unstable. This project involves training of graduate and undergraduate students
in research and educational activities, thus connecting research with the
scientific advancement of the next generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
three parts to this project on D-modules. At the center of the first part are
D-modules that arise from embeddings of singular varieties into manifolds. The
larger goals here include studying Hodge theoretic filtrations on these modules
and their interplay with intersection homology. With a view towards a conjecture
of Hellus, the project will also aim at establishing a certain type of vanishing
result. The second piece begins with a particular type of D-module that arises
in the presence of a group action on a variety. For the resulting equivariant
D-modules, the PI developed in previous NSF-funded work a categorical paradigm
to study them in the toric case. Adapting these tools to the more general case
of tautological systems studied by Yau et al. in mirror symmetry is at the core
of this aspect of the project. To investigate their functorial presentations,
goals include finding a description of the moduli space and the period module. A
third type of invariant to be investigated is the Bernstein–Sato polynomial of a
singularity, which is closely related to solution counts via the wide-open
Monodromy Conjecture. An unexpected approach to this conjecture is introduced,
based on a translation – via Frobenius thresholds in finite characteristic – to
a new feature of hypergeometric D-modules. In all these parts, the PI will be
directing thesis projects and engage undergraduates in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.