* 2100248
* Excellence in Research: Fine Structure of Exciton Levels in Lead Chalcogenide Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Serguei Goupalov, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2024
* USD 412,380.00

This project is managed in the Division of Materials Research and funded by the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Excellence in Research (HBCU-EiR)
program and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Quantum dots are
tiny crystals, a few nanometers across, that display useful electronic and
optical phenomena. This award supports theoretical research into such phenomena
in dots made of lead sulfide, lead selenide, or lead telluride, the so-called
lead chalcogenides. The distribution of possible electronic energies in a
quantum dot depends on size, shape, and composition; tuning these parameters
will permit applications in photovoltaics, optoelectronics, quantum information
technologies, and medicine. Lead chalcogenide quantum dots are unique because
they can be used in devices operating in the near-infrared and mid-infrared
frequency ranges employed in telecommunications and medical imaging. Optical
properties of these quantum dots are determined by particles called excitons,
each consisting of a negatively charged electron and a positively charged empty
state, or hole, where an electron should have been. At low resolution, many
different exciton states share the same energy. However, competing interactions
split the energies, so that different exciton states take different energy
values. Being able to predict how these splittings depend on shape and size is
key to engineering quantum dots for desired purposes. This research will be
carried out at Jackson State University and will contribute to development of
the science, technology, engineering, and math workforce at a historically Black
university that primarily serves educational needs of local minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical investigation of the exciton fine structure in lead chalcogenide
quantum dots and its manifestation in optical phenomena. Description of band-
edge exciton states in lead chalcogenide quantum dots comes up against
fundamental complexity stemming from the fact that extrema of conduction and
valence bands in bulk lead chalcogenides occur at four inequivalent L points of
the Brillouin zone. In lead chalcogenide quantum dots, electron-hole exchange
interaction and intervalley coupling split the otherwise 64-fold valley- and
spin-degenerate ground exciton state into several groups of closely spaced
states giving rise to a large intrinsic broadening of the photoluminescence
spectral lines. Furthermore, an exciton effectively couples to confined optical
and acoustic phonon modes. This results in complex photoluminescence spectral
line-shapes which can be directly observed by means of single-dot spectroscopy.
Additional information can be obtained from polarized photoluminescence
measurements in external magnetic fields. This project aims to model lead
chalcogenide quantum dots within the empirical tight-binding and effective-mass
methods in order to provide theoretical description of physical processes
underlying this kind of experiment. The effects of various perturbations and
their interplay will be studied in order to gain control over the exciton fine
structure through the control over the quantum dot
shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.