* 2100708
* HBCU-Excellence in Research: Biomass Burning Aerosol-Molecular Level Characterization of Aging Conditions on Optical and Chemical Properties
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rudra Pokhrel, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,039,736.00

The goal of this project is to improve knowledge of the optical properties of
biomass burning (BB) aerosol, especially those derived from the combustion of
African biomass fuels. This research is directed toward the study of changes in
the optical properties of BB aerosol due to changes in the burning conditions
during combustion. This project is designed to enhance atmospheric chemistry and
physics research training capacity at North Carolina A&amp;T State University
(NCAT). Collaborative laboratory studies will take place at NCAT, as well as at
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will address the following questions: (1) How does the molecular-level
composition of African fuel-derived BB-derived aerosol change as a function of
aging conditions (i.e., fresh versus dark/photochemical/cloud water aging) and
how do these aerosol optical properties (i.e., single scattering albedo,
refractive index, and modified combustion efficiency) change because of any
potential molecular-level chemical changes? (2) Does aging of primary (fresh)
BB-derived aerosol and gas emissions alter the aerosol physicochemical
properties, including volatility, density, morphology, and water-solubility? (3)
what is the relationship between morphology (fractal dimensions) and modified
combustion efficiency and how does this influence the criteria for selecting the
correct method (Mie, Rayleigh-Debye-Gans or T-matrix approach) to modeling
optical properties and the resulting extraction of RIs? (4) Can BB-derived
water-soluble gas emissions undergo cloud water processing to yield secondary
organic aerosol after cloud droplet evaporation? and (5) What are the precursors
for African fuel- derived water-soluble gas emissions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Atmospheric Chemistry, Excellence in Research, and
Integrative and Collaborative Education and Research Programs at NSF. This
effort provides opportunities for students and faculty from all participating
institutions to work collaboratively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.