* 2100832
* Excellence in Research - Investigating Smooth Muscle-based Regulation of Non-shivering Thermogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Sharon Francis, Morehouse School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 873,768.00

This project tests the hypothesis that smooth muscle contributes significantly
to heat production during cold acclimation in mice, and investigates the
mechanisms of heat production in these cells. Mammals and birds adjust to a cold
environment by stimulating biochemical processes in specific cells to increase
heat production within the body, allowing survival at cold temperatures. To
date, the specific cells known to produce heat for body temperature regulation
are those that comprise brown fat and skeletal muscle. This research will
examine a previously unrecognized potential for smooth muscle cells to produce
heat to keep animals warm when housed at a cold temperature. The study will use
a unique animal model in which a protein that stimulates biochemical processes
that enhance heat production is removed from smooth muscle cells. The knowledge
gained from these studies may have important implications for proper cell
function and body weight maintenance. Rigorous academic and civic training
opportunities will be provided to under-represented minority graduate students
pursuing careers in the STEM workforce. A new course that incorporates didactic
and hands-on training will be developed to expand the knowledge of under-
represented students in temperature regulation. Additionally, this project will
engage K-12 public school students and the lay community to demystify the
scientific research process and expose the lay minority community to science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a novel paradigm for
thermoregulation and energy expenditure in mammals and broaden the participation
of under-represented graduate students in STEM-related basic research. The
project tests the hypothesis that smooth muscle regulates energy expenditure and
contributes to temperature homeostasis through a serum and glucocorticoid-
inducible kinase 1 (SGK1)-based mechanism of non-shivering thermogenesis (NST).
NST is the production of internal body heat and is crucial for maintenance of
core body temperature and energy expenditure. Experiments will examine the
contribution and function of smooth muscle and SGK1 in thermoregulation and
energy expenditure in smooth-muscle-cell (SMC)-specific SGK1 null mice under
thermoneutral housing temperatures and cold-challenged conditions. Preliminary
studies demonstrate that thermogenic processes mediated by the mitochondria are
enhanced in SMC-specific SGK1 null mice. This project will establish a novel
paradigm for NST by uncovering a previously unknown thermogenic role for SGK1 in
smooth muscle. The research will help to broaden scientific knowledge of how
endothermic animals are able to maintain body temperature and ensure survival,
and could lead to future applications for reducing obesity in humans. In
addition, this proposal will facilitate training opportunities for under-
represented minority students who are enrolled in the graduate programs at
Morehouse School of Medicine. This award will provide an opportunity for
students to conduct research, contribute to the body of scientific literature,
and receive scientific, academic and civic mentorship to support future
employment in STEM-related careers and contribute to the diversification of the
American scientific workforce. Community-based projects involving lay minority
members will be incorporated to enhance their exposure to the scientific
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities - Excellence in Research Program in the Office of
Integrative Activities and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program
in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.