* 2100575
* Training the Skilled Biomanufacturing Workforce Through Innovative Internships in Protein Biomanufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Aron Kamajaya, Los Angeles Pierce College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 520,304.00

Due to rapid growth in the biotechnology industry, the demand for skilled
biotechnicians in the Los Angeles region continues to increase. Out of the
~3,200 projected annual openings in biotechnology-related jobs, more than 2,000
require an associate degree or less. The most recent statewide data indicate a
massive gap in availability of these trained biotechnicians, with an annual
average production in Los Angeles county of only ~50 individuals. The largest
demand is for quality control and manufacturing technicians. This project will
help fill this demand by providing comprehensive training and internships in
biomanufacturing, a process that uses cells (or parts of cells) to produce
useful products such as proteins. The biotechnology industry is one of the
sectors that has been most resilient and least impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic. In contrast, people from the communities served by the college,
including students who are Hispanic, have been disproportionately impacted by
the pandemic. By training biomanufacturing technicians, this project will help
put people back to work in more secure, well-paying jobs, and contribute to
mitigating the financial impacts of COVID-19 on these
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address major regional
needs for biotechnology talent by establishing a protein biomanufacturing
training program. By accomplishing this goal, the project will provide a
pipeline for students from high school to two-year college, and then to
employment or transfer to a four-year biomanufacturing program. To create the
program, three new courses will be developed, implemented, and evaluated.
Complementing the coursework, the project will establish a student-centered
Contract Manufacturing Organization that will provide internship opportunities
for students in protein biomanufacturing. The protein (Taq polymerase) will be
produced by student interns working in college laboratories, and provided at low
cost to local high school and community college bioscience classrooms, as well
as to national course-based undergraduate research experiences programs,
including the DNA Learning Center’s DNA Barcoding experience and the Amgen
Biotech Experience. By providing affordable enzymes to bioscience classrooms in
less-resourced institutions, the project can help mitigate COVID-19 impacts on
the institutions and support greater learning opportunities for the students
they serve. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.