* 2100710
* Excellence in Research: CAS: Rationally Designed Porous Metal Nanoarchitectures for Electrochemical Reduction of CO2
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Bishnu Bastakoti, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 435,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Bishnu Prasad Bastakoti of North Carolina A&amp;T State University is
studying materials based solutions to address the current problems resulting
from increasing CO2 levels. The project provides a framework for the development
of new catalysts for CO2 recycling and energy storage. Converting CO2 into
desired chemical products provides an alternative source of carbon for fuels and
useful chemicals. The educational plan of the proposed project introduces
participants to the importance of materials design in addressing current and
future energy-related challenges. North Carolina A&amp;T State University is an
officially recognized minority institution, an HBCU, and a land-grant
institution. Training students in chemistry and materials science by involving
them in current research will help them to develop the techniques necessary for
industrial positions or in higher-level education. Dr. Bastakoti will work with
K-12 teachers to develop lesson plans that integrate research with classroom
studies, and will impact many high school students. The research and integrated
education components of this proposal will address several challenges in carbon
dioxide conversion and utilization as well as important issues at the scientific
and societal levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bishnu Prasad Bastakoti of North
Carolina A&amp;T State University is studying the use of porous metal/alloy
systems to address mechanistic questions necessary to understand the reduction
of aqueous CO2 to desirable products. Amphiphilic block copolymers prepared in
the Bastakoti laboratory are being used as a template and structure directing
agent to synthesize self-supported nanoporous frameworks of Cu and its alloys.
The co-operative self-assembly of block copolymers and soluble inorganic
precursors followed by chemical reduction will give highly porous metal
frameworks. The interconnected nanopores provides a Cu catalyst with a large
number of atomic steps, kinks, and Cu(100) facets that facilitate the formation
of C2 products in the electrochemical reduction of CO2. The addition of other
metal(s) into the Cu provides multimetallic interfaces that promote the
stability of key intermediates through synergistic interactions between the two
metals and facilitate CO2 reduction. The catalytic sites bind the key
intermediates tightly enough to set a sufficient coverage for C-C coupling but
not so tightly as to increase the corresponding activation barrier. The
compressive strains due to secondary metal into Cu framework favors the binding
toward reactive species and offers an attractive method for the development of
new nanostructured multimetallic catalysts to improve activity while
simultaneously steering selectivity toward more desirable
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.