* 2100898
* Excellence in Research: MicroRNA Detection Strategies via Exploration of Flavin Binding Allosteric Switches
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mehnaaz Ali, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 353,998.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Mehnaaz F. Ali of Xavier University of Louisiana is
studying the design and exploration of flavin induced allosteric aptamers with
microRNA specific functional domains. Flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and flavin
adenine dinucleotide (FAD), are biologically active forms of riboflavin. These
molecules play diverse and wide-ranging roles in a multitude of biological
processes due to their structure and chemical versatility. The exploration of
FAD and their interactions as ligands within allosteric nucleic acid probes will
offer fundamental insight into their potential role as molecular switches,
chemo-responsive sensors or genetic control elements. In addition to promoting
discovery in nucleic acid chemistry and sensing fields, this project (both
directly and indirectly-via Dr. Ali’s teaching responsibilities and outreach
program) will also promote teaching, and learning of chemistry at the middle
school through undergraduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA polymers are well
known for their ability to present a range of distinct structural conformations.
These molecules lend themselves to the formation of allosteric nucleic acid
scaffolds with multiple binding domains. Although ubiquitous in nature, the
isolation of molecules with dual-domain functionality from a random sequence
population is not facile. An approach to generating allosteric ribozymes is to
utilize a mixture of modular rational design in combination with in-vitro
selection strategies. To explore the utility of flavins as ligands, Dr. Ali is
interested in using a combination of these existing efforts to design allosteric
systems by using rational design to construct flavin dependent conformational
switches, where flavin binding will lead to the formation of binding pockets
using an aptamer scaffold with tailored miR binding regions. Such forms of
‘adaptive-binding’ have traditionally been used with RNA motifs to
allosterically regulate the activity of naturally occurring catalytic RNA.
Together, these systems provide novel approaches to chemo-responsive sensing,
particularly novel methods of allosteric aptamer development. Specifically,
these studies are expected to contribute to the design of new flavin binding
scaffolds for sensing microRNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.