* 2100805
* Research Initiation Award: Molecular Mechanisms for DCLK1 Tumorigenesis Revealed by Pathway Analysis using RNA Sequencing Data
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lianna Li, Tougaloo College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,997.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Tougaloo College proposes a study of stem cell markers which play a
role in the growth and chemical resistance of cancer cells. The proposed work
will study the molecular mechanisms of different forms of these cells to better
understand the origin of tumors. The research will provide a research
opportunity for Tougaloo College undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1) is a putative cancer
stem cells marker with 5 isoforms. DCLK1 is up regulated and plays critical
roles in the initiation and progression of multiple cancers. However, which
isoform of DCLK1 is more closely correlated with tumorigenesis and
chemoresistance, and the underlying molecular mechanisms are unclear. The long-
term goal of the lab is to develop a comprehensive understanding of DCLK1. The
overall objectives of this proposal are to: 1) reveal and compare association of
different DCLK1 isoforms with stemness of cancer cells; and 2) discover
molecular mechanisms of different DCLK1 isoforms in tumorigenesis and
chemoresistance using RNA seq technology. The current hypothesis is that
different DCLK1 isoforms may correlate differently with tumorigenesis and
chemoresistance of cancers. The rational is that DCLK1 protein was up-regulated
in clinical cancer samples, but the promoter region of DCLK1 isoform 1
(DCLK1-I1) was epigenetically imprinted. The discrepancy of protein and gene
expression strongly suggests that specific DCLK1 isoform(s) are more closely
associated with tumorigenesis and chemoresistance of cancers. To achieve our
goals, 1): isogenic DCLK1 isoform (I1- I5) over-expressing cells will be
established using colorectal cancer cell lines with different genetic
background. Association of each isoform with stemness of cells will be
determined; 2) modifications of transcriptome profiles in the isogenic DCLK1
isoform (I1- I5) over-expressing cells will be determined using RNA Seq
technology. Differentially expressed genes will be identified and used for
pathway analysis to establish the molecular networks of individual DCLK1
isoforms; and 3) cells will be treated with 5-Fu and transcriptome profiles will
be determined using RNA seq technology. Differentially expressed genes will be
identified and used for pathway analysis to reveal the molecular mechanism for
chemoresistance. With successful completion of the proposal, it is expected that
specific DCLK1 isoform(s) which contributes to the tumorigenesis and
chemoresistance of cancer cells will be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.