* 2100225
* Developing an Online Cybersecurity Certificate with Stackable Credentials to Increase the Number and Expertise of Cybersecurity Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mete Kok, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 595,800.00

The world now critically depends on the security of its cyberinfrastructure. For
example, our nation’s critical systems depend on complex computer and
telecommunications technology. This dependence includes national systems for
water, banking, power (nuclear and conventional), security, and public safety.
Although cybersecurity is a critical economic and national security challenge,
the nation has a severe shortage of computer security specialists with the
skills and knowledge needed to support cyberinfrastructure. This project aims to
help meet this need by developing an Online Cybersecurity Certificate with
stackable college credits to prepare cybersecurity technicians in New York City.
This project is led by the Borough of Manhattan Community College, a Hispanic-
serving institution in which more than 75% of the students are from communities
that are not yet equitably represented in STEM or in cybersecurity fields. Thus,
by providing training that can lead to high-paying, stable jobs, this project
will help to mitigate the disproportionate impacts of COVID-19 on the
communities that the College serves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The certificate
program will target high school students and incumbent workers. By mapping
stackable credentials, such as industry certifications or prior experiences, to
credit-bearing college courses, the certificate program intends to increase
timely completion. The curriculum will consist of 30 college course credits.
Thus, individuals who earn the certificate will have the flexibility of entering
the workforce directly or continuing their studies to earn advanced credentials
including a college degree. In creating the certificate program, the project
will modify current face-to-face cybersecurity courses for delivery online. By
offering these courses online, the certificate program will accommodate
individual schedules and travel limitations, thus enabling more individuals to
participate. To help participants gain knowledge about the industry, the
certificate program will include enrichment activities, such as summer bridge
courses, industry certification workshops, and panel discussions with career
professionals. Throughout development of the certificate program, the project
team will adopt or adapt materials from ATE Cybersecurity Centers, including
curricular materials and faculty development activities. In addition, by sharing
the new materials developed by the project with the cybersecurity community, the
project will contribute to the cybersecurity education knowledge base. The
project will benefit incumbent workers who need new skills as well as high
school students who want to enter information technology fields after
graduation. Incumbent workers will gain valuable contacts with industry leaders
through the project’s Advisory Board, while the dual enrollment certificate
courses will help prepare high school students for both cybersecurity careers
and college. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.