* 2100328
* Effects of Combined Attention and Academic Interventions for Kindergarten Children with Significant Difficulties in Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Bruce McCandliss, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,400,897.00

Low math skills significantly limit access to post-secondary education,
employment, and lifetime earnings. Because math difficulties can be detected
early in schooling, early intervention is key for preventing the negative
consequences of persistent low math achievement. Kindergarten is a particularly
important developmental time-window within which to intervene given that
children who enter and exit kindergarten with low math knowledge are at high
risk for having long-term difficulties in mathematics. Many kindergarten
children who do not respond adequately to classroom math instruction are
characterized as having both low math knowledge and difficulties in focusing and
sustaining attention. One way to tackle the math learning difficulties of these
at-risk kindergarten children, then, might be to create interventions that
conjointly address mathematics and attention. The purpose of this project is to
test the effects of a novel approach to intervention in which instruction in
mathematics and training in attention are combined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
aim of this study is to determine whether combined intensive attention training
and math intervention leads to greater math learning than the same math
intervention without attention training. The study will also seek to determine
whether the effects of combined training on mathematics are sensitive to the use
of quantitative information during attention training. Two hundred and ten
children identified as not having made progress in math in the fall semester of
kindergarten will be randomly assigned to one of three active intervention
conditions in the spring semester: 1) an intensive mathematics intervention; 2)
the same mathematics intervention combined with adaptive game-like attention
training designed to improve the abilities to focus and sustain attention; or 3)
the mathematics intervention combined with similar adaptive attention training,
but where the child has to focus on and respond to quantitative information in
the games. Multiple measures of math, attention, and attention-related cognitive
competencies such as working memory are measured prior to the intervention,
immediately following the intervention, and after a one-month follow-up. The
study is designed to address ongoing questions regarding whether cognitive
training - in this case, when combined with math intervention - holds any
promise for improving mathematical learning for young children at high risk for
persistent low math achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by
the EHR Core Research Program (ECR). ECR supports fundamental research in STEM
education in critical research areas that are essential, broad and enduring. The
ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.