* 2100012
* Increasing the Number and Diversity of Cybersecurity Technicians in Rural North Carolina
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Michael Jacobs, Robeson Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,792.00

The US Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that the need for cybersecurity
technicians will grow more than 30 percent over the next decade. The number of
students enrolled in and graduating from cybersecurity programs is not at a pace
that can meet this growing demand. As a result, the nation will not have enough
domestically trained cybersecurity technicians to satisfy the needs of industry,
business, government, and other sectors. This project aims to addresses critical
regional and national needs for skilled cybersecurity technicians. It will do so
by collaborating with the local education agencyâ€™s high school Career and
Technical Education program, local businesses, and industries to increase the
number of trained cybersecurity technicians who are ready for work. Program
pathways will be created that allow students to earn credits toward a degree in
applied science while completing an industry-recognized certificate in
cybersecurity. Internships with local businesses and organizations will provide
students with opportunities to put the skills they are learning in the classroom
into real-world practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project
include: (1) producing skilled, highly qualified, and career-ready cybersecurity
technicians; (2) equipping information technology faculty with the cybersecurity
knowledge and skills required to effectively teach cybersecurity and optimize
student learning and retention; (3) recruiting, retaining, and graduating
individuals from communities that are underrepresented in cybersecurity,
including women. Evaluation of the project will include both formative and
summative assessment of the efficacy of the program in meeting the proposed
goals and outcomes. The outcomes of this project have the potential to advance
knowledge about challenges that students in a rural community face as learners
in STEM fields, particularly in the information technology and cybersecurity
fields. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.