* 2100447
* Linking Matrix Composition with Spatially Resolved Mechanical Properties in Polymicrobial Biofilms
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Oluwaseyi Balogun, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This award will support research to understand the mechanistic underpinnings of
biofilm mechanical and physical properties. Biofilms are soft multi-component
biological materials. They are made of microbial communities attached to
surfaces and encased in polymeric substances. It is thought that these polymeric
substances provide mechanical stability. Detrimental biofilms cause billions of
dollars per year of damage via biofouling or corrosion of ship hulls, heat
exchangers, water treatment and distribution infrastructure, membranes, and in
the food, oil, and beverage industries. In addition, they account for 65% of
infections that originate in hospitals, affecting 17 million people and causing
at least 550,000 deaths annually in the US. Conversely, beneficial biofilms can
clean water and remediate groundwater and soil. Despite the crucial relevance of
biofilms to diverse industrial, medical, and environmental applications, little
is known about how local biofilm mechanical properties are mediated by
encasement composition, community diversity, and biofilm physical structure.
This award will support fundamental research to understand the relationship
between microscale biofilm mechanical properties, encasement and community
composition, and physical structure. This work will study biofilms of increasing
complexity, including complex environmentally-relevant mixed-culture biofilms.
The results generated from executing this award will directly inform new
strategies to manage biofilms in critical applications (e.g., remove when they
are undesirable, and retain when they are beneficial), leading to significant
cost savings. The project provides additional benefits, including diversifying
the nation’s STEM workforce through multidisciplinary training for
underrepresented students at grade school, undergraduate, and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will advance our understanding of
critical yet poorly understood interrelationships between molecular composition,
physical structure, and mechanical properties in polymicrobial biofilms exposed
to disparate environmental cues. The majority of the work to date on biofilm
mechanical properties has employed macrorheological tools that neglect the
inherent local heterogeneity in biofilms and has focused primarily on pure
culture biofilms (e.g., P. aeruginosa alone) that are not representative of, and
likely differ significantly in extracellular polymeric substances (EPS)
composition and mechanical properties from, polymicrobial biofilms that are
found in medical, environmental and industrial settings. Specifically, the
research team will, 1) study local structure- composition-viscoelastic property
relationships in biofilms; 2) study biofilmsubstratum adhesion and cohesion
properties; and 3) develop homogenization-based constitutive models to predict
the multi-scale mechanical properties of biofilms. Project results will
elucidate, for the first time, how microscale variations in EPS constituents
(e.g., polysaccharides, proteins, eDNA) mediate local heterogeneity in shear
moduli and viscosity, adhesion strength, and cohesive fracture energy in dual
and mixed-culture biofilms, and how environmental cues and microbial populations
present modify this relationship. This improved understanding of spatially
resolved structure/ composition- mechanical property relationships will provide
the basis for rational management and control of
biofilms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.