* 2100876
* Reducing Racially-Biased Beliefs by Fostering a Complex Understanding of Human Genetics Research in High-School Biology Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Ravit Golan Duncan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 303,085.00

Genetic essentialism is the belief that people of the same race share genes that
make them physically, cognitively, and behaviorally uniform, and thus different
from other races. The project will refine a genetics education curriculum,
called Humane Genome Literacy (HGL), in order to reduce belief in genetic
essentialism. This research will provide curriculum writers and educators with
knowledge about how to design a humane genetics education to maximize reductions
in students’ genetic essentialist beliefs and minimize the threat of backfiring
(unintentionally increasing belief in essentialism). The research findings will
demonstrate how to support teachers who wish to reduce beliefs in genetic
essentialism by teaching students about the complexity of human genetics
research using the HGL learning materials. Project research findings, learning
materials, and professional development institutes will be made available to
educators and researchers across the country who desire to teach genetics to
reduce racial prejudice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To prepare for the research, the
project will revise and augment the project’s existing HGL curriculum and
professional development institutes. In year one, the project will develop new
versions of the HGL interventions. Using these materials, the project will train
teachers to implement new versions of the HGL interventions in their classrooms.
Researchers will video and audio record a sample of teachers and students as
they learn. These data will be analyzed qualitatively to: (1) examine how the
conceptual change of genetic essentialism was promoted or impeded by
interactions between teachers, students, and the materials; and (2) identify and
corroborate general factors undergirding the backfiring effect. Knowledge
constructed through these studies will be used to revise the HGL interventions
and PDIs. In year three, using the revised versions of the HGL intervention, the
project will conduct a cluster randomized trial (CRT). The CRT will compare the
HGL interventions to a well-defined “business as usual” genetics curriculum,
using a statistically powerful and geographically diverse sample (N = 135
teachers, N = 16,200 students, from 33 states). Using data from the CRT, the
project will identify classrooms where the interventions reduced essentialism,
had no effect on it, and where it backfired. Then, the project will use
stimulated recall methods to interview the teachers and students in those
classrooms to make sense of factors that contributed to these outcomes. The
project will use this information to develop the final version of the HGL
interventions and PDI materials. By the end of year four, the project will have
trained an additional 90-100 teachers to use HGL interventions, reaching an
additional 10,800-12,000 students, in at least 33 different states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.