* 2100047
* Developing a Flipped Classroom Approach to Enhance Access and Improve Learning in Electro-Mechanical Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Jim Pytel, Columbia Gorge Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 457,270.00

The nation has an expanding need for electro-mechanical technicians, who have
expertise in both mechanical technology and electrical/electronic circuits.
These technicians apply their knowledge and skills in many fields, from
generation and transmission of power to advanced manufacturing. This proposal
aims to improve the education of electro-mechanical technicians. To do so, it
will develop online teaching and learning resources that support a flipped
classroom experience. In flipped classrooms, students engage in more passive
learning, such as listening to a lecture, before coming to class. Then, in the
classroom, they are guided by the instructor to work on hands-on applications of
what they learned. This project will develop teaching resources for electro-
mechanical technology with input from industry and other two-year colleges. It
is expected that implementing these resources in an online flipped classroom
will be more effective at helping electro-mechanical technicians and instructors
gain both technical knowledge and practical hands-on experience. Columbia Gorge
Community College is a Hispanic-serving institution. Thus, by preparing students
for well-paying, high-demand electro-mechanical technician jobs, this project
can help to mitigate the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the
Hispanic communities the College serves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages the results of a successful previous NSF ATE award that developed
free, high-quality online resources to support flipped classroom courses for
electrical engineering, industrial maintenance, and renewable energy
technicians. The project has three major aims: (1) develop high-quality online
learning modules that support a flipped classroom approach for teaching electro-
mechanical technologies, (2) cultivate the next generation of instructors and
workforce-ready technicians for high-demand fields, and (3) advance the
knowledge base about use of the flipped classroom approach to enhance technician
education. The flipped classroom structure and materials can be easily updated
and repurposed for other technical programs, thus increasing access to technical
education and decreasing cost. U.S. economic and national security depends on
the industries supported by knowledgeable, skilled technicians. This project
intends to train new electro-mechanical technicians and serve practicing
electro-mechanical technicians who want to stay current in their jobs. This
project is funded by the NSF Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.