* 2100837
* Collaborative Research: An Agent-Based Investigation of Hurricane Evacuation Dynamics: Key Factors, Connections, and Emergent Behaviors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kate Fossell, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 71,021.00

Hurricane evacuations are a complex process involving interactions among
hurricane systems, the built environment, particularly transportation systems,
and the evacuation decisions and actions of individuals and households in our
coastal communities. Previous research suggests that evacuation processes vary
depending up on the nature of hurricanes in terms of their intensity, direction,
and speed, but the research community has been lacking in approaches to link
these complex systems together within a single modeling framework. This project
will model the interactions among these different systems to better capture and
understand the problems and issues associated with evacuations under different
kinds of hurricane storms scenarios within a single framework. The resulting
framework will greatly facilitate the scientific understanding of these
processes helping reduce potential loss of life that often accompany hurricanes
and help state and local agencies better plan for hurricane evacuation. The
broader societal beneficiaries of this work include coastal communities,
government agencies, and businesses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane evacuations
are a complex process involving many intersecting physical-social factors and
uncertainties which evolve over time. The ultimate goal of the research is to
examine the complex dynamics of the integrated hurricane evacuation system, and
subsequently, to help mitigate the loss of life that often accompanies tropical
systems. To that end, models are constructed representing three interwoven
elements relevant to the hurricane evacuation system: the natural hazard
(hurricane, forecasts, warning information), the human system (information flow,
evacuation-related decisions), and the built environment (transportation
infrastructure and evacuation routing). By integrating these models into a
unified, agent-based framework, the project will create a virtual laboratory
where model pieces can be perturbed in different ways to see how components
interact and influence evacuation processes under different hurricane scenarios.
The model system generated will advance the scientific communityâ€™s ability to
model and understand the complexities of the integrated hurricane evacuation
system dynamics and outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.