* 2100147
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Hydrologically driven export of pyrogenic carbon and nutrients in fire-impacted watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Margaret Zimmer, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 10/31/2022
* USD 53,201.00

Wildfire magnitude and frequency are increasing across the western US. These
wildfires are drastically altering Earthâ€™s surface by burning vegetation and
surface soils and destabilizing hillslopes, making them more prone to erosion.
Together, these alterations impact how precipitation and other material is
transported to rivers. Rivers are the main conduit for transferring water and
materials from headwaters further downstream and ultimately to oceans. However,
given the challenges of capturing unpredictable wildfire events, there is a lack
of understanding of the composition, concentration, and timing of material
export out of watersheds immediately following fires. Included in the material
being transported is soot and charcoal (called pyrogenic carbon) and essential
nutrients, such as nitrogen. These materials are important for local ecosystem
function, global biogeochemical cycles, and for the water quality of downstream
drinking water resources. This study will collect and analyze water and soil
samples from burned watersheds following the fires of the Santa Clara Unit
Lightning Complex. The watersheds were instrumented prior to the fires and
provide an opportunity to analyze hydrologic and biochemical data previous to
and after the fire. This study will generate data that will help to understand
the impacts of wildfires on water resources used for drinking water purposes and
provide valuable information for mitigation of these
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to reveal how altered
hillslope hydrology and streamflow in newly burned landscapes will impact the
in-stream storage and export of ecologically and biogeochemically critical
material, with specific focus on nitrogen and pyrogenic carbon. This research
will be conducted in a headwater catchment in central coastal California, which
experiences non-perennial streamflow due to its Mediterranean climate.
Researchers will couple measurements of nutrient and pyrogenic carbon
concentrations at the outlets of five nested watersheds to assess how previously
identified differences in dominant streamflow generation processes influence
observed material transport. Through deployment of automated samplers and a
spectrophotometer, this work will develop a rich dataset of in-stream pyrogenic
carbon and nutrient concentrations from the very first post-fire precipitation
event to the summer dry down. This is critical for constructing an integrative
view of hydrologic and biogeochemical processes in fire- impacted watersheds.
The project will provide train undergraduate and graduate students and generate
data that will inform the Santa Clara Valley Water District on the export of
materials from burned watershed into drinking water sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Hydrologic Sciences
and Geobiology and Low-Temperature Geochemistry programs in the Division of
Earth Sciences and the Ecosystem Science Cluster program in the Division of
Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.