* 2100034
* External Review Letters in Promotion and Tenure Decision Making: Validity and Fairness
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michelle Penn-Marshall, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,000,005.00

Promotion and tenure decisions at universities are of critical significance to
the integrity of the research enterprise because they determine the career
progression of scholars and scientists. Despite significant investments in
pipeline interventions to diversify academia, faculty of color and women are
underrepresented in tenured and tenure track positions. Underrepresentation has
important implications for the nation's prospects of developing a diverse STEM
workforce. For undergraduate and graduate students of color, having access to
faculty members who share and understand their lived experiences and backgrounds
has profound benefits. These include developing science identities and
persisting in science careers. Therefore, novel ways to examine gatekeeping
mechanisms such as the promotion and tenure (P&amp;T) processes are needed.
Despite the widely recognized importance of P&amp;T processes, minimal research
has examined whether and how P&amp;T processes' most critical elements
contribute to outcomes for women and faculty of color. This project examines the
validity and fairness of external review letters (ERL) provided by arm's length
reviewers as part of promotion and tenure decision making. Academic
administrators often view ERLs as the most impartial and critical components of
tenure and promotion portfolios, providing qualitative, independent evaluations
of candidates' past accomplishments, reputation, potential, and the prospect of
continued, sustainable contribution levels. Despite their sensitive nature,
given the criticality of ERLs in academic promotion and tenure decisions, the
limited research on validity and bias in ERLs is stunning. This project closes
this gap by analyzing the linguistic characteristics of ERLs and examining the
relationship between ERL linguistic characteristics, promotion candidate
characteristics, letter writer characteristics, and promotion and tenure voting
outcomes at the department, college, and university-level committees. The
project examines ERLs through theoretical work on the social psychology of
language use, social comparison processes, and social role theory. This project
is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that
advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goals are to investigate the
validity of ERLs, determine possible bias in ERLs based on candidate and letter
writer characteristics, and identify possible ways to remediate limited validity
and bias. Leveraging a partnership between nine universities (University of
Houston, Hampton University, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Lehigh University,
University of Alabama, Louisiana State University, Rice University, Texas
A&amp;M University, and University of Texas Rio Grande Valley), and by examining
more than 9000 ERLs, this project aims to contribute to the validity of P&amp;T
processes, understand barriers to P&amp;T for women and faculty of color and
ultimately increase the P&amp;T rates for women and faculty of
color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.