* 2100108
* Industry 4.0 Curriculum Development and Occupation-Based Learning Outcomes In Automation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ronald Zitek, Lorain County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 599,315.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by continuing to improve and
scale Industry 4.0 curricula and expand training sites to grow the nation’s
future-ready workforce. The project seeks to address two fundamental issues. One
is the need for replicable and scalable Industry 4.0 curricula that can be
continuously updated to keep pace with rapid innovations in target industries.
Two is the need to strengthen and coordinate partnerships with industry to
increase work-based learning and workforce supply. The potential benefits of the
project are: customizable curricula that are equity-informed and scalable; a
progressively diverse pipeline of skilled workers; and expanded opportunities
for upskilling the current workforce to increase their retention in high-demand
Industry 4.0 jobs. The project will create and extend synergistic activities
that address gaps in post-secondary education, educator preparation, and
regional and statewide workforce needs. Several objectives frame the project's
efforts. First is to expand career pathways in Industry 4.0 by translating
research and evidence-based projects to the development and implementation of
technician education and educator preparation. Second is to continuously improve
and align career pathways to Industry 4.0 so technicians have the real time,
state-of-the industry tools required to successfully complete career preparation
and be work ready. And finally, to formalize a model site that has the potential
to scale collaborations and support other community college partners within the
state or nationwide, and also to engage career training centers, manufacturing
sector partnerships, and Manufacturing USA initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the project includes development of industry-
aligned curricular and training resources that will expand access to
technological education in advanced manufacturing, educator professional
development activities, and creation of an advanced compendium of open-access,
peer-authenticated resources for STEM and Industry 4.0 educators. Products will
be developed in formats that allow for online and virtual delivery and rapid
dissemination to students, educators, workforce training professionals, and
employers. The project will result in benefits to students by accelerating
progress toward industry-validated credentials. The project will also benefit
educators and industry by facilitating and expanding academic-industry
partnerships to build and strengthen connections across Ohio’s advanced
manufacturing supply chain. The project will achieve broader impact by
leveraging opportunities to scale and disseminate through the Ohio TechNet
consortium of community colleges and universities, and it will utilize methods
and approaches that enhance equitable access and engagement for underrepresented
women and minorities. This expanded collaboration has the potential to lead to a
future automation network among Ohio’s institutions of higher education and
post-secondary career-technical centers that could engage more deeply with
employers seeking an Industry 4.0-skilled and “future-ready” workforce. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.