* 2100296
* Developing Authentic and Fair Computer Science Assessments
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Min Li, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 575,010.00

This project aims to promote equitable design of Computer Science (CS)
assessment in secondary and post-secondary education in the United States and
globally, increasing the diversity of students engaging in CS learning through
reduced test bias. In this study, we aim to address difficulties in assessing
computer programming by investigating critical characteristics of programming
tasks using both response process and product data. Findings will have direct
practical implications for developing authentic, fair and valid assessment of
learners with different demographic backgrounds. Through advancing our
understanding of the cognitive processes underlying programming thereby
informing ways to better teach, learn, and assess programming skills, we expect
the project to impact the broader CS education community through shareable data
sets to the general public, assessment innovations in large CS classrooms,
actionable insights on test bias for CS instructors, and the engagement of
undergraduates of diverse gender, race, and ability. The research team from the
University of Washington also intends to integrate scientific discoveries from
this study into the universityâ€™s publicly available course materials. The
planned dissemination will maximize outreach to various outlets such as the NSF-
supported Exploring Computing Education pathways that brings together state
leaders shaping U.S. K-12 CS Education curricula, practices, and
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of foundational research
on assessing, learning and teaching computer programming skills. The project
will capitalize on the ability of recording the coding process via keystroke
logs to extract and summarize vast amounts of fine-grained information captured
by observing program edits. We aim to study the relations between process and
task characteristics, identifying patterns that are indicative of proficiencies
and suggest fluency or dysfluency. Such identification will, in turn, allow for
designing instructional, learning, or assessment materials that are targeted at
specific needs of learners. We plan to triangulate different types of student
data to address research questions around detecting meaningful behavioral
patterns from timing and process data when students are engaged with computer
programming, relations between tasks characteristics and programming process,
student knowledge, attitudes, experience and proficiency, as well as the extent
to which task design contribute to the performance patterns detected for
students that vary along gender, ethnicity, and native language. The project
will use controlled experiments and cognitive interviews to collect quantitative
and qualitative data. Multiple instruments will be used for data collection,
such as the ETS Major Field Test-Computer Science. In terms of data analysis,
the project will leverage various analytical and modeling techniques from the
fields of psychometrics, statistics, machine learning, and educational data
mining. Findings from this project will offer empirically-tested guidelines on
which task characteristics to account for when designing fair and valid
assessments across different demographic groups. This project is funded by the
EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental
research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.