* 2100772
* Particle Electrokinetics in Non-Newtonian Microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Xiangchun Xuan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,684.00

Microfluidic devices have been increasingly used over the past two decades for
numerous chemical, biomedical and environmental applications. Many applications
require precise placement and transport of particles (ranging from
macromolecules to viruses and cells, from colloids to beads, etc.) in
microchannels. The application of an electric field is the method of choice to
control particle motions in microfluidic systems because of the ease, precision,
autonomy of operation and integration with other components for analysis. The
electric field can induce motion of a charged particle (electrophoresis) or the
motion of the surrounding fluid (electroosmosis). This so-called electrokinetic
particle motion has been extensively studied in simple liquids. However, it has
not been studied extensively in complex fluids such as polymer solutions,
colloidal solutions, biological fluids, which are examples of non-Newtonian
fluids that exhibit unusual properties in flow. The goal of this project is to
develop a fundamental knowledge of electrokinetic particle motion in polymer
solutions through microchannels. The research will delinate effects of fluid
elasticity and shear-thinning effects on electrophoretic motion in the direction
of the channel axis and lateral migration of particles toward the channel walls
in order to find ways to control particle motions. The experiments will be
extended to large electric fields that have not yet been considered for non-
Newtonian fluid systems. The research will be intimately weaved into
undergraduate and graduate curricula at Clemson University and will form the
basis for activities developed for high school students in South Carolina.
Undergraduate and high school students, especially those from underrepresented
groups, will be actively involved in the project through various programs
available in the department, university, and state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be the first comprehensive study of electrokinetic particle motion
in non-Newtonian fluids through microchannels. A systematic experimental
investigation of both the axial motion and lateral migration of particles will
be performed in the flow of polymer solutions through straight rectangular
microchannels under (1) pure DC electric field, (2) DC electric field imposed
with a pressure gradient, and (3) pure AC electric field with a magnitude of up
to 1 MV/m (one order of magnitude higher than in typical electrokinetic
microfluidics) in each case. Five types of common polymer solutions with
distinct rheological properties will be tested and compared against Newtonian
fluids. The experiments will investigate effects of fluid elasticity and shear
thinning, individually and in combination, on the linear and nonlinear
electrophoretic particle motions as well as the accompanying lateral particle
migration. The experimental data of particle mobility and migration will be
compared with the predictions of theoretical formulae and numerical simulations,
if available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.