* 2100234
* Collaborative Research: Examining Training Environments and Career Outcomes of Interdisciplinary STEM PhD Students
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Bruce Weinberg, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2026
* USD 886,654.00

This collaborative project with Ohio State University as the lead institution
and Indiana University and Cornell University as partners examines the career
outcomes across employment sectors of interdisciplinary graduate students, the
environments in which they are trained, and how those environments relate to
career outcomes. The investigators will use and expand an emerging
infrastructure of data and measures to conduct a rich, multilevel analysis of
individual career paths in the transition from graduate training to the
workforce in the context of supply and demand factors that exist throughout a
researcher’s career. The investigators will (1) study how the characteristics of
interdisciplinary researchers compare to disciplinary researchers and how the
structure of the teams and networks in which they train compare, (2) develop a
range of novel measures of early career outcomes to study how outcomes relate to
training environments of disciplinarians and interdisciplinarians, and (3) study
how outcomes vary across disciplines and by market demand. The project will
enable young researchers to be better informed about the career outcomes of
interdisciplinary researchers and provide actionable information to improve the
training environments for these researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will be implemented using the emerging UMETRICS infrastructure, and the data and
metrics that the investigators develop on interdisciplinarity will flow back
into the UMETRICS data infrastructure and made accessible for other researchers
through the virtual enclave run by the Institute for Research on Innovation and
Science at the University of Michigan. The research will include three tasks.
Task 1: Develop rich multi-faceted measures to identify interdisciplinarity
among STEM doctoral students and researchers. A wide range of integrated data
resources will be used to operationalize “interdisciplinarity”. Investigators
will generate field-based measures, citation-based measures, field transition
measures, and text-based measures that will be cross-validated to trace the
interdisciplinarity of research trajectories post graduation. Task 2: Describe
the environments in which interdisciplinary graduate students train.
Investigators will describe a range of dimensions of training environments and
how they relate to interdisciplinary research, including advisors, teams, team
size and composition, team diversity, and funding mechanism. Task 3: Estimate a
wide range of career outcomes for interdisciplinary PhD recipients and the role
of supply and demand in shaping outcomes. Data will examine whether
interdisciplinary research is mostly induced by discoveries in new fields that
open new avenues of research or whether the need for interdisciplinary research
induces these discoveries. The project will expand an evolving data
infrastructure for investigating STEM workforce development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the EHR Core Research program
that funds fundamental research focused on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.