* 2100909
* Excellence in Research: Synthesis and Evaluation of Amino Acid-Appended Macromolecules Designed Towards Enhanced Water Purification via Lead Chelation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Marco Giles, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2024
* USD 473,205.00

The use of lead in construction and industrial processes has contributed to
widespread heavy metal contamination of water sources and increased occurrences
of biological lead intoxication, which is detrimental to human health and
development. Conventional remediation approaches include the use of adsorbents
such as activated charcoal; however, the long-term effectiveness remains
unknown. To address this public health risk, this project will synthesize
innovative, efficient, and biocompatible macromolecules that effectively
encapsulate the heavy metal and purify lead-contaminated water upon extraction
from aqueous environments. The investigator's long-term goal is to build a
viable and competitive polymer research program at Prairie View A&amp;M
University. Through this program, graduate and undergraduate students will learn
how to conduct application- and hypothesis-driven investigations in the polymer
chemistry field. The following objectives will be pursued to satisfy the overall
goals of the project: (1) understand how polymer architecture and branching
impact metal chelating affinity; (2) explore how solubility parameters affect
the chelation efficiency of the nanomaterials; and 3) engage undergraduate and
graduate students in high-impact and intensive polymer chemistry research
environments. Collaborators at Texas A&amp;M University, Tulane University, and
the State University of New York at Stony Brook will aid in specialized
characterization of the nanomaterials, extending the potential for
transformative impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project
is to investigate the effectiveness of amino acid-functionalized macromolecules
towards sequestering lead ions to promote water purification. Biocompatible,
polymeric materials with both linear and branched architectures will be
generated with adequate functionality to comprehensively probe the structure-
property relationship underlying metal-chelating activity. To enable sufficient
complexation of lead ions, hyperbranched and dendrimeric polyesters and linear
polycarbonates will be outfitted with n-acetylcysteine via thiol-yne click
addition to generate numerous vicinal thioether binding pockets covering the
polymer surface or backbone. Novel insights into binding capability will be
obtained, and vicinal thioethers and water-soluble polymers will be produced.
The efficacy of the materials will provide data that can inform future efforts
to prevent and treat lead contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.