* 2100149
* Creating Equitable Pathways to Careers in Biotechnology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Katherine Marsh, COMPTON COLLEGE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,999.00

The Los Angeles/Orange County region supports almost 5,000 life science or
biotechnology firms that collectively employ nearly 100,000 people. Over the
next five years, the biotechnology workforce is projected to add more than 4,000
technician jobs each year. This project aims to address the regional workforce
needs for these skilled biotechnicians by creating a biotechnology program that
specializes in biomanufacturing. This program will be designed to quickly
prepare students for positions in the biotechnology industry. By earning
stackable credentials, students will be prepared for skilled technical jobs with
a living wage in a growing industry that offers substantial employment
stability. The new biotechnology program will include course-based undergraduate
research experiences that align classroom experiences with industry
expectations. In addition, the College will support students in the
biotechnology program with peer mentoring, enhance classes with biomanufacturing
case studies, and develop an internship program. The internships will take place
at the college, making them accessible to more students. The project is designed
to accelerate entry into life science and biotechnology employment and address
the ongoing need for skilled STEM graduates in southern California. By providing
the education needed for entry into biotechnology jobs in the Los Angeles area,
this project can help mitigate disproportionate impacts of COVID-19 on the
largely Hispanic and African American communities served by the
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This support will enable Compton College to: (1)
launch an equitable and industry-validated biotechnology program, (2) establish
an on-site internship program, (3) provide professional development for
community college instructors and secondary school educators, and (4) recruit
and retain a diverse body of students. The college will use industry aligned
skills standards to revise existing biotechnology courses and develop new ones
that meet industry needs. Annually, 24 students are expected to earn a
credential that can qualify them for employment as a Laboratory Assistant.
Students earning this credential may go on to earn a Biomanufacturing Technician
Certificate, which will prepare them to work as Biomanufacturing Technicians. At
least 20 College faculty and secondary teachers will receive professional
development in the form of externships with regional companies and will use
their externship experiences to augment their classroom instruction. Finally,
students will be recruited to participate in a summer Biotech Experience that
will give high school and community college students a chance to explore
biotechnology as a potential future career. The revised biotechnology program
will be permanently integrated into the college’s academic structure. Project
leaders will regionally disseminate their findings throughout the California
Community College System in addition to national conferences. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.