* 2100781
* CATALYST AWARD: FOSSIL FUEL FREE AND RESILIENT NETWORK FOR DISTRICT HEATING AND COOLING
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Wentao Wu, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 05/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution.
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The project at
Tennessee State University seeks to discover the mechanism of the resilience of
fossil-free district heating and cooling (DHC) networks. Fossil-fuel free DHC
networks have potentials to satisfy space cooling and heating demands in future
smart communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to discover
the mechanism of the resilience of fossil-fuel free DHC network. The project
promises to answer the following questions: (1) how to configure network
topologies for better system resilience of renewable-energy fueled district
networks; (2) is there a special building mechanical system more compatible to
renewable-energy fueled DHC network? The project will investigate the system
resilience by developing a holistic and bi-level dynamic modeling framework. The
success of the project would provide a fossil-fuel free solution for space
heating and cooling demand. The potential contribution is to advance the
knowledge on the resilience of using renewable energy. The project outcomes will
support informed decision-making regarding clean energy power
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.