* 2100729
* Excellence in Research: Statistical Network Modeling and Inference for Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yufeng Liu, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 783,432.00

Estimation and inference of network structure have wide applications in many
scientific fields such as genomics and finance. However, the abundance of
complex data presents a great demand for new statistical learning methods in
network analysis. A main goal of this project is to develop a set of novel
methodological and theoretical tools to identify change points and infer
structural changes for high-dimensional networks. Success of this project can
have significant impacts on biomedical sciences and finance. Data applications
to the Alzheimer's disease and portfolio risk monitoring will help to offer new
insights. The team will develop computational packages to facilitate the
application and dissemination of the proposed methods to academia and industry.
Furthermore, the research will be closely integrated with education, through
joint supervision of students and joint development of courses from two
institutions. Underrepresented minority students will be recruited and involved
in the project. The collaborative project will provide an opportunity for
students and faculty in an HBCU institution to gain access to cutting-edge
research and educational resources, and help increase the diversity of the next
generation of data scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of this project
has two main directions. The first one focuses on change point analysis for
heterogenous data. To detect possible change points of a high-dimensional graph,
a threshold variable and a threshold parameter are introduced while considering
all nodes simultaneously to construct a highly effective algorithm. To
simultaneously identify change points in a high-dimensional linear model, an
innovative method to test homogeneity of the corresponding regression
coefficients across different segments is considered. For the second direction,
a nonparametric testing method is developed to compare correlation/covariance
matrices. The team plans to investigate theoretical properties of the proposed
methods and apply the methods to genomics and finance. This project can provide
unique contributions to the statistical learning and big data literature. In
addition, the knowledge gained from the proposed research can be valuable for
handling other complex high dimensional problems in statistics and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.