* 2100563
* Elucidating the role of protein arginine methylation in regulating RNA-binding protein function
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Jun Qu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,109,203.00

The amino acid arginine is one of the building blocks for making proteins in the
cell. In some proteins, arginines can be chemically modified by addition of
methyl groups. However, it is not clear why this happens and what the outcomes
are. This project seeks to solve this puzzle by studying a specific protein in
budding yeast that has methylated arginines and that also appears to be
important for allowing cells to grow in different environments. Key goals are to
discover how the process of arginine methylation is controlled and how arginine
methylation affects protein function. Also, the project will serve as a platform
for improving science education and developing science educators across multiple
levels, through integration of educational outreach during research training.
This includes specific outreach activities aimed at K-12 level. Recruitment of
underrepresented minority, women, and persons with disabilities will be
emphasized.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In eukaryotes, many RNA-binding proteins
harbor protein arginine methylation. This post-translational modification is
catalyzed by a family of evolutionarily conserved enzymes known as protein
arginine methyltransferases (PRMT). Genetic studies have revealed that protein
arginine methylation contributes to the function of RNA-binding proteins, but it
is not clear how this post-translational modification is regulated, and what the
biological consequences of such regulation are. This project will address these
questions by studying a model RNA-binding protein (called Npl3) in the budding
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Npl3 is methylated on arginines by the major
PRMT enzyme in yeast. When methylated, Npl3 promotes splicing of pre-mRNAs that
function at different times in the growth cycle. The goals of this project are
to examine the molecular mechanisms by which protein arginine methylation in
Npl3 is regulated and the consequences of such regulation at both molecular and
cellular levels. A multi-faceted approach using molecular biology, biochemistry,
proteomics, and genomic technologies will be utilized to carry out these
studies. The outcomes are expected to improve our understanding of the dynamics
of protein arginine methylation and its effects on cellular adaptation to growth
under different environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms and the Cellular Dynamics and Function
programs in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.