* 2100385
* RAPID: American Indian Authorities, Trust, and Collective Action during the Covid-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Aila Matanock, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Paul Huth
* 11/30/2021
* USD 187,664.00

This project will determine how citizens react to and utilize information from
different sources on public health policies to inform their individual decisions
on responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. The project will provide systematic and
rigorous evidence on how and why citizens’ perceptions of trust and legitimacy
condition their response to different sources of information from authorities on
public health policies. The results of this project will contribute to improving
the understanding of how public and private authorities can build trust with
citizens and communities through the information they provide on public health
policies to combat COVID-19 and future public health crises.

The research will use multi-wave, survey experiments on rural-based national and
select state populations samples to examine which sources of information
providing guidelines on public health policies are deemed trustworthy and
legitimate by citizens. Those evaluations in turn will be examined to determine
how they influence individual choices about compliance with lockdown orders and
the use of vaccines when they become available. The findings of the project will
advance basic research on the causes of collective action, the public’s reaction
to and use of scientific information and expertise, the social determinants of
improving public health policies, and the efficacy of different information
strategies in times of crisis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.