* 2100494
* Collaborative Research: Microbiota Role in Intestinal Regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jose Garcia-Arraras, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 661,175.00

Little is known about why some animals can regenerate certain tissues or organs,
while other species cannot. This research explores regeneration in a novel
organism, the sea cucumber Holothuria glaberrima. These animals have an
incredible ability to regenerate lost structures and this study will focus on
the regeneration of the intestine. In recent years, the microbial environment
associated with organisms, or microbiota, has been shown to play important roles
in the development and proper function of an organism. This project aims to
determine the possible role of the microbiota on the process of intestinal
regeneration. For this study, the bacteria and other microorganisms that are
associated with the regenerating intestine will be characterized to determine if
and which species might be modulating intestinal regeneration. Moreover, the
project provides "hands-on" research training to undergraduate students as a way
of guiding them toward scientific research careers and help increase the
diversity of the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microbiota
within the digestive tract has been shown to modulate energy metabolism and
immunity in both vertebrate and invertebrate species. However, little is known
of their role in organogenesis and in particular in the regeneration of new
organs following loss or injury. This proposal aims to extend our knowledge of
the microbiota role in developmental and regenerative processes. The proposal
brings together two research scientists with different areas of expertise that
will join forces to focus on the characterization of holothurian intestinal
microbiota and its function in the regeneration of the holothurian digestive
tract. To determine the possible effects of the microbiota, state of the art
technology including RNA-Seq and 16rRNA sequencing together with more
traditional microbiota analyses will be utilized. The proposed project will: (1)
Characterize the intestinal microbiota of two different species of holothurians,
that inhabit different environments and use different feeding methods and
determine the spatial and temporal changes in the microbiota during intestinal
regeneration. (2) Determine the role of the microbiota by modifying the
microbiota using antibiotics and antifungal agents. (3) Identify the host genes
that are under the control of the microbiota in normal and regenerating animals
by performing transcriptomic analyses of normal and regenerating animals treated
with specific antibiotic agents. The outcome of the proposal will be a clear
description of how the microbiota modulates intestinal regeneration, a
characterization of species that play a major role in the process and the target
genes involved in the process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.