* 2100527
* Calibration of the Lithium-in-Feldspar Geospeedometer for Timing Magmatic Events
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Megan Holycross, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 405,922.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). “Crystal clock” techniques use element concentration
profiles preserved in minerals to constrain the timescales of magmatic
processes. Magma recharge, degassing, foaming, fragmentation, and other
perturbations that spur mass transport and trigger eruptions can occur mere
hours to seconds before final magma ascent. Thus, only the fastest-diffusing
cations, like the volatile element lithium (Li) will preserve a crystalline
record of these rapid volcanic events. The goal of this project is to
experimentally quantify the transport of Li isotopes in feldspar solid solutions
to yield data that can be applied to natural volcanic rocks to determine the
onset and duration of these magmatic events. Laboratory experiments will be run
to assess the diffusivities of both total Li and the relative diffusivities of
its two isotopes in feldspar, harnessing the potential of Li isotope
geochemistry to track high-temperature kinetic processes. This project will also
re-assess existing Li diffusion data in plagioclase feldspars and produce the
first data for Li diffusion in potassium feldspars, filling a need for crystal
clocks that are suitable for application to the highly evolved, large volume
magma systems that produce super eruptions. In addition to the intellectual
merits of improved understanding of eruption timescales, this project has
broader impacts that include development of community standards for Li mass
spectrometry and training of a PhD student at Cornell University. Project
outcomes will be incorporated into an educational module on volcano science that
will be delivered to incarcerated persons in upstate New York in collaboration
with the Cornell Prison Education Program
(CPEP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the drivers of volcanic eruptions is
one of the most important tasks facing Earth scientists today. A Li-in-feldspar
diffusion chronometer is uniquely suited to address this task because feldspar
solid solutions are found across magma compositions and concentrations of total
Li in feldspar are well-resolved by common analytical tools like laser ablation
ICP-MS. Recent work has found that Li diffusion occurs by complex mechanisms in
a variety of crystal systems, necessitating a re-assessment of existing Li
diffusion coefficients in plagioclase feldspars to accurately quantify the rates
and timescales of magmatic processes. This project will also produce the first
experimental measurements of Li diffusion in potassium feldspars and the first
measurements of the kinetic fractionation of Li isotopes in feldspar, data which
are critical for discriminating between Li concentration profiles produced by
growth zoning and those produced by mass transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.