* 2100228
* Excellence in Research: Role of the T3SS effector EseN of E. ictaluri in virulence and host immune response.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lidiya Dubytska, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 958,309.00

Catfish are a food source around the world. Reducing fish loss is an essential
task in the catfish industry for food security. Edwardsiella ictaluri is a
bacterium, and it is a leading cause of catfish disease and loss. The goal of
this project is to identify how this bacterium causes disease and death in
catfish. We show that the EseN bacterial product is a virulence factor.
Experiments here will identify how this EseN protein is involved in the disease
development. These findings will increase basic knowledge about host-pathogen
interactions. EseN has no equivalents in eukaryotes, and can therefore be an
attractive target for indirect narrow-spectrum antibiotics. Findings from this
project could be applied for disease prevention, disease control, and the
development of a live-attenuated vaccine. Recently, Edwardsiellosis was also
reported in other fish species that increases the importance of this work. The
proposed work will also have a broad impact on research and research
productivity at Southern University. It includes a mentoring program for
undergraduate students and under-served high school students introduce them to
research and to prepare them for careers in the Biological Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to determine the molecular
mechanism(s) that the E. ictaluri T3SS effector EseN employs to accomplish its
impact as a virulence factor on host physiology. This will be accomplished by
investigating EseN modulation of host cell gene expression, determining EseN-
host protein interactions, establishing phenotypic changes associated with
specific gene mutations, and determining expression of genes involved in the
host innate immune response. The E. ictaluri T3SS effector EseN is similar to
Shigella OspF and Salmonella SpvC, which selectively dephosphorylate
extracellular signal regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), p38, and c-Jun-N-
terminal/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK) during infections, resulting in
inactivation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways. The
EseN amino acid similarity to these other effectors, however, does not ensure
similar activity, even if the biochemical activity of the homologous proteins is
the same. Indeed, we find that EseN also targets the major vault protein and
potentially phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3), in addition to ERK1/2. This
demonstrates unique functions of EseN that are not described in its homologs.
When these data are combined with the demonstrated high level of attenuation of
an EseN knock-out mutant, we hypothesize that EseN is a major virulence factor
that plays an essential role in manipulating host cytokine production and
limiting induction of the host innate and adaptive immune responses. This
project is jointly funded by Excellence in Research (EiR), and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.