* 2100797
* Excellence in Research: CAS: Design Principles for Enabling the Adsorption of Heavy Metal Cations and Oxoanions in Layered Double Hydroxides through Targeted Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Muhammad Islam, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 459,998.00

In this Excellence in Research project, Professor Muhammad Islam of the
Department of Chemistry, Physics and Atmospheric sciences at Jackson State
University is developing new classes of two-dimensional (2D) material that
exhibit intriguing adsorption and chemical exchange properties. The central
goals of this project are to design, synthesize and functionalize a unique class
of hybrid layered materials with an enhanced built-in property for the rapid,
concurrent, highly efficient sequestration of a chemically distinct class of
toxic metallic and non-metallic pollutants relevant to environmental remediation
and wastewater treatment. The research activities of this project lie at the
nexus of inorganic, materials and environmental chemistry. Thus, this project
will serve as a multidisciplinary platform to educate the students in the STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields. Developing scientific
literacy and translation of science to a broader audience are also key to this
research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to expand our
knowledge of layered materials design principles to enable the development of
new classes of adsorbents for hard, borderline, and soft Lewis acidic heavy
metal cations, and oxyanions. The proposed efforts could advance the chemistry
of metal-polysulfides and metal-oxypolysulfides intercalated into hybrid single-
phase 2D layer double hydroxides (LDHs) and could develop a correlation among
their distinct chemical entities and their synergistic interactions with
inorganic cationic and anionic species. This project will investigate the
impacts of a number of factors on their adsorption behaviors. Such factors
include metal sulfide ratios, valence states of the polysulfides, cation
exchanged into the interlayered metal-polysulfide anions, chemically distinct
oxides and sulfides in a single anionic moiety, 2D layered host LDHs with ion-
exchangeable cations, different degrees of host-guest interactions, and variable
inter-layered distances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.