* 2100971
* Catalyst: Chemiluminescence, Quantum Yield and High-Dimensional Data Analysis in Trajectory Surface Hopping Simulation
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jian-Ge Zhou, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution.
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The project at
Jackson State University applies machine learning approaches, the subset of
artificial intelligence (AI), to automatically collect and analyze the
nonadiabatic molecular dynamics data to uncover the mechanism of improving
quantum yield. The project also designs the exciting educational interface of
Bayesian support vector machines and trajectory surface hopping simulation,
which provides unique research experience and practical AI skill for
undergraduate students from populations that are historically underrepresented
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates Bayesian support vector
machines with trajectory surface hopping approach to explore the origin of
chemiluminescence yield, and develops the educational modules for undergraduate
research and lab training. The proposed simulation and data analysis includes:
1) being able to process the vast amount of the surface hopping trajectory data
via Bayesian support vector machines - based separatrices to extract useful and
meaningful information of quantum yield; 2) uncovering the transition threshold
through high-weight support vectors separating energy subspaces; 3) manifesting
how initial conditions of trajectories differentiate energy states; 4)
establishing the relation between initial nuclear phase space coordinates and
class probabilities. It also sizes down the sophisticated computational protocol
into multiple modules, and each module development is used as a research project
for undergraduate participants. Beyond the local and regional educational
benefits, the research entails a major benefit to society in that successful
results could lead to the revolution of bioluminescence imaging technology (BIT)
and photodynamic therapy (PDT), which would greatly enhance the accuracy of
tumor diagnosis (via BIT) and the survival rate in cancer treatment (via
PDT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.