* 2100059
* NNCI Coordinating Office at Georgia Tech
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2025
* David Gottfried, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,100,000.00

The National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) comprises 16
university sites and their partners awarded individually by the National Science
Foundation to provide open access to nanoscale fabrication and characterization
user facilities and staff expertise across the nation. The NNCI Coordinating
Office at Georgia Tech enhances the impact of NNCI as a national infrastructure
network by promoting its capabilities, facilitating user access to its
resources, sharing best practices, and improving overall efficiency through
coordination of activities of the individual sites. The Coordinating Office
assists users from academe, industry, and government in finding NNCI fabrication
and characterization resources to meet their research needs through an NNCI
website and other marketing approaches. The Coordinating Office leadership,
using site staff expertise, facilitates programs in education and outreach,
social and ethical implications, computational modeling and simulation, and
innovation and entrepreneurship across the network, and helps provide linkages
with other national and international nanotechnology resources. The overall
activities of the NNCI Coordinating Office contribute to the economic
competitiveness of the U.S. in training a globally competitive workforce and in
providing efficient access to resources for commercialization of nanotechnology.
They also help to inform and educate the general public on fundamentals and
advances of nanoscience and engineering and their social and ethical
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the NNCI Coordinating Office
is to support the interests of individual NNCI sites, site users, and the
broader public using the combined assets of a nation-wide network of university-
based nanotechnology user facilities. The Coordinating Office uses a variety of
mechanisms to communicate availability of network assets to users of the
facilities, foster interactions among the sites, and assess the impact of the
various programs. A primary mode for communication is a dedicated NNCI website,
which allows new and existing users to efficiently locate capabilities and
expertise within the network, and also provide up-to-date nanotechnology
resources to students, teachers, and the broader public. To emphasize the
importance of a network of sites, the Coordinating Office is guided by an
Executive Committee with representation from all 16 sites as well as a number of
Working Groups and Subcommittees that address topics of broad interest and solve
common problems. Research Communities are organized around key scientific and
engineering challenges and represent an opportunity for the NNCI to interact
with the broader research ecosystem. A flagship event for the NNCI network is an
annual NNCI Conference that will highlight the research supported by the
individual sites, as well as provide a venue for site staff to share best
practices and research trends. An External Advisory Board provides input on
network management issues and future directions. Education and outreach
activities are coordinated across the network to share and disseminate best
practices and resources for impactful programs at the local, regional, and
national levels. Network and multi-site programs include those for
undergraduates (REU) and teachers (RET). Societal and ethical implications
programs, such as an annual retreat and workshops, enable social scientists to
interact with nanoscale scientists, engineers, and students so that all groups
can consider the potential impacts new discoveries might have on society.
Computational modeling and simulation needs of the user community are supported
through an inventory of available resources and collaboration with the Network
for Computational Nanotechnology (NCN), as well as a planned seminar series.
Innovation and entrepreneurship activities, such as a speaker series,
undergraduate education, and entrepreneur-in-residence programs, provide a means
for realizing the economic and societal benefits of NNCI resources and
expertise. Assessment of the strength of the sites and the network as a whole
are determined through metrics developed in collaboration with the sites and are
based on site usage, site productivity and impact, contributions to the network,
and education and outreach activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.