* 2100830
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Teachers to Develop Equitable Mathematics Instruction Through Rubric-based Coaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Jonee Wilson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,146,432.00

Creating supportive middle school mathematics learning spaces that foster
students' self-efficacy and mathematics learning is a critical need in the
United States. This need is particularly urgent for mathematics classrooms with
students who have been historically marginalized in such spaces. While many
instructional improvement efforts have focused on broadening access to
mathematical ideas, fewer efforts have paid explicit attention to the ways
instructional practices may serve to marginalize students. Supporting teachers
in identifying and refining their equitable mathematics instructional practices
is a persistent challenge. This project brings together a successful mathematics
rubric-based coaching model (MQI Coaching) and an empirically developed
observation tool focused on equity-focused instructional practices, the Equity
and Access Rubrics for Mathematics Instruction (EAR-MI). The project's work
integrates the EAR-MI rubrics into the MQI Coaching model with 24 middle grades
mathematics coaches supporting 72 teachers at grades 5-8. The project measures
the effects of the coaching model on teachers' beliefs and instructional
practices and on students' mathematical achievement and sense of belonging in
mathematics. The project also investigates how teachers' attitudes and beliefs
impact their participation and what teachers take away from engagement with the
coaching model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes use of a delayed-
treatment experimental design to investigate effects on teacher beliefs and
practices and student achievement and sense of belonging. A cohort of 14 coaches
are randomly selected to participate in the coaching in Years 2 and 3, with the
remaining 10 coaches assigned to a business-as-usual model in Year 2 and
engaging in the training in Year 3. Coaches engage in a 4-day summer training to
become acquainted with the model with coaching cycles and follow-up meetings
during the school year. Each coach will engage teachers in 8-10 coaching cycles
in treatment years. Data on the nature of the coaching includes logs and surveys
from the coaches. Teachers submit surveys related to their beliefs and practices
and two lessons each at the start and end of the academic year for analysis.
Student assessment data, course grades, and administrative data, combined with
survey data from students on classroom belonging and perceptions of ability and
confidence in mathematics, are used to describe student outcomes. Teacher
outcomes are captured through the analysis of classroom video, surveys about
ethnic-racial identity and racial attitudes, beliefs about students and
instruction, and beliefs about and efficacy for culturally responsive teaching.
The project uses a set of survey measures with established reliability and
validity, adapting some instruments to include specific indicators related to
the equity and access rubrics. Analysis of the data uses a multi-level model
accounting for the clustering of teachers within schools and students within
classrooms and schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The DRK-12 program seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.