* 2100493
* Collaborative Research: Two-way Coupled Fluid/Particulate Transport in Fractured Media - Bridging the Scales from Microscopic Origins to Macroscopic Networks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sungyon Lee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 348,253.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contamination of hydrologic
systems such as oceans, rivers, lakes, and aquifers with particulates has
emerged as one of the most urgent environmental issues of today. Recent field
data suggests a clear presence of solid contaminants, such as microplastics and
pathogens, in fractured aquifers which make up a significant portion of the
world's drinking water supply and in other subsurface media. Understanding and
predicting particulate transport in subsurface fracture flows poses both
fundamental and practical challenges, as it requires a quantitative
understanding of particle/fluid transport across many length scales that range
from individual particles to a network of fractures. To overcome these
challenges, our research will uncover the physical origin of the coupled
particle/fluid transport and its effects on the large-scale particle transport,
by combining laboratory experiments, theoretical modeling, and computations both
at the particle scale and the network scale. The resultant particulate transport
models will greatly improve our predictive capabilities for wide-ranging
subsurface processes, which include contaminant transport, geological nuclear
waste disposal, hydraulic fracturing, and enhanced geothermal systems. In
addition, this project will provide training opportunities for graduate students
and post-docs from diverse backgrounds, as well as collaborative educational
activities for high school summer interns who will gain project-based experience
as part of interdisciplinary teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
explore and quantify the effects of two-way coupled particle/fluid motion on
particulate transport in fractured media, across a wide range of scales. Towards
this end, they will combine detailed laboratory experiments as well as particle-
resolving simulations at the single-fracture scale, with novel upscaling
approaches to the fracture network scale. Traditional particulate transport
models in subsurface systems treat particles as passive scalars that do not
affect the surrounding flow field, although their preliminary experiments
demonstrate that particles can actively modify the fluid flow and even trigger
hydrodynamic instabilities. By overcoming this deficiency of traditional models,
this research project will provide the next generation of large-scale subsurface
particulate transport models. Specifically, they will address three research
questions: 1) the microscopic origins of the two-way coupling; 2) the
hydrodynamic instabilities and dispersion in a single fracture; 3) the effects
of two-way coupling on network-scale particulate transport. They will conduct
systematic laboratory experiments to characterize particle-scale instabilities
and collective particle behavior at the single fracture scale, which will be
verified and supplemented by particle-resolving Navier-Stokes simulations of
concentrated suspensions in rough fractures. The resulting data will provide
effective dispersivities and stochastic rules of particulate motion that capture
the two-way coupling effects on particulate transport. These results from the
single fracture study will be incorporated into fracture network models, in
order to assess the influence of two-way coupling on particulate transport at
the network scale and to develop upscaled particulate transport
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.