* 2100062
* Targeted Research to Identify Mathematics Competencies and Align Mathematics Education for Skilled Technicians in Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Paul Horwitz, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2024
* USD 799,315.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by aligning the mathematics
taught in technical programs with the needs of advanced manufacturing
technicians in the workplace. To do so, the research team will conduct a three-
year research and development project that builds upon recommendations of the
NSF-supported Needed Math Conference held in 2018. The project will establish
connections between the American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges
and manufacturing educators and industrialists. The project intends to use this
collaboration to: (1) develop and validate situations encountered by technicians
in several manufacturing sectors; (2) identify the mathematics competencies
technicians need in those situations; and (3) enhance communication between
industry leaders and community college technical faculty to identify and align
the mathematics needed by skilled technicians in manufacturing. It is expected
that the project will improve mathematics education in technical programs. In
addition, the project may provide a model for how partnerships involving
academia, industry, and other stakeholders can enable curriculum reform to meet
present and future industry needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish its goals,
the project will hold a series of Collaborative Working Group meetings across
the country to establish and sustain changes in mathematics instruction for
students pursuing certificates and degrees for careers in advanced
manufacturing. Institutions and organizations involved in this project are
Hofstra University, City University of New York, Holyoke Community College,
Rhodes State College, American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges,
Consortium for Mathematics and its Applications, Florida Advanced Technological
Education Center, Central Virginia Community College, Support Center for
Microsystems Education, Gadsden State College, Ohlone College, and the Center
for Supply Chain Automation. The project is designed to develop resources that
inform the teaching of mathematics, coupled with a mixed methods research
investigation. Drawing on work by Simon and Goes, a validation panel will review
workplace scenarios using the Validation Rubric for Expert Panels. The
qualitative (grounded theory) and quantitative (descriptive, linear regression,
ANOVA, cluster analysis) research design will integrate data collection and
analyses that are guided by a set of four research questions that focus on: (1)
the alignment between mathematics competencies for the technical workplace and
the mathematics taught in technical programs; and (2) the effectiveness of
collaborative working groups as mechanisms for change in the post-secondary
mathematics education of skilled manufacturing technicians. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nationâ€™s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.