* 2100739
* Excellence in Research: Convergent Physics-based Data-driven Bioprinting of Regenerative Tissues for Future Biomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sang Jin Lee, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2024
* USD 528,738.00

Regenerative tissue engineering holds great promise to replace diseased and
dysfunctional organs with stem cells. The fabrication of tissue scaffolds in
stem-cell engineering is, however, dependent on an interplay of several factors
such as biochemical signaling, cellular arrangement and related process
parameters. Key impediments in progressing biomanufacturing research are the
lack of formal guiding principles and real-time process monitoring, in addition
to the exorbitant resources required to conduct stem-cell based bioprinting
experiments. This critical barrier has limited the ability to control the growth
behavior of multiple cell types to form viable tissue constructs for organ
replacement. To address these issues, this Excellent in Research award will
investigate physics-based models that integrate sensor data with machine
learning algorithms and experimentation to create a digital twin of bioprinting
processes. The discovery-driven research will generate a body of knowledge to
guide researchers and industrial users through an open-source repository of
Bioprinting Design and Manufacturing rules for regenerative tissue engineering.
The education efforts including the development of biomanufacturing coursework
will impact underrepresented students at the North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University, one of the nation’s largest historical black
colleges and universities, and beyond. A scholar exchange program with the Wake
Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine (WFIRM) will train student cohorts in
biomanufacturing, data-analytics and guiding
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
establish a physics-based data-driven structure in hybrid bioprinting to custom
engineer stem-cell based tissue constructs. The specific objectives include (1)
creating a robust framework integrating computational modeling, experimental
results and industrial internet of things based scaffold health monitoring
techniques for bioprinting, (2) understanding the combinatorial effect of
adsorption configurations of biochemical cues and nanoscale topologies using
hybrid physics-based data-driven models, and (3) investigating relationships
among interacting materials, process parameters and microenvironmental variables
of bioprinting for closed-loop control. The team plans a convergent approach
wherein, computational modeling data, experimental research, real-time in-situ
sensors and diagnostics will be augmented to investigate bioprinting process
parameters. Machine learning algorithms will be applied to the consolidated data
sets to unravel the underlying hidden patterns between topography, mechanical
stimuli and biochemical cues in determining cell fate and function. The hybrid
predictive models will be developed to enable real-time monitoring and control
of the bioprinting process and material formulations. Cell proliferation,
histological staining, and biochemical assays will be performed at the WFIRM to
validate the hybrid models. Input-output relationship mappings will enable
integrated process control, monitoring and smart process data analytics towards
a Biomanufacturing Industry 4.0.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.