* 2100640
* I-Corps: Self-guiding drilling tool for the oil, gas and geothermal industries
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Eduardo Gildin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the benefits
for the energy industry, especially the US oil &amp; gas and geothermal
industries. The energy sector is ramping up its digital transformation process
as other sectors (e.g. automotive or information technology) have already seen
tremendous progress in digitalization. Over the next five years, the markets for
traditional drilling tools and digital oilfields are expected to reach $5
billion and $30 billion, respectively. Furthermore, with the increasing clean
energy demand and regulations regarding eco-friendliness, the global geothermal
energy market is projected to reach $9 billion by 2025, with a significant share
held by North America. The proposed, automated, self-guided drilling tool
targets this market to reduce the public, environmental, and economic hazards
associated with deep oil and geothermal well development. Improved drilling
operations will keep the overall drilling rig's footprint low, significantly
minimizing sidetracks and non-productive time. Consequently, the intended semi-
autonomous process will ultimately reduce costs and energy consumption resulting
in more environment-friendly drilling and improved
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will explore the commercial
potential of technology stemming from previously funded drilling automation
research. The proposed self-guided drilling tool is superior by at least two
automation levels compared to the current market tools, resulting in significant
cost savings and improved safety. Developing a tailored prototype and a
functional tool requires a much better understanding of potential customer
needs. This I-Corps project aims to discover critical customer needs through
comprehensive customer interviews to guide prototype development. Proving
technical and economic feasibility of the product will benefit automated
drilling operations and open up avenues for implementing the technology in other
aspects of process optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.