* 2100322
* Teaching Technician Troubleshooting with Mini Industry 4.0 Factories
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Waddoups, Bridgerland Applied Technology College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 547,981.00

Utah is facing a critical shortage of skilled advanced manufacturing technicians
due to the large number of industries that continue to automate their
facilities, the limited number of advanced manufacturing programs in the state,
and the looming retirement of a large portion of the workforce in the next
several years. Automated systems that formerly employed standalone electronic
systems are now integrated with more automated processes such as: information
technology, big data, and industrial robotics. Manufacturers are calling for
students who not only understand the constituent parts of manufacturing systems
and how they interact but fundamentally understand troubleshooting methodology.
Highly skilled technicians need to be able to troubleshoot complex systems that
are not only composed of motors, conveyors, and sensors, but also reliant on
networks of devices, intricate computer codes that control processes, and high-
speed exchanges of data about the state of the different components in the
systems. Bridgerland Applied Technology College, in collaboration with industry
partners, aims to develop and build a “Mini Industry 4.0” factory along with
associated curricular materials. Together they will be used to teach
troubleshooting practices in support of the education of the skilled technical
workforce needed by the advanced manufacturing industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
meet the demands of industry, this project will pursue four objectives. First is
to integrate troubleshooting methodology into the current curriculum of three
programs at the institution. Second is to build a low cost "Mini Industry 4.0"
factory and develop a corresponding troubleshooting curriculum. Third is to
provide professional development in troubleshooting complex manufacturing
systems for faculty. And fourth is to deliver high-quality professional
development to high school and college faculty throughout the region. The
project will evaluate how the mini-factory and augmented reality impact student
learning outcomes with respect to troubleshooting, and the College will evaluate
students periodically throughout the certificate with respect to "Employment
Skills &amp; Ethics." Redesigned certificate courses and newly designed industry
courses will be shared across the state and nation. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.