* 2100339
* Educating Technicians to Use Precision Technology for Innovative Livestock Management
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Jay Olsen, Snow College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 04/30/2024
* USD 304,580.00

The livestock industry is an important part of Utah's economy, especially in the
rural six-county region served by Snow College. Livestock managers apply
biological and chemical principles to livestock growth and production. In
livestock operations, feed is the largest annual expense. Thus, to increase
profitability, livestock farmers and ranchers must find ways to minimize feed
costs. An emerging technological approach to feed costs and sustainability is
Innovative Livestock Management. This approach includes the use of complex
technologies, such as precision irrigation and geospatial monitoring of grazing
and feed production to maximize fodder production. In addition, Innovative
Livestock Management includes composting technologies to manage livestock waste,
while maintaining and improving water quality, increasing environmental
sustainability, and producing marketable compost that can further increase
profitability. This project will support development of the first Innovative
Livestock Management program in Utah. Through this program, students will learn
about innovative livestock management approaches and gain the related technical
skills to improve economic success, profitability, and sustainability of
livestock production. Graduates will be able to apply these skills to manage
large industrial ranching operations or small family-owned farms. As a result,
this project can strengthen Utahâ€™s agricultural economy, while improving water
conservation and water quality. In addition, the new Innovative Livestock
Management program, which focuses on scientific, technical, and management
skills, may be replicable at colleges throughout the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new Innovative Livestock
Management program will offer stackable certificates and an A.A.S. degree. It
will also develop articulation agreements that enable students to transfer to
four-year institutions and earn advanced degrees. The program will offer a
curriculum that includes two new classes, "Forage and Grazing Management" and
"Composting and Regenerative Livestock Waste Management," along with
modifications of existing courses in irrigation management, animal feeds and
animal science, and drones and aerial imagery. Graduates will be able to assume
management responsibilities by applying their knowledge and skills in data-
driven precision technologies in 1) the planting of forage varieties, 2) the use
of fertilizer and irrigation to improve feed production, 3) livestock waste
management and composting, 4) the use of drones, GPS, and GIS for monitoring
both grazing and feed production, and 5) evaluation of animal performance. An
advisory committee of representatives from local livestock industries, including
family farms, will guide program development to ensure that it appropriately
addresses specific management needs. An additional component of the project will
be the development of a pathway that connects high school students in
agricultural courses to this program. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.