* 2100072
* Expansion, Curriculum Evolution, and Enhancement of Biotechnician Training
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Margaret Bryans, Wistar Institute
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,969.00

An urgent need exists for a highly trained, diverse life sciences research
workforce to support the rapidly expanding U.S. biotechnology industry. To
address this need, this award will enable Wistar Institute to entirely re-design
an existing hands-on, mentored technician training program and expand it to
additional community colleges. The project will provide students with research
experiences required for employment as technicians in biomedical research.
Students will participate in an accelerated, paid summer program that includes
pre-apprenticeship training, a hands-on Orientation at Wistar, and two full-time
mentored laboratory experiences. Program graduates will be prepared for
immediate employment as laboratory technicians or for advanced training through
Wistar’s Biomedical Research Technician Apprenticeship program. The project aims
to engage a diverse and underrepresented student population in life sciences
research, while offering a direct path to employment as a laboratory technician.
The project will address the compelling need to prepare community college
students who have been disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic for
employment in the skilled biotechnology workforce. This program can also serve
as a model for other community colleges and scientific research
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three primary goals: 1) Expand to
recruit more students, including those from new community college partners,
while developing articulation agreements that make the project a credit-bearing
experience; 2) Develop a novel project-based curriculum that more effectively
engages students, especially those from underrepresented groups, in
biotechnology research skills training; and 3) Redesign the existing two-summer
program as a one-summer experience that includes full-time internships in both
academic and industry labs. The project will use Wistar’s interactive trainee
website to maintain data, measure student outcomes, track career development,
and provide networking opportunities. The project will also compare
participation and outcomes of students in Wistar’s existing two-summer program
with those in the new one-summer option. The project plans to map specific
skills and competency standards, as well as disseminate training models and
materials. It is anticipated that the project can provide a blueprint for
incorporating biotechnician pre-apprenticeship training into biotechnology and
science curricula at community colleges, while serving as a model for regional
program expansion. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.