* 2100297
* Developing and Implementing Hybrid Instruction to Increase the Access of Women and Adult Learners to Diesel Technology Training
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Anna Beard, George C. Wallace State Community College-Hanceville
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 279,336.00

The Alabama Department of Labor has identified Diesel Technicians as a high
demand occupation and estimates that 3000 technicians will be hired over the
next six years. Wallace State Community College will help to meet this need by
revising and enhancing its Diesel Technician program to align with industrial
needs and to put students on the path to quickly earn a credential that will
result in employment. The college will leverage partnerships to build new
virtual training opportunities that will make the program more accessible to
students who need flexible learning options. An additional partnership with the
National Institute of Women in Trades, Technology, and Sciences will increase
the diversity of students entering the Diesel Technology program, ultimately
providing more opportunities and jobs for women and adult learners. This project
has the potential to establish a pathway to employment for individuals in
communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic
in Alabama. In addition, the project can decrease the potential negative impacts
on supply-chain logistics that heavily rely on diesel technology for the
transportation of groceries and farming supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
revised Diesel Technician program will be designed to (1) improve student
learning outcomes by aligning the curriculum with National Automotive
Technicians Education Foundation standards, (2) implement a hybrid online
content delivery model that will enable students to complete up to 75% of their
coursework from remote locations, and (3) increase the number of graduates who
are women and/or from populations that are not yet equitably represented in
diesel technology fields. A Diesel Technology Business and Industry Leadership
Team will work with college faculty to align the curriculum with the needs of
employers. Students enrolled in the program will use virtual reality training to
give them access to on-the-job training that would otherwise take place in a
technical workshop. A digital coach in the virtual training modules will provide
immediate feedback through Conversational Artificial Intelligence. Information
gathered from this project will be shared and replicated among ten Wallace State
STEM Career and Technical Education workforce programs. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.