* 2100984
* Polaritonic Quantum Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Albert DePrince, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 444,721.00

Eugene DePrince of Florida State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop theoretical tools for the description of strongly-coupled
light-matter systems. Strong interactions between nanoconfined photons and
molecular systems can lead to the creation of hybrid light-matter states, known
as polaritons, that may display remarkably different chemical and physical
properties than their parent components. The technological and chemical
applications of these polariton states are wide-ranging. Recent examples of
cavity-based catalysis, polariton lasing, and plasmon-based photostabilization
offer only a glimpse into the transformative potential of polaritonic approaches
to chemistry and materials science. In order for the field to fully live up to
its promise, the experimental realization of ultra-strong light-matter coupling
must be accompanied by high-quality theoretical descriptions of the properties
of polaritonic features. The DePrince group will develop a robust, reliable, and
systematically improvable framework for the ab initio description of polaritonic
structure. The theories and software that will be developed will fill a gap in
the existing computational tool kit for the high-accuracy description of
polariton-mediated processes. Such tools have the potential to facilitate the
rational design of new polariton-based technologies relevant to light
harvesting, super conductivity, and quantum information science. All software
developed under this program will be released in a free and open-source manner.
Under this award, the DePrince group also will be developing readily accessible
online educational materials for quantum chemistry and computer science
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. DePrince and his team will take a many-body
approach to the polaritonic structure problem, with an emphasis on the equation-
of-motion (EOM) coupled-cluster (CC) hierarchy of methods. Polaritonic
formulations of excitation-energy (EE), ionization potential (IP), and electron
affinity (EA) EOM-CC theory and software will be developed and applied to a
variety of problems involving cavity-bound molecules. Ab initio descriptions of
strong and ultra-strong light-matter coupling are rare, with only a few existing
examples of many-body approaches to this problem having recently emerged. Given
that the exact form of the electron-photon exchange-correlation functional in
polaritonic formulations of density functional theory (DFT) is unknown, it
appears that many-body methods such as the EOM-CC approaches that will be
developed under this program offer the only route to universally reliable and
systematically improvable descriptions of cavity-molecule
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.