* 2100113
* Enhancing Aviation Maintenance Technician Training with Nondestructive Testing Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Samuel Fischer, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 04/30/2024
* USD 529,354.00

Nondestructive Testing (NDT) is used to detect and evaluate defects in materials
without damaging the object being tested. In this way, NDT can be used to ensure
the functionality of objects across their period of service. The NDT industry is
expected to grow substantially over the next few years, driving an increasing
industry demand for technicians with the knowledge and skills needed to perform
NDT. A need for more NDT technicians already exists within Northeast Florida’s
aviation manufacturing industry. However, local college education programs are
not available to help meet this need. This project aims to establish a new
career pathway in NDT for students and incumbent workers. It will do so by
developing a new NDT certificate program within the current Aviation Maintenance
Technology associate degree program at Florida State College at Jacksonville. To
support the certificate program, the project will create a new NDT learning lab
equipped with training equipment so that students can learn how to use different
types of NDT methods. A set of NDT lab exercises will be developed for outreach
activities, such as high school visits and summer camps, designed to increase
the number of students in the certificate program. These outreach efforts will
focus on reaching students from communities that are underrepresented in the
aviation maintenance workforce. The project is expected to provide the aviation
industry with workforce-ready technicians while broadening participation in the
technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on recommendations from aviation
industry partners, the college will develop a program to prepare students for
American Society of Nondestructive Testing (ASNT) NDT Level I certification. It
will develop the NDT program with guidance from a Business and Industry
Leadership Team (BILT) that includes members from the aviation industry and
academic institutions. The project anticipates developing a set of five courses
covering the common NDT techniques of magnetic particle, liquid penetrant,
electromagnetic, ultrasonic, and visual inspection. The courses will use an
inquiry-based learning model based on the 5E learning cycle, Engage, Explore,
Explain, Evaluate, and Extend. A new NDT learning lab will serve as an
educational training center for faculty and students and will include NDT
equipment needed for inspection techniques covered in the ASNT Level I
certification. Outreach activities will be conducted at participating high
schools to introduce students to NDT technology, to describe career
opportunities available in aviation technology, and to share profiles of high
school and college students from diverse populations who are employed in the
aviation technology industry. The impact of the project activities on student
enrollment and retention will be assessed using institutional data including
demographics, student enrollment in courses, and student retention rate. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.