* 2100345
* High-Precision Synthesis and Analysis of Deuterated Cycloalkene Isotopomers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Brooks Pate, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors W. Dean Harman and Brooks Pate of the University of Virginia are
studying ways to make and identify molecules with distinct three-dimensional
structures that differ in the attachment of hydrogen (H) and its isotope
deuterium (D = a hydrogen atom with an extra neutron) to specific carbon atoms.
Professor Harman is using a metal complex to template the controlled addition of
deuterium to organic molecules. Professor Pate is developing molecular
rotational resonance spectroscopy techniques to identify the structural
distinctions between molecules that only differ in the attachment of hydrogen
and deuterium. While hydrogen and deuterium exhibit similar broad reactivity
patterns, carbon-deuterium bonds are slightly stronger than carbon-hydrogen
bonds and this difference can be used to alter how a fast a reaction occurs. By
installing deuterium instead of hydrogen in specific portions of a molecule, the
biological activity of the molecule can be adapted to provide opportunities for
increased drug lifetime, reduced dosing, and improved safety margins. Common
techniques used by organic chemists to identify the structures of molecules are
insufficient for determining the attachment of a hydrogen and a deuterium at a
single carbon atom. Molecular resonance spectroscopy is being developed to
address this limitation. These activities will provide an interdisciplinary
education for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students. Professors
Harman and Pate are also actively pursuing opportunities to increase
participation in chemistry by underrepresented groups through engagement in
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to the deuterium kinetic isotope
effect, compounds in which hydrogen atoms have been replaced with deuterium can
show dramatically reduced rates of metabolism. To progress toward the goal of
having accessible isotopologue building blocks for incorporation into the active
pharmaceutical ingredient of existing or potential drugs, Professor Harman is
developing strategies for the precise synthesis of isotopologues and
stereoisotopomers of common cycloalkenes. The fundamental reactivity of aromatic
molecules bound to tungsten complexes is being investigated to enable the
precise, sequential addition of individual deuterium atoms to aromatic rings.
Through this process, a variety of specific isomers can be generated in high
purity, solely differentiated by the number, position, and three-dimensional
location of the deuterium atoms. A key challenge to making isotopologue and
stereoisotopomer building blocks is the inability to accurately determine their
molecular geometry and extent of purity through conventional characterization
methods. Professor Pate is addressing this limitation through the development of
molecular resonance spectroscopy techniques for enantio-enriched isotopomers, an
approach that his designed to accommodate high-throughput analysis. With the
good synergy between the development of synthetic chemistry and of new
complementary analytical techniques, this research will provide a strong,
interdisciplinary training environment for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.