* 2100325
* Collaborative Research:Beyond Representation: Adversity Experiences on STEM Motivation, Performance, and Persistence
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Suazette Mooring, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 633,774.00

Understanding the impact of adversity experiences on STEM persistence and
performance is significant to broaden participation of individuals from groups
that have been traditionally underrepresented. Researchers at Georgia State
University and Pennsylvania State University aim to study the effects of
adversity experiences on student motivation to pursue STEM majors and student
persistence and performance in STEM degree programs. The project aims to develop
and use a model that predicts how different sources of adversity affect STEM
motivation, persistence, and performance. This project aligns with the EHR Core
Research program’s goal of addressing challenges in STEM interest, learning, and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The longitudinal study will include surveys
of 1000 first-time, first-year STEM majors enrolled in introductory Chemistry
and Psychology courses at two large minority-serving and economically diverse
public research institutions. The project aims to produce adversity profiles,
derived from Latent Profile Analysis, that will guide investigations of links
among adversity, motivation, and decisions to remain in STEM fields. The project
seeks to identify patterns of adversity and determine which profiles have the
strongest association with STEM persistence and achievement, examine how
longitudinal patterns in motivation and performance operate as a function of
adversity, and determine how adversity profiles and adversity levels change over
time. Demographic differences and differences between STEM departments and
universities will be examined. This project seeks to advance knowledge about
adversity experiences’ impact on STEM motivation that may be used to develop
interventions that target students whose STEM motivation and performance are
inhibited by multidimensional adversity. The project is funded by the EHR Core
Research program that supports fundamental research focused on STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM professional
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.