* 2100582
* RUI: Thermodynamics and NMR Crystallography of Organic Crystal Forms
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Manish Mehta, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2025
* USD 422,360.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Manish Mehta of Oberlin
College is using experimental methods of physical chemistry to study the
stability of organic co-crystals, the molecular basis of plastic and elastic
crystals, and the creation of crystals that will allow existing techniques to
determine their structures to a new level of accuracy. Co-crystals have proved
to be a useful formulation for some medicinal compounds, one that allows control
over factors such as solubility and biological effectiveness, yet their
stability is poorly understood. The PI and his research team are building two
custom instruments that will enable measurements of physical properties to
determine that stability. His team is also investigating the structural
characteristics of an unusual class of bendable organic crystals. If success,
these studies will add to our understanding of the connection between structure
and stability, and this will inform the design of new compounds. The research is
being performed by college students as part of a course taught by the PI.
Undergraduate participants in this research are gaining hands-on experience with
modern experimental methods, acquiring skills in written and oral communication,
and eventually are expected be undergraduate coauthors on peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns organic crystal forms
and is divided into two main thrust areas. The first goal is to determine three
key thermodynamic quantities necessary to understand the relative stability of
crystal forms: the enthalpy of formation via bomb calorimetry, standard molar
entropy via heat capacities using low-temperature calorimetry, and the enthalpy
of sublimation via the Knudsen effusion mass-loss method. These three quantities
are being combined to yield the Gibbs energy of formation, which determines
overall thermodynamic stability. The study focuses a set of molecular targets
chosen for their structural homology; included are common functional groups and
ubiquitous supramolecular synthons. This course-based undergraduate research is
being performed as part of a thermodynamics course taught by the PI. In the
second thrust area, the PI and his research team are investigating elastic and
plastic molecular crystals by using solid-state NMR to detect subtle changes
when the crystals are subjected to mechanical strain. The team will attempt to
detect the effects of isotope substitution on organic crystalline structure.
Students are gaining hands-on experience with cutting-edge techniques which will
prepare them for advanced study in the chemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.