* 2100632
* IUCRC Phase II+ University of Maryland: Center for Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing Innovation (AMBIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 245,000.00

The Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing Innovation Center (AMBIC) represents a
unique opportunity to maintain national excellence and US technological
leadership in the production of life-saving medicines. AMBIC is an NSF-supported
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) focused on using animal
cells to produce biologic drugs. AMBIC serves as a catalyst for technology
innovation by bringing together academic researchers from five universities
(Johns Hopkins University (JHU), Clemson University (CU), University of Delaware
(UD), University of Maryland College Park (UMD), and University of Massachusetts
Lowell (UML). Industrial and federal mentors identify engineering challenges
that limit the production of important medicines used to treat cancer and other
diseases. Next, academic, federal, and industrial researchers work cooperatively
to develop solutions to improve the quantity and quality of these drug products.
These transformative advances may speed medicines to market and lower
manufacturing costs, reducing health care costs for consumers by making
biopharmaceuticals more affordable and available. The research conducted by
AMBIC has been supported by the leading biopharma and supplier companies and
federal institutes throughout Phase I and continuing into Phase II+. AMBIC
contributes to the scientific community by educating students from diverse
backgrounds for careers in biotechnology and biopharmaceutical industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMBIC's Phase II+ research goals focus on: 1)
industrially-relevant biology, 2) process monitoring and control, and 3)
consensus and standardization for advancing upstream biomanufacturing. Cell line
stability robustness and productivity are investigated for Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) and other industrial mammalian hosts. Novel analytic tools, sensors, and
instrumentation are developed and implemented with advanced system modeling and
advanced media and culture operations are designed and deployed to generate
optimized processes for developing proteins and other biologics. AMBICâ€™s
industrial members include large integrated biopharma companies, manufacturers,
suppliers, consultants, and federal institutes. Faculty researchers are drawn
from five university sites using a centralized model including experts in CHO
biology, metabolism, kinetics, and thermodynamics (JHU). CU brings expertise in
advanced process control, bioreactor optimization, genomic and transcriptomic
analysis, and protein glycosylation. UD offers expertise in systems and
synthetic biology. UMD brings expertise in sensor and regulatory sciences. UML
provides expertise in process development, analytics, and product
characterization. By bringing together academic researchers and students from
diverse backgrounds with industrial and federal partners, AMBIC is contributes
to technology innovation in mammalian bioprocessing, ensuring the development
and manufacture of the next generation of life-saving biologic medicines for
patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the following
Programs: &lt;br/&gt;Industry University Cooperative Research Centers Program in
the Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships - Engineering Directorate
and Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (MCB) - Biological Sciences
Directorate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.