* 2100955
* CSBR: Rehousing of the Mammal Collection at the University of Kansas Biodiversity Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Maria Eifler, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 682,711.00

This project ensures the long-term preservation and security of the mammalian
research collections housed at the University of Kansas (KU) Biodiversity
Institute. The KU Biodiversity Institute’s mammal collection is of international
importance, ranked as the sixth largest in North America, and the third largest
university holding in the world. This project replaces antiquated wooden
specimen cabinets with updated stainless steel casing to rescue irreplaceable
specimens from environmentally deficient conditions and preserve them in ideal,
climate-controlled, pest-free housing in perpetuity. Safeguarding the KU
Biodiversity Institute’s mammal collection ensures the continued contribution of
these resources to biodiversity science, formal undergraduate and graduate
education, and public programming for K–12 students, teachers, and public
audiences of the KU Biodiversity Institute’s Natural History Museum. This
project engages several undergraduate and graduate students in collections-based
research projects and active curation. The physical specimens preserved at the
Biodiversity Institute provide a critical foundation for research and education
on DNA, climate change, evolution, conservation, and emerging pathogens, and are
available for loan by researchers across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KU
Biodiversity Institute’s mammal collection houses 279,936 dry specimens in 332
cabinets, 185 of which are antiquated and compromised wooden cabinets that date
to the 1950s and 1960s, and whose joints, doors, and seals are inadequate for
protecting dry specimens from pest infestations. Specimens will be vacuumed and
frozen at -40ºC for 2 weeks to eliminate pests, then transferred to stainless
steel cases for long-term preservation. During the transfer, data from specimen
tags will be verified and digitally recorded in the Specify museum database, and
served to the community through GBIF, iDigBio, BISON, and VertNet. As specimens
are processed, phenotypic characters will be recorded, including the
reproductive status or molting progress of each specimen, and these data will be
used to test for shifts in mammalian life history events overtime. Students will
collaborate with Exhibits Staff at the KU Biodiversity Institute to conceive and
build a new public exhibit focused on the importance of scientific collections.
The exhibit will highlight research stories that illustrate how critical
collections are for solving problems of societal interest, including recognizing
emerging pathogens and tracing the origins of invasive
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.