* 2100129
* Broadening Participation and the Culture of Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Christal Sohl, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,288,953.00

It is critically important that the United States create and maintain a thriving
scientific workforce that propels future discoveries and innovations. The
academic research laboratory is an essential context where students learn what
science is, what is expected of a scientist, and decide whether they will pursue
or persist within the scientific community. This project investigates the
transmission of norms, expectations, and values between and among scientists,
their students, and their research personnel. We do not yet know how faculty
communicate the cultural beliefs and practices of science in ways that do – or
do not – support student motivation and experiences, especially those students
who are from historically underrepresented backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to follow nearly one thousand
students working within faculty research labs at three universities to answer
four research questions: 1. How do the messages that faculty directly and
indirectly convey to their research labs shape students’ perceptions about the
norms and values of science? 2. To what extent do faculty’s beliefs about the
norms and values of science predict experiences of microaffirmations in the lab
among students from historically underrepresented backgrounds? 3. To what extent
do faculty beliefs about the norms and values of science predict undergraduate
student research interest and persistence, and are these effects stronger for
students from historically underrepresented backgrounds? 4. To what degree do we
observe discrepancies between faculty beliefs about the norms and values of
science, and what students think their faculty believe? Do these discrepancies
predict student experiences and outcomes? To answer these questions, the project
will draw on longitudinal social psychological methods and social capital
theory. This project aims to employ behavioral measures related to student
persistence, productivity, and career choices, in addition to subjective
measures of research interest collected over one year. The goal is to produce
transformative knowledge on scientific communication processes that shape
students’ research experiences and interests, in order to retaining a diverse
and robust future scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.