* 2100790
* Stereoscopic visualization study of turbulence and vortex-tangle dynamics in He II
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Wei Guo, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 521,489.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;When liquid helium is cooled to below about
-271 degrees Celsius, it becomes a superfluid (called He II), which can do
things that other fluids cannot, such as flowing through a narrow capillary
without apparent friction and climbing over container walls despite the gravity.
The fascinating hydrodynamics of He II has many important applications. For
instance, it supports an extremely efficient heat-transport mode called thermal
counterflow and therefore has been widely utilized as a coolant material in
scientific instruments. When stirred, He II can also create vortex tubes which
are essentially tiny tornadoes with thin hollow cores. Understanding the
dynamics of a tangle of vortex tubes can benefit the study of various physical
systems such as neutron stars that consist of neutron-pair superfluid. In this
project, the research team aims to explore some predicted anomalous behaviors in
counterflow turbulence and to visualize the vortex tubes in He II using advanced
three-dimensional flow visualization techniques. This research can produce
fundamental knowledge indispensable for better applications of He II. The
research team consists of both postdoctoral researchers and graduate students.
Through the project, the team members are expected to gain valuable knowledge in
fluid dynamics, cryogenics, and laser technologies. The skills they learn
through the research training are also crucial for their success in today's job
market. In addition, the research team plans to conduct educational
demonstrations involving cryogenic fluids in various outreach programs at the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. The PI is also committed to serve the
research community by organizing workshop and conferences to engage junior
researchers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The current
research work consists of: 1) a stereoscopic molecular tagging velocimetry (MTV)
study of the anomalous anisotropy in He II counterflow turbulence, and 2) an
exploration of the vortex tangle dynamics using a scanning particle tracking
velocimetry (PTV) method. The stereoscopic MTV system, which incorporates a
unique double-line optical setup, is developed as the first-of-its-kind
equipment in quantum turbulence research. It offers the capability of making
unambiguous measurements of the normal-fluid velocity field and its spatial
correlations in the coupled two-fluid system, which breaks the ground for
solving various challenging problems. The study of the anomalous anisotropy in
He II counterflow turbulence is expected to produce experimental data that are
critical for the development of a complete theoretical understanding of this
complex doubly turbulent system. Such an understanding not only advances the
knowledge of turbulence in general but also aids the cryogenic engineers in
designing more efficient He II based cooling systems. The scanning PTV system to
be developed enables real-time imaging of quantized vortex tangles in three-
dimensional space, which offers a great opportunity for vortex research that is
not possible otherwise. The planned research on exploring the vortex-
reconnection scaling, vortex-velocity correlations, and vortex trajectory
statistics should produce important new knowledge needed for the development of
an advanced statistical model of quantum turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.