* 2100748
* Excellence in Research: Development of two-dimensional (2D) molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and molybdenum selenium (MoSe2) thin-film nanomaterials and nanoelectronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Zhigang Xiao, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 491,235.00

Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductor nanomaterials are promising electronic
nanomaterials and could be used for future high-speed nanoelectronics because of
their superior electrical properties. In this project, 2D molybdenum disulfide
(MoS2) and molybdenum selenium (MoSe2) semiconductor thin-film nanomaterials
will be grown using plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition. The 2D molybdenum
disulfide and molybdenum selenium thin-film nanomaterials will be used to
fabricate 2D nanomaterial-based field-effect transistors and integrated
electronic devices. The device fabrication is compatible with the current
standard fabrication of silicon integrated devices for computer chips and could
lead to 2D nanomaterial-based computer chips with much smaller transistors.
Semiconductor devices represent a multi-trillion-dollar industry. The 2D
nanomaterial-based nanoelectronic devices could contribute to the rapidly
growing industry of semiconductor and nano-manufacturing and are potential
alternatives to silicon-based electronic devices. This project can have great
impacts on US and global societies and provide many societal benefits. The
primary educational goal of this program is to integrate the research objectives
to enhance the educational experiences of students. Minority graduate and
undergraduate students will be mentored to perform research in nanofabrication
and nanotechnology in the project. The project will also offer summer research
opportunities for high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this project is to grow two-dimensional (2D) molybdenum disulfide
(MoS2) and molybdenum selenium (MoSe2) semiconductor thin-film nanomaterials
using remote plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PE-ALD) and fabricate 2D
nanomaterial-based nanoelectronic devices. An innovative localized growth method
will be used to grow the 2D nanomaterials with higher ordered nanolayers and
nanostructures. Unlike the conventional growth of 2D nanomaterials which grow
the nanomaterials on a flat and smooth surface of substrate, the innovative
localized growth will use nano-patterned substrates to grow the 2D nanomaterials
with higher-ordered nanolayers and nanostructures and would allow substrate
materials such as hafnium oxide and zirconium oxide for the growth of the 2D
nanomaterials. The 2D nanomaterials will then be used as the active channel
material to fabricate 2D nanomaterial-based field-effect transistors (FETs) and
integrated electronic circuits such as inverters and oscillators using
cleanroom-based micro and nanofabrication techniques. The 2D molybdenum
disulfide and molybdenum selenium nanomaterials are semiconductor materials with
appropriate band gaps for electronic devices applications and have unique
electrical properties such as ballistic quantum transport, which enable the 2D
nanomaterial-based FETs to have higher current on/off ratios and to operate
faster without energy dissipation. Nanoelectronic devices built on the 2D
materials offer many benefits for further miniaturization beyond Mooreâ€™s Law and
the possibility to revolutionize future electronic technologies. This project is
potentially transformative and will create a new 2D nanomaterial and device
fabrication paradigm. The project will greatly benefit the research community
and semiconductor industry by providing new approaches for the fabrication of 2D
nanomaterials and nanoelectronic devices. The innovative localized growth method
can effectively grow nanolayered 2D thin-film materials with higher-ordered
nanolayers and nanostructures while remote plasma-enhanced atomic layer
deposition can offer new opportunities to grow 2D nanomaterials with improved
electrical properties, leading to higher-performance functional 2D
nanoelectronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.