* 2100985
* Excellence in Research: Effect of Hydration on the Thermo-elastic Properties of Mantle Minerals and the Geophysical Implications.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Gabriel Gwanmesia, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 672,584.00

Earth’s deep interior is not accessible to direct sampling. As temperature and
pressure increase with depth, man-made instruments become unusable. The most
direct observations arise from studying vibrations generated by earthquakes,
called seismic waves. The waves travel within the Earth and are collected at the
surface using seismographs. The seismic signal is analyzed to inform the
structure and composition of Earth’s interior, as sonography is used in medical
imaging. The velocity of seismic waves depends on the type of rocks they
encounter. Seismological studies combined with experimentation allow identifying
rocks in the Earth’s mantle. It was shown that at depths of 410 to 660 km (255
to 410 miles) - in the so-called transition zone - two dense minerals are
present: wadsleyite and ringwoodite. These minerals can incorporate large amount
of water in their structure under the form of OH molecules (hydroxyls). The
transition zone may contain as much water as that contained in the oceans. This
has implications for Earth’s mantle thermal convection, which drives plate
tectonics. Yet, it is unclear how much water is stored in the transition zone.
This is partly due to uncertainties on how hydroxyls affect seismic-wave
propagation in minerals. Here, the researchers investigate how water
incorporation in wadsleyite and ringwoodite affects the velocity of seismic
waves. They synthetize in the laboratory minerals with various compositions and
water contents. They carry out ultrasonic measurements at the extreme pressures
and temperatures prevailing in the Earth. These experiments are performed at a
national synchrotron facility, to ensure specimen quality and measure their size
by radiography during the measurements. The study outcomes are critical to
better understand the properties of the transition zone. It has implications for
the understanding of thermal convection in the Earth. This project promotes
multidisciplinary collaborations across Earth Sciences, Physics, Chemistry, and
Mathematics. It provides support for a post-doctoral associate and training for
undergraduate students at Delaware State University (DSU). DSU is a Historically
Black University and a predominantly undergraduate institution. The project
offers unique opportunities to students from groups underrepresented in Science.
It fosters diversity and inclusion in Geosciences. It is co-funded by NSF
Directorate for Geosciences and Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Excellence in Research (HBCU-EiR) Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental
and theoretical studies indicate that wadsleyite and ringwoodite can incorporate
up to 2-3 weight percent of hydroxyl (OH-) in their structures. Up to 1.5 weight
percent of water was measured in a ringwoodite crystal trapped in a diamond
which originated from the transition zone. Water incorporation strongly affects
mineral physical and chemical properties – such as electrical and thermal
conductivity, melting and flow – as well as elastic wave propagation. Here, the
researchers synthetize polycrystalline samples of wadsleyite and ringwoodite
containing controlled structural water. They use the 2000-ton uniaxial split-
cylinder apparatus at Stony Brook University. The quality of the hot-pressed
specimens is verified using X-ray diffraction, scanning transmission electron
microscopy, bulk density measurements, and bench-top acoustic velocity
measurements. Specimen elastic wave velocities is then quantified by ultrasonic
measurements at high pressure and temperature, in the mineral stability fields.
These measurements are carried out at the 6-B-MB beamline of the Advanced Photon
Source (Argonne National Laboratory). The beamline is equipped with a cubic
anvil high-pressure apparatus coupled with in situ ultrasonic interferometry,
X-ray diffraction and imaging. Specimen water content is measured before and
after the high-pressure experiments by infrared spectroscopy, secondary ion mass
spectrometry, and using the Electron Probe Micro-Analyzer
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.