* 2100155
* Staying in Science: Investigating STEM Persistence Among High School Youth
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Jennifer Adams, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,188,842.00

The American Museum of Natural History plans to investigate the relationship
between mentored research and youths’ STEM trajectory from high school to early
college. The study builds on a previously funded project that examined the
experiences of 733 high school youth who participated in an out-of-school, in-
depth science research and mentoring program through the New York City Science
Research Mentoring Consortium. The current study will examine how 380 of the
initial participants navigate obstacles and biases during college, workforce
preparation, and initial jobs, and how the institutional settings for these
experiences contribute to a sense of belonging and support or function to
further marginalize them and challenge their motivation to pursue STEM
education. The study will take an innovative approach of studying relationships
among and changes in (1) youths’ participation in communities of practice
associated with sustained, mentored science research experience; (2) youths’
social networks; and (3) youths’ academic achievement to identify variations in
their pathways and supports. The project will generate evidence-based findings
to position STEM education and workforce development initiatives to implement
more effective broadening participation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conceptual framework for the longitudinal research design is the Bronfenbrenner
ecological model that enables the investigators to respond to the findings from
the prior study and to the theoretical knowledge base that informs factors that
mediate STEM persistence for historically marginalized youth. The investigators
will investigate questions about how dominant institutional structures afford or
limit STEM learning and integration of experiences for marginalized youth and
how claims of objectivity and neutrality and a culture of meritocracy in the
sciences affect opportunities for such youth. The investigators will use a
mixed-methods approach to answer three research questions: (1) What factors
influence commitment to, or divergence from, a pursuit of a STEM major and
career? (2) How do institutions, internships, and workplaces create
opportunities, experiences, and strategies for students to develop a sense of
belonging or function to marginalize youth? (3) In what ways do youth experience
and manage obstacles and biases, stereotypes, and microaggressions that they
encounter in college, workforce preparation experiences, and first jobs? The
study will focus on alumni who completed their mentored research in 2017 or
2018. Surveys will explore key constructs from the conceptual framework that all
the investigators to operationalize the theoretical variables in the research
design. The sources of data include surveys with alumni and significant adults,
social network analysis surveys, and interviews. The study will provide insight
into a key challenge that STEM fields face in increasing interest and
persistence in STEM among underrepresented populations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the EHR Core Research program that funds
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.