* 2100050
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: RUI: Context-aware Models of Source Code Summarization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Siyuan Jiang, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,009.00

The objective of this research project is to address key barriers towards
automatic documentation generation for software source code. Programmers create
software by writing instructions in source code. That source code is often very
difficult to understand, and programmers often must spend significant time
writing and updating natural language descriptions of the code to serve as a
guide to other programmers. But programmers tend to avoid this task, leading to
difficult-to-understand legacy code, bugs, struggles for novice programmers, and
other problems. The process of writing these natural language descriptions is
called "source code summarization" and this project aims to automate this
process. The long-term goal of the project is that automatic documentation
generation will improve productivity for software engineers, and increase the
quality of software generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two key barriers that
this project targets are: 1) context-aware models of code summarization, and 2)
improved optimization and evaluation procedures for those models. The research
towards item (1) centers on novel neural network-based algorithms for reading
and understanding source code. The "context" of a section of source code
includes the surrounding source code, dependencies and dependents, programmer
communications, bug reports, architecture documentation, and many other software
artifacts. This proposal aims to build new neural models of code that include
this context such as attentional graph neural networks and dynamic memory
networks. The research towards item (2) centers on improving the metrics used to
evaluate models of source code summarization, as well as optimization functions
used to train these models. This project includes both design of these metrics
and functions, and experiments to evaluate them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.