* 2100655
* Catalyst Award: "Characterization of p27Kip1 as an Enhancer of Stem-Like Properties in Breast Cancer Stem Cells"
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Erica Cassimere, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 149,877.00

Catalyst Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Texas Southern University intends to understand the molecular
mechanisms by which an enzyme inhibitor enhances the stem cell populations found
in breast cancer stem cells. Undergraduate students will be involved in this
work through participation in a 10-week intensive summer
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to identify
the molecular mechanisms by which the cell cycle kinase inhibitor, p27KIP1
(termed p27), enhances stem cell populations found in breast cancer stem cells
(CSCs). Texas Southern University undergraduate students will employ various in
vitro cellular and molecular biology assays to perform research. The proposed
study will characterize p27 protein expression in CSCs compared to non-CSCs
isolated from breast cancer cell lines with different molecular signatures.
Protein expression for p27 will be assessed by Western blot analysis. The
subcellular compartment whereby p27 resides will be investigated using
fluorescence microscopy to shed light on the role of p27 in the stemness of
these populations, for p27 exerts both cell cycle-dependent (nuclear) and cell-
cycle independent (cytoplasmic) functions. Moreover, the molecular factors which
contribute to p27 stability in breast CSCs will be determined using cell lines
stably expressing p27 with point substitutions at residues known to regulate p27
protein expression. Investigating novel biological markers involved in the stem
cell niche will enhance our understanding of the factors governing stemness as
identification of reliable breast cancer stem markers still remains a challenge.
The implementation of this proposal will provide a unique opportunity for
underrepresented minority STEM majors to be immersed in hands-on research
experiences using cutting edge techniques and prepare them for graduate programs
and/or careers in the STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.