* 2100514
* Dual Cooperative Catalysis by Group 4 Metals and Cr
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jack Norton, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the National Science Foundation, the research team at Columbia
University led by Professor Jack R. Norton will explore fundamental issues in
organometallic chemistry and develop green catalysis for the synthesis of value-
added chemicals. They will use inexpensive and abundant Group IV metals such as
titanium, in combination with other transition metals, to cooperatively activate
and transform dihydrogen gas—one of the cleanest and most economical chemical
sources. This project involves a mixture of inorganic, organometallic, and
organic chemistry, and therefore offers an interdisciplinary environment for
training early career scientists. Students in the Norton research group are
encouraged to interact with both academic and industrial scientists, to prepare
themselves for careers in either professional sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address four important issues in organometallic and organic
chemistry: (1) it will develop more efficient bimetallic catalysts for the
preparation of a class of primary alcohols (those with unbranched structures)
that are of special importance; (2) it will explore the replacement of the
cyclopentadienyl ligands in the Ti part of these catalysts with less expensive
and more readily available alkoxy ligands; (3) it will try to apply these
bimetallic catalysts in radical cyclizations for the construction of polycyclic
scaffolds in natural products; (4) it will determine whether the proton cleavage
of Group IV metal-carbon bonds in O– and N–containing complexes involves a
proton relay mechanism. This project involves a mixture of inorganic,
organometallic, and organic chemistry, and therefore offers an interdisciplinary
environment for training early career scientists. The PI has an outstanding
record of training early career scientists, and is engaged in standing up a web
site that offers examples of kinetics problems the group has utilized through
the years as a pedagogical tool for the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.