* 2100379
* Collaborative Research: Toward placing contemporary Arctic summer warming in a millennial perspective with a pan-Arctic record of Neoglacial crysophere expansion
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 55,333.00

Miller/Kaufman: Toward placing contemporary Arctic summer warming in a
millennial perspective with a pan- Arctic record of Neoglacial crysophere
expansion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical summary. Glacier dimensions in the
Arctic are set by summer temperature, but changes in the dimensions of Alaskan
glaciers since the end of the ice age are poorly constrained. In response to
recent Arctic warming, glaciers in the Brooks Range, Alaska are receding
rapidly, and in special settings, on gentle slopes where the ice is thin,
glaciers act as preservation agents, rather than erosive agents, preserving
intact tiny tundra plants living before the ice expanded over that site in the
distant past. The goal of this project is to visit the most likely sites in the
Brooks Range where glaciers preserved, rather than eroded the landscape, where
we expect tundra plants are being re-exposed as ice recedes. The radiocarbon
ages of these plants document when past summers grew colder, allowing ice to
expand across these sites, and provide the most reliable&lt;br/&gt;evidence of
when in the past Arctic summers cooled enough to allow glaciers to
grow.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Comparing the ages of ice-entombed Alaska
plants to ages of plants exposed in other Arctic regions will allow us to better
understand large-scale climate change on a hemispheric scale. These results
serve as tests for climate models that are used to predict future climate. The
same models used for future projections can be run in reverse to predict climate
evolution in the past. If the models predict similar patterns of past climate
change as documented by the ages of ice-entombed plants across the Arctic, our
confidence in the ability of climate models to reliably predict future climate
is increased. If the models fail to predict patterns similar to the plant ages,
then it is likely the models have underestimated certain aspects of the climate
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary. Changes in the dimensions of
Brooks Range glaciers through the Holocene, a primary proxy for changes in
summer temperature, are poorly constrained. Where glaciers are cold-based and on
gently sloping terrain, they often do not erode, but act as exceptional
preservation agents, preserving tiny tundra plants killed by expanding ice.
Rapid ice recession across the Brooks Range is now exposing landscapes likely to
preserve in situ tundra plants killed by late Holocene ice expansion, with their
radiocarbon ages defining episodes of consistently cold summers. This project
will visit the most promising sites to look for iceentombed plants emerging as
the ice margins recede, and take advantage of the new NSF-supported accelerator
mass spectrometer at Northern Arizona University for dating. We expect the
resultant composite probability density functions of dated plants to produce age
clusters reflecting episodes of ice expansion/cold summers, which can be
compared with results from the North Atlantic Arctic, and collectively serve as
targets for Common Era climate modeling now underway with
CMIP-6.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Communicating climate change with the wider
public is more important than ever as climate change accelerates and climate
literacy lags. Although it's widely understood that glaciers in Alaska (and
elsewhere) are rapidly receding, there is less understanding of how unusual this
recession really is. This study will place glacier recession in a millennial
perspective, likely illustrating that current warming is unprecedented over
thousands of years, a concept easily grasped by the general public. To advance
public outreach, we will support an experienced graphic designer to translate
our science to a form that is accessible to the citizens of Alaska and the
broader US community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.