* 2100784
* Teaching Amidst Uncertainty: Developing Mathematics Teachers' Groupwork Monitoring Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Darryl Yong, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,435,240.00

Decades of research shows that students learn best and instruction is more
inclusive when students have opportunities to talk about mathematics. For this
reason, many conceptually-oriented mathematics instructional approaches
emphasize peer-to-peer discussion. Yet research diverges around questions of how
teachers should manage such discussions, an instructional practice referred to
as groupwork monitoring. There is contradictory guidance on issues of teacher
involvement: should teachers stand back to support student autonomy or involve
themselves frequently to support productive sensemaking? This study addresses
two open questions in mathematics education and teacher learning research
related to groupwork monitoring. The first question centers on groupwork
monitoring itself: How can teachers foster productive mathematical talk among
students? The second question touches on an underdeveloped topic in teacher
education: in what ways can teacher preparation and professional development
support teachers in learning effective group work monitoring. Many teacher
education strategies –– such as rehearsing routines or learning curriculum ––
aim for teachers to learn well-structured, predictable aspects of instruction,
yet there are not clear approaches in helping teachers learn to support more
interactive and emergent aspects of mathematics teaching. This Design and
Development project addresses these challenges by studying experienced and
accomplished secondary mathematics teachers’ learning about groupwork monitoring
in a large urban school district. Using contemporary information visualization
techniques and open-source tools , alongside a video-based coaching activity,
teachers will a) analyze classroom video records featuring group math
discussions and b) uncover and investigate their specific interactions with
student groups as well as their overall approach to this important phase of
their lessons. Through these tools, teachers will develop strategic and
integrated understandings of effective groupwork monitoring strategies. As a
result of this work, teachers and researchers will be able to better connect
teachers’ monitoring choices to students’ peer-to-peer math
talk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate how experienced secondary mathematics
teachers learn about groupwork monitoring, the project will develop rich
visualization tools to analyze classroom discussions, engage teachers in
analytical activities, and study resultant teacher and student learning. In
Phase 1, the project team will build on existing visualization tools to develop
efficient processes for producing interactive visualizations of monitoring that
provide new ways to link classroom video to teachers’ overall interactional
patterns. In Phase 2, 12-16 experienced secondary mathematics teachers in six
school-based teams will engage over a two-year period with teacher professional
development designed to enhance their sensemaking about monitoring, both
individually and in teams. The enhanced video feedback system will allow
teachers to guide, document, and investigate their evolving sensemaking. In
Phase 3, individual and team learning portraits of productive math talk will be
developed from the rich corpus of classroom and teacher sensemaking data. At the
same time, the corpus will be analyzed using quantitative methods to investigate
the conditions under which different teacher monitoring moves support or impede
students’ productive math talk. The primary research products will be: 1) novel,
open-source tools that dynamically visualize teachers’ monitoring work over a
lesson, coordinated with specific teacher-group interaction; 2) a framework for
mathematics teachers’ monitoring; 3) a theory about teachers’ learning of
responsive and situated practices, of which monitoring is an example; and 4)
stronger empirical evidence to guide mathematics teachers’ monitoring practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.