* 2100906
* RUI: Symmetries, Stability, and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jason Lo, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 141,046.00

In the study of algebraic objects in mathematics, a central problem is to
classify all the relevant objects in a given context. A powerful and time-tested
approach to this classification problem is to begin with a measure of how
"stable" an object is. Since there are different measures of stability, it is
important to understand how they are related. Moreover, when there are inherent
symmetries underlying the spaces in which algebraic objects arise, these
symmetries induce even richer relations among different measures of stability
and the corresponding stable objects. This project aims to discover new
relations among different types of stability that arise in the area of algebraic
geometry and nearby areas such as representation theory, using symmetries as a
main tool. The project will also train undergraduate and graduate students in
research through integrated student projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will incorporate stability conditions in algebraic geometry and representation
theory under a single framework. Different aspects of the project are tied
together by the problem of solving the generalized Gepner equation in a variety
of situations. The generalized Gepner equation is a relation involving different
group actions on stability conditions. When specialized to different contexts,
the generalized Gepner equation is connected to the birational geometry of
moduli spaces, modularity of counting invariants, dynamical systems in algebraic
geometry, and the existence of new kinds of stability conditions. The main tools
will be the notion of weak polynomial stability functions and their associated
weight functions. The actions of exact equivalences on these functions and
relevant t-structures will be studied. These results will then be refined to
yield concrete equations involving stability
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.