* 2100990
* MothEd - Authentic Science for Elementary and Middle School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Frieda Reichsman, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,425,634.00

There are few opportunities and curriculum materials that support teachers in
engaging elementary and middle-school students in scientific research processes
and in conducting their own investigations. Widely-adopted science education
standards have expanded expectations for students to learn science research
processes. To address these needs, the project will research and develop
curricular materials and classroom practices that teachers can use to bring
authentic science into their classes and engage students as active science
researchers. The project, called MothEd, will focus on the study of moths, which
are well-suited to the project’s goal of having students conduct authentic
scientific investigations. Moths are ecologically important, easy to capture,
and there is a lack of research on moths compared to many other insect species.
In the project activities, students will construct moth traps and collect data
through research processes that they design and carry out. The project is
building on an approach called community science (sometimes called citizen
science), where non-scientists in local communities voluntarily contribute to
scientific research. Students and teachers will work in partnership with
entomologists and science educators to develop and answer questions about local
ecological conditions and will become genuine producers of knowledge within
science learning communities. Students will work collaboratively within an
online platform to design experiments using a complete suite of research tools
for collection, expression, and analysis of data, including sensors,
photographs, sketches, and graphs. The project will develop curricular materials
that will provide teaching and learning materials that are focused on giving
students place-based opportunities to conduct age-appropriate scientific
investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MothEd’s educational research will
investigate several questions: (1) what students understand about scientific
research processes and how they see themselves in that process; (2) how students
can work as partners with scientists in discovery and what do they learn about
research methods and moth ecology; and (3) What supports teachers need in order
to support students as active science researchers. Using a mixed methods
approach, the project will collect a variety of data for the research: in-class
observations of student work; pre- and post- activity surveys about their
knowledge of moth ecology and their view and understanding of science research
processes; teacher interviews; and analysis of data collected by project
software on student work and collaboration. The project will be designed to
ensure that the MothEd education materials can be adopted and used independently
by teachers across the country. Project research findings and materials will be
shared via conferences, journal publications, and the project’s collaborative
learning environment. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.