* 2100693
* ASBMB Interactive Mentoring Activities for Grantsmanship Enhancement (IMAGE 2.0)
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Anna Woodcock, American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2027
* USD 380,490.00

While data from the National Science Foundation (NSF) have demonstrated a
doubling in the number of underrepresented minorities (URM) in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields over the past three
decades, the numbers of African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Native
Americans in these fields remain woefully below their representation in the US
population. In 2018, only ~12% of doctoral degrees in STEM fields were conferred
to URM, although they constitute ~30% of the US population. Similarly, over the
past 20-years, the number of URM professors in chemistry or biology has hovered
around 4%, despite myriad programs aimed at diversifying the STEM workforce.
These data highlight the need for additional and novel strategies that target
multiple points in the STEM pipeline. As one intervention to impact on the
persistence of URM professors within the STEM, the American Society of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB) Minority Affairs Committee (MAC) has
organized an annual workshop for early-career faculty and postdoctoral fellows
that provides intensive mentoring on grant writing and career and professional
development. The workshops, conducted yearly since 2013, have been well received
among participants and participating mentors, and assessment metrics indicate
that participants are two-fold more likely to obtain federal funding than
closely matched comparison-group subjects who do not participate in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strengthened by the experience gained over the
past almost 10 years, an enhanced five-year Interactive Mentoring Activities for
Grantsmanship Enhancement (IMAGE) Program – called IMAGE 2.0 – will serve a
total of 120-150 participants. IMAGE 2.0 also includes, for the first time,
activities for mid-career faculty from underrepresented ethnic groups,
especially those who have encountered a persistent roadblock in their ability to
maintain federal funding. Moreover, the program will conduct a longitudinal
analysis of the effect of IMAGE by tracking previous participants through tenure
and into their mid-careers. This tracking will inform on the impact of IMAGE in
obtaining and sustaining funding and in acquiring tenure. Although the workshop
will be the core of IMAGE 2.0, participants will be provided with year-long
mentoring through communities of grant-writers. These communities will consist
of participants and grant-writing mentors or participants and grant-writing
coaches, and will convene virtually on a monthly basis. Grant-writing mentors
will be content-competent and will provide periodic feedback on proposal
development. Grant-writing coaches will be trained in culturally sensitive
career coaching, and will motivate participants, help them develop and maintain
a strong science identity, and coach them as they make major career decisions.
These efforts will create a sense of belonging and accountability that will
encourage participants to continue forward with their proposals through ultimate
submission and also facilitate their persistence in their
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.