* 2100956
* Excellence in Research: Experiment Efficient Modeling Method of Dynamic Systems Based on Short-Term Dependency and Non-Recurrent Neural Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Lichun Li, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2024
* USD 331,963.00

This grant will support research to contribute new knowledge related to dynamic
systems, promoting a modeling method that is experiment efficient and
accelerating the research and development processes. Current modeling methods
either require comprehensive understanding, which is difficult for complex
systems, or extensive experiment effort, which is impractical due to the expense
and time. However, a limited number of experiments does not always mean a
limited amount of data. With advanced sensing techniques, abundant in-situ data
can be collected in every experiment. This award supports fundamental research
to provide needed knowledge to extract abundant independent data from the in-
situ data in a limited number of experiments. The new knowledge will provide
enough data to train neural network models even with a limited number of
experiments and help reduce the time and cost to model dynamic systems. As
dynamic systems are common in aerospace, manufacturing, material science, and
civil systems, the results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and
society. This grant will support women students and broaden the participation of
women in science, technology, engineering, and math. A micro-scale supporting
network for women engineering students will be built within the PIâ€™s group,
which will connect the PI, graduate students, undergraduate students, and K-6
children on a regular basis to encourage women to pursue an engineering career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Practitioners find that short-term memory feed-forward
neural networks and infinite memory recursive neural networks have comparable
performance in some dynamic systems. This project is to study this phenomenon
based on the well-known observability property of dynamic systems, and will
focus on two specific case studies, fiber orientation in additive manufacturing
and nanotube network quality of continuous nanotube thin film. Different from
the existing observability criteria that rely on the full system knowledge, the
observability criteria built in this project only depend on the in-situ data
and/or the partial system knowledge. Based on the short-term dependency study,
abundant independent data will be extracted from a limited number of experiments
to train feed-forward neural network models. Based on the partial knowledge of
the dynamic systems, this project is for a customized feed-forward neural
network structure to achieve further data efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.