* 2100237
* CCRI: ABR: Cognitive Hardware and Software Ecosystem Community Infrastructure (CHASE-CI)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Larry Smarr, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,015,971.00

This project, called the Cognitive Hardware And Software Ecosystem Community
Infrastructure (CHASE-CI), is to continue and expand a cloud of hundreds of
affordable Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), networked together with a variety
of neural network machines to facilitate development of next generation
cognitive computing. This cloud will be accessible by 30 researchers assembled
from 10 universities via the NSF-funded Pacific Research Platform. These
researchers will investigate a range of problems from image and video
recognition, computer vision, contextual robotics to cognitive neurosciences
using the cloud to be purpose-built in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training of neural network with large data-sets is
best performed on GPUs. Lack of availability of affordable GPUs and lack of easy
access to the new generation of Non-von Neumann (NvN) machines with embedded
neural networks impede research in cognitive computing. The purpose-built cloud
will be available over the network to address this bottleneck. PIs will study
various Deep Neural Network, Recurrent Neural Network, and Reinforcement
Learning Algorithms on this platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.