* 2100561
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: VisDict - Visual Dictionaries for Enhancing the Communication between Domain Scientists and Scientific Workflow Providers
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Sandra Gesing, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2022
* USD 164,500.00

The complexity of research topics, research environments, and lab instruments
has majorly grown in the last 20 years and has led to an uptake of computational
methods such as computational workflows. Thousands of researchers use workflows
for creating and analyzing data from a diverse set of research domains and the
uptake of workflows for research is also reflected in a high number of mature
workflow management systems with different strengths and foci. Workflows have
been instrumental in enabling significant discoveries such as the gravitational
waves from colliding black holes and the analyses of DNA from Next-Generation
Sequencing technologies. While workflows constitute a research domain in their
own right and lead to improvements such as efficiency, feature enhancement, and
usability, workflows are inherently designed to serve other domains. The
creation of workflows supporting a research topic requires an understanding of
the targeted problem and can be a labor-intensive and error-prone process. One
source of errors is the communication between domain researchers and workflow
providers. Successful communication considers diverse aspects such as the
scientific background, native language, home country, and culture of the
researchers. While the agreement on one natural language for communication - or
involving a translator - is the typical set-up communication, there is a lack of
tools or translators for communication between research domains and computer
science. VisDict is intended to fill this gap by providing a set of vocabularies
in a science gateway to enhance communication. The goal is to present a
definition for different domains and workflow providers and, thus, serve as
source for terms. Adding visualization will lower the communication barrier
further following the saying, “A picture is worth a thousand
words.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal for VisDict is to create an intuitive
visual dictionary that translates terms and concepts between research domains
and computer science, specifically computational workflows. A key component of
the proposed work is the development of a visual dictionary - VisDict -
instantiated as a science gateway that is based on the science gateway framework
HUBzero and aimed at providing a knowledge map of terms across disciplines. To
accomplish this innovative and transformative goal, the project is conducting a
series of surveys and interactions with workflow systems researchers and
developers, and researchers from the science and engineering communities. The
project is applying semantic representation to create knowledge between
different domains to make it seamlessly available to researchers and thus fill
the gap in this area. The visualization is intended to enhance understanding,
and users are be able to vote on definitions and figures to allow for a wide
adoption of the dictionary in diverse communities. By lowering the communication
barrier for workflow design and development activities between computer
scientists and domain scientists, this project has the potential to
significantly enhance and accelerate scientific progress of critical importance
for the development and sustainability of society. While the project starts with
two communities - physics and ecology - the concept can be applied to any
research domain with subject-specific language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.