* 2100163
* BEE: The Evolution of Fluctuation-Dependent Species Coexistence
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,11/30/2022
* David Reznick, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,616,701.00

Understanding how similar species coexist has been a central question in ecology
since its inception. The question is important because species diversity is a
defining characteristic of natural ecosystems. Traditional answers to this
question focus on how species differ in the types of resources they use in non-
fluctuating environments. Under this paradigm, evolution can facilitate species
coexistence when it makes species less similar in their resource use. However,
natural ecosystems are not constant, and there has been recent interest in
understanding how temporal variation in the environment, and differences in how
species respond to this variation, can lead to conditions that favor
coexistence. While we know about these fluctuation-dependent mechanisms in
theory, we know little about whether they can promote species coexistence in
natural populations. We know even less about how evolution either facilitates or
impedes such fluctuation-dependent mechanisms. This research attacks these
questions by leveraging studies of experimental evolution in nature together
with mathematical models and experiments in artificial streams. The research
will engage 38 young scientists from diverse backgrounds per year in the Young
Scientist Training Program. The Young Scientists gain research experience that
is complemented by training in ecology, evolution, and statistics. The
researchers will also engage the public through an online outreach website and
will develop training in ecology and evolution through mobile gaming, social
media, and teacher training modules based on this
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide a multipronged test of
fluctuation-dependent coexistence mechanisms in natural communities and
investigate how they evolve. In doing so, this work will synthesize ideas in
ecology and evolutionary biology. This research takes advantage of the natural
laboratory provided by the structure of stream communities in Trinidad, West
Indies where fish communities consist of either Trinidadian guppies and Hart’s
killifish or Hart’s killifish by themselves. Killifish-guppy communities are
formed when guppies invade communities with only killifish. Prior research has
shown that following these invasions, guppies and killifish rapidly evolve
differences in their life histories and resource use. These streams are also
highly seasonal with pronounced dry and wet seasons. Do killifish and guppies
respond differently to these seasonal fluctuations? Are guppies adapted to dry
season conditions and killifish to wet season conditions? If so, then this
difference provides an avenue for the two species to coexist. This research will
also address how important these fluctuation-dependent mechanisms are relative
to traditional fluctuation-independent mechanisms and identify how these
contributions change through the formation of the community. This research will
leverage replicated experimental evolution studies in natural ecosystems with
structured models, factorial experiments in artificial streams, and stable
isotope work. At the same time, the mathematical models will provide a framework
for linking theory on species coexistence with evolutionary
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.