* 2100617
* Improving Professional Development in Mathematics by Understanding the Mechanisms that Translate Teacher Learning into Student Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* James Hiebert, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,470,932.00

A great deal is known about the effects of mathematics teacher professional
development on teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching. While some
professional development programs show meaningful changes in teacher knowledge,
these changes do not always translate into changes in teacher practice. This
project explores the mechanisms by which teachers translate what they learn from
professional development into their teaching practice. The goal of this project
is to study how the knowledge and skills teachers acquire during professional
development (PD) translate into more conceptually oriented mathematics teaching
and, in turn, into increased student learning. The project builds on a promising
video-based PD that engages teachers in analyzing videos of classroom
mathematics teaching. Previous research indicates that teachers who can analyze
teaching by focusing on the nature of the mathematical learning opportunities
experienced by students often teach more effectively. The researchers aim to
better understand the path teachers follow as they develop this professional
competency and translate it into more ambitious teaching that supports richer
student learning. The lack of understanding of how a PD program can reach
students is a significant barrier to improving the effectiveness of PD. To build
this understanding, the researchers aim to test and refine an implementation
theory that specifies the obstacles teachers face as they apply their learning
to their classroom teaching and the contextual supports that help teachers
surmount these obstacles. Lessons learned from understanding the factors that
impact the effects of PD will help educators design PD programs that maximize
the translation of teacher learning into student learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will recruit and support a cohort of teachers,
grades 4–5 (n=40) and grades 6–7 (n=40) for three years to trace growth in
teacher learning, changes in teaching practices, and increases in student
learning. The PD will be provided throughout the year for three consecutive
years. The researchers will focus on two mathematics topics with a third topic
assessed to measure transfer effects. Several cycles of lesson analysis will
occur each year, with small grade-alike curriculum-alike groups assisted by
trained coaches to help teachers translate their growing analysis skills into
planning, implementing, and reflecting on their own lessons. Additional days
will be allocated each year to assist the larger groups of teachers in
developing pedagogical content knowledge for analyzing teaching. The research
focuses on the following questions: 1) What are the relationships between
teacher learning from PD, classroom teaching, and student learning, how do
hypothesized mediating variables affect these relationships, and how do these
relationships change as teachers become more competent at analyzing teaching?;
and 2) How do teachers describe the obstacles and supports they believe affect
their learning and teaching, and how do these obstacles and supports deepen and
broaden the implementation theory? Multi-level modeling will be used to address
the first question, taking into account for the nested nature of the data, in
order to test a model that hypothesizes direct and indirect relationships
between teacher learning and teaching practice and, in turn, teaching practice
and student learning. Teachers will take assessments each year, for each
mathematics topic, on the analysis of teaching skills, on the use of teaching
practices, and on students’ learning. Cluster analysis will be used to explore
the extent to which the relationship between learning to analyze the mathematics
of a lesson, teaching quality, and student achievement may be different for
different teachers based on measured characteristics. Longitudinal analysis will
be used to examine the theoretical relationships among variables in the
hypothesized path model. Teachers’ mathematical knowledge for teaching, lesson
planning, and textbook curricular material use will be examined as possible
mediating variables between teacher learning and teaching practice. To address
the second research question, participants will engage in annual interviews
about the factors they are obstacles to doing this work and about the supports
within and outside of the PD that ameliorate these obstacles. Quantitative
analyses will test the relationships between the obstacles and supports with
teacher learning and classroom teaching. Through qualitative analyses, the
obstacles and supports to translating professional learning into practice will
be further articulated. These obstacles and supports, along with the
professional development model, will be disseminated to the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.