* 2100705
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Optimized design principles inspired by compliant natural propulsors.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* John Costello, Providence College
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 150,004.00

High efficiency is a fundamental design goal of vehicles moving through both air
and water. Although most human designs of propulsors such as wings or propellers
are rigid, natural propulsors are generally flexible. Propulsive efficiencies of
natural flyers and swimmers are typically higher than human-designed vehicles of
similar weight and dimensions. However, attempts to emulate flexible animal
designs have met with limited success. Recent comparative animal studies have
demonstrated startlingly consistent patterns of bending kinematics among a broad
diversity of swimmers and flyers constructed from very different materials and
of very different physical dimensions. These patterns encompass cilia to whale
flukes and fluid regimes from water to air. This project will use computational
fluid dynamics and particle image velocimetry to measure fluid velocities to
investigate the mechanical and fluid dynamic details that enable high force
production by flexible natural propulsors. K-12 outreach activities are planned
at the universities and at the Cabrillo Aquarium in San Pedro, CA and
undergraduate and graduate student involvement is core to the research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a set of design
rules that govern force production by flexible propulsors. To achieve this goal,
experiments and computations will be used to investigate: a) bending kinematics
of propulsors as control surfaces of vorticity, pressure fields and thrust, b)
the hydrodynamic basis of vortex-vortex interactions that generate pressure
fields and thrust and c) the advantageous limits of bending kinematics. Each of
these will be investigated using a combination of experiments (particle image
velocimetry) with natural organisms and computational fluid dynamic models. The
results of this project will define the necessary design criteria that enable
performance enhancement by bending propulsors of different types and across a
range of fluid regimes. While contributing to interpretation of the natural
world, the results will also contribute to novel engineered designs ranging from
biomedical applications (cilia) to vehicle design (swimming,
flight).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.