* 2100930
* Excellence in Research: Aptamer integrated graphene-gold conjugates for machine learning aided pesticide residue screening
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Patricia Mead, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2024
* USD 555,000.00

The main objective of this proposal is to design graphene-gold-aptamer
bioconjugates for building colorimetric pesticide sensors. The bioconjugates
designed will be tailored for inkjet printing on flexible substrates. The
colorimetric output will be captured by a camera integrated handheld device or a
smartphone camera. Dependency on capture device and illumination conditions will
be corrected using a machine learning algorithm to extract the precise chromatic
information that correlate to pesticide levels. In order to prove the
versatility of the proposed platform, a case study on detection of four
pesticides namely Glyphosate, Malathion, Acetamiprid, and Chlorpyrifos will be
performed. By being part of this project, graduate and undergraduate students of
the Department of Engineering, Norfolk State University, will gain valuable
multidisciplinary experience in designing sensing systems by applying concepts
of engineering, nanotechnology, image processing and machine learning. This
project will also be enhanced by offering curricular opportunities such as
independent study, summer internships, and senior capstone projects. Project
displays and demonstrations will be included in Engineering Department outreach
to Norfolk area high school students and teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed bioconjugate is based on the peroxidase like nanozyme activity of the
Graphene-gold conjugate, selectivity of the aptamer and reliability of machine
learning. The proposed architecture can serve as a universal colorimetric
sensing platform by changing the aptamer sequence for different targets,
providing a powerful and versatile engineered system which is scalable, allowing
testing of a wide range of pesticides. Products of the research tasks will not
only result in a rapid analysis tool for pesticide analysis but will also yield
unprecedented new knowledge on aptamer-small molecule target binding. In order
to accurately correlate chrominance changes to pesticide levels, the illuminance
element will be separated from the chrominance factor using a machine learning
approach. The effect of varying illumination conditions on the colorimetric
output of the sensor using RGB, LAB and HSV color spaces will be investigated.
The machine learning approach will also provide the methodological framework
needed to understand the influence of experimental parameters such as sample pH
and conductivity, aptamer length, and %GC on aptamer-target affinity. The
platform developed will be capable of measuring binding kinetics, monitoring
equilibrium affinities of aptamers and adjusting for the presence of nonspecific
interactions. Moreover, this technology has high commercial potential as the
sensor fabrication is based on low-cost techniques like inkjet printing and
thermal embossing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.