* 2100822
* Empowering Teachers to See and Support Student Use of Crosscutting Concepts in the Life Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sarah Fick, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 07/31/2024
* USD 515,367.00

The project focuses on the development of formative assessment tools that
highlight assets of students’ use of crosscutting concepts (CCCs) while engaged
in science and engineering practices in grades 9-12 Life Sciences. In response
to the calls set forth by the Framework for K-12 Science Education and Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS), the field has most successfully researched
and developed assessment tools for disciplinary core ideas and the science and
engineering practices. The CCCs, which serve as the connective links across
science domains, however, remain more abstractly addressed. Presently, science
educators have little guidance for what student use of CCCs looks like or how to
assess and nurture such use. This project, with its explicit attention to the
CCCs, advances true three-dimensional scientific understanding in both research
and the classroom. Leveraging formative assessment as a vehicle for student and
teacher development taps into proven successful instructional strategies (e.g.,
sharing visions of successful learning, descriptive feedback, self-assessment),
while also advancing formative assessment, itself, by strengthening and
illustrating how these strategies may focus on the CCCs. Further, a strengths-
based approach will center culturally related differences in students’ use of
CCCs to achieve more equitable opportunities to engage in classroom sensemaking
practices. This work impacts the field of science education by 1) enabling a
more thorough realization of NGSS ideals, 2) strengthening teachers’ abilities
to identify diverse demonstrations of CCCs, and 3) showcasing the impact of
novel classroom tools to sharpen teachers’ abilities to solicit, notice, and act
upon evidence of emergent student scientific thinking within their instructional
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design-based implementation research
project will engage teachers in the iterative development and refinement of
rubrics that support three-dimensional science understanding through formative
assessment. The high school biology classrooms that compose the study site are
engaged in ambitious science teaching-inspired instruction. An inductive,
bottom-up approach (Brookhart, 2013) will allow researchers, teachers, and
students to co-construct rubrics. Analysis of classroom observations, artifact
collection, interviews with teachers and students, and expert-panel ratings will
produce a rubric for each CCC that integrates relevant science and engineering
practices and is applicable across a range of disciplinary core ideas. These
rubrics will illustrate progressions of increasingly advanced use of each of the
CCCs, to guide the construction, pursuit, and assessment of learning goals.
There will be two design cycles that allow for the collection of validity
evidence and produce rubrics with the potential for broad application by
educators. Complementary lines of qualitative and quantitative (i.e.,
psychometric) analysis will contribute to development and validation of the
rubrics and their formative uses. Project inquiry will focus on 1) how the
rubrics can represent CCCs for key disciplinary practices, 2) the extent to
which teachers’ and students’ understandings of the rubrics align, and 3) how
implementation of the rubrics impacts teachers’ and students’ understandings of
the CCCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.