* 2100146
* Supporting Diversity to Increase Innovation: Building New Mexico’s Computer Information Systems Technician Workforce through Equity and Inclusion
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sandy Wilson, Central New Mexico Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,757.00

The Department of Labor estimates that more than a million computing-related job
openings will be available in the U.S. by 2024. It also estimates that more than
two thirds of these jobs could go unfilled due to an insufficient pool of
qualified applicants. Addressing the underrepresentation of women and other
minoritized groups in the computing workforce will help to close this predicted
employment gap. Evidence suggests that the resulting increased diversity of the
workforce can also lead to increased productivity and better problem solving in
the workplace. This project will investigate how to recruit, retain, and prepare
women and minoritized students to pursue careers in Computer Information Systems
(CIS). Project goals include: 1) providing CIS faculty at Central New Mexico
Community College with resources to support and retain traditionally
underrepresented groups in CIS technician majors; 2) introducing high school
students to careers in CIS, with a focus on girls and students from other
minoritized groups; 3) preparing these students for success in postsecondary CIS
pathways; and 4) strengthening high school teachers’ knowledge and understanding
of CIS careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project efforts will focus on the entire
pipeline, from high school teachers and students to college faculty and students
in the CIS program. The project intends to broaden participation in CIS by
recruiting high school students from minoritized groups, including women, into
CIS career pathways and supporting their success within the pathway. The project
will leverage multiple approaches including providing high school students with
CIS skills workshops, paid internships, and courses that provide dual enrollment
credit. It will also train college faculty to better support the educational
journeys of all their students using customized curriculum. Quantitative
instruments will be developed to monitor the impact of activities on high school
students. Descriptive statistics will be used to determine the baseline
perceptions of CIS and confidence in ability to learn CIS skills. The student
cohort will be surveyed over time to measure changes in attitude and behavior,
as well as changes in their intention to pursue CIS education after high school.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.