* 2100888
* Collaborative Research: PurSUiT: Sampling amoeboid protists as a reservoir of unknown/undescribed eukaryotic diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Matthew Brown, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,131,517.00

Amoeboid microbes are fascinatingly diverse both ecologically and
evolutionarily, but they are severely under-studied and poorly sampled. While
they act as important players in nearly all ecosystems examined, very little is
known about the true biodiversity that exists in nature. The primary goal of
this project is to examine the biodiversity and genomic diversity of amoebae
found in a broad variety of habitats from land to sea. The researchers will
collect samples in the state of Mississippi to generate a much deeper cross-
section of the group, which in turn will expand our knowledge of the
environmental distribution and ecological function of the major eukaryotic
amoeboid lineage, Amoebozoa. Amoebozoa resides on an important branch of the
Eukaryotic Tree of Life, representing the closest relative to the lineage that
contains animals and Fungi. As such, a deeper look into their evolution and
biodiversity is important to better understand how microbial and multicellular
eukaryotes evolved into the vast diversity we see today. This project will help
train the next generation of systematists and taxonomists by providing research,
teaching, and outreach opportunities for a postdoctoral scholar, as well as
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. Participation by project
personnel in local public-school programs will provide education activities
aimed at teaching biodiversity science to area students from a diverse
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolutionary mechanisms that led to the
great diversity we observe today in in life cycle complexity, morphology, and
ecological variation amongst eukaryotic amoeboids are largely unknown. This
project will take an integrative approach to researching the biodiversity of
this group using detailed morphological characterizations, comparative genomics,
differential transcriptomics, and environmental DNA sequencing. It will provide
a much deeper taxon sampling in genome and transcriptomes than is currently
available for this group, and provide a more robust phylogenetic framework
through which the evolution of genomic and life history traits can be analyzed.
Using unique amoebozoan-specific barcoding primers, the environmental diversity
of a group that is not well represented in surveys will be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.