* 2100858
* RAISE:  Spring &amp; Wings:  Resonance in insect and engineered flight with synchronous and stretch-activated actuation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Nicholas Gravish, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2025
* USD 999,844.00

This Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering (RAISE)
project will develop a dynamical model to enhance understanding of insect flight
as an integrated system and apply this information to robotic design. Flight at
the size of insects is very energetically challenging. Nonetheless, the
evolution of flight spurred much of the evolutionary diversity of insects we see
today. Insects fly long distances, maneuver in crowded and gusty environments,
and overcome the energetic limitations of flapping wing flight in ways that
cannot yet be matched in human-engineered systems. Insects couple springy
exoskeletons to their wings to help store and return energy on every flap;
however, to maximize energy return, insects would have to beat their wings at a
steady rate. This project will explore how insects couple springs and wings
together to manage energy requirements and flight control under a range of
conditions. This project will also explore how the two distinct types of muscle
contraction that insects use to power flight could both be achieved with the
same underlying mechanics and muscle properties, enabling a mathematical
framework for understanding how insects achieve such different types of flight.
The project will use robophysical models with springy exoskeletons coupled to
wings and insect-scale flapping robots to establish a general “spring-wing”
framework. Research at both collaborating institutions will include an
immersive, vertically integrated undergraduate research program. Student teams
will receive mentorship and on-site research experience during the school year
and will travel to their exchange location for interdisciplinary summer
research. At least two graduate students and a post-doctoral fellow will also
receive cross-disciplinary training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insect-scale flapping-
wing flight demands both high-power actuation and low-latency control. To
mitigate flight power requirements, most insects actuate their wings indirectly
via muscles that deform a stiff, elastic exoskeleton. Coupling elastic elements
to the wings allows insects potentially to operate as a resonant system, which
would reduce power costs but also would introduce control constraints, such as
limiting wingbeat frequency modulation. To power flapping flight, insects
evolved two distinct actuation strategies: synchronous flight, with time-
periodic forcing of antagonistic muscles paced by the nervous system, and
asynchronous flight, in which muscles set up self-excited oscillations due to
strain-dependent activation. The project will establish an analytic framework
for spring-wing systems, test if insects operate at their hypothesized resonant
frequencies, and develop a dynamically scaled robophysical spring-wing flapper
to explore how a single non-dimensional parameter, the Weis-Fogh number,
influences elastic energy storage and aerodynamic force control. The two muscle
actuation strategies will then be combined, testing if synchronous flying
insects that have evolved from asynchronous insects retain the necessary
physiological signatures of self-excited (asynchronous) oscillations. A single
dynamic system that can transition from the two regimes of stable flapping will
be tested in the robophysical system and in an at-scale, bio-inspired flapping
wing robot. Finally, the tradeoffs of operating at or away from resonance in
spring-wing systems will be investigated. The project bridges the biological and
physical sciences, will expand understanding of physiological and biomechanical
principles and trade-offs involved in flight, and should transform the current
understanding of insect flight, with applications to robotics. Undergraduate and
graduate students and a post-doctoral fellow will participate in mentored,
interdisciplinary research teams, and will present research results at national
scientific meetings. Research results will also be disseminated through a bio-
inspired design workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Dynamics, Control and Systems Diagnostics Program in the Division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation, Directorate for Engineering, and the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.