* 2100402
* Supporting Micro and Nano Technicians through Hybrid Teaching Methods
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Trevor Thornton, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 281,983.00

Labor market data show that Micro and Nano Technicians are in high demand
throughout the American Southwest. Employers have indicated that they have
trouble identifying potential hires with the right combination of experience and
industry knowledge. This project at Rio Salado College, in collaboration with
Arizona State University, seeks to address the critical need for skilled Micro
and Nano Technicians throughout Arizona and the American Southwest. It intends
to do so by developing a technician education program with a hybrid learning
environment that prepares students to quickly enter the workforce. This award
will enable Rio Salado to (1) offer a six-course certificate, and an associate
degree in Nanotechnology, (2) provide an accessible and affordable academic
program for students to gain employable skills, (3) actively recruit students
from underrepresented and underserved groups, and (4) establish partnerships
with industry and other partners to prepare students to fabricate and
characterize materials for biological, textile, chemical, light, and electrical
applications, all at the micro and nanometer scale. The project team expects
that the combination of flexible course options and student recruiting will
increase the number of highly skilled technicians who meet industry needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to this project is the development and testing of
a hybrid Micro and Nano Technology academic program that will train or reskill
students. This project will advance career and technical education by providing
insights about alternative training models that are both accessible and
affordable for non-traditional students. An estimated 30 students will complete
either a certificate or an associate degree, and at least 8 community college
and secondary school educators will receive relevant training that will enhance
their teaching with industry relevant concepts and skills. This project will
generate new knowledge about how non-traditional students use flexible pathways
to complete their educational, career, and professional goals. Rio Salado
College will share the results of this work through national technical education
conferences and with other colleges in the Maricopa County Community College
District. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.