* 2100176
* Electronics and Engineering Technician Training in High Technology for the 21st Century
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gordon Snyder, Suffolk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 597,961.00

As technological innovation continues to determine the competitiveness of U.S.
industries, businesses are seeking employees who possess the skills to engage
with new technologies being adopted across a variety of sectors. In response,
Suffolk County Community College’s (SCCC) Electronics and Engineering Technician
Training in High Technology for the 21st Century (ETECH-21) will develop
advanced technological training and virtual hands-on lab activities that
incorporate some of these latest technologies, such as applied artificial
intelligence and machine learning and microcontroller electronic devices. With
guidance from industry, the initiative will engage 120 college students, 12 high
school teachers and 30 high school students in new curriculum and lab
activities; design and implement an innovative remote lab, which will provide
24/7 access to virtual lab equipment for students, faculty and industry
partners; offer internships with industry partners such as Brookhaven National
Laboratory, Tesla, and Curtis Wright, among others; and provide training to
faculty and high school educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase the
participation of underrepresented students, SCCC will collaborate with area high
schools and women-focused STEM organizations to promote enhanced STEM
educational pathways among K-12 women and minority students. Dissemination of
project innovations and best practices will be achieved through presentations at
regional, state, and national conferences. Project evaluation will focus on
several key components. First is the extent project activities are completed
with quality and within the anticipated timeline. Second is the degree to which
the activities result in the proposed outcomes. Third is to investigate how much
the project increases regional capacity to grow and train the advanced
technological workforce. Fourth is to gauge the extent to which the project
creates a seamless pathway for inquiry-based STEM learning, particularly for the
participation of underrepresented students. And fifth is to examine the extent
to which the project fosters collaboration among scientific, engineering,
industry, higher education, and secondary schools to expand ATE knowledge. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.