* 2100498
* Excellence in Research: Biodegradable Functional Hydrogels for Bone Loss Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Rupak Dua, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogels show great promise
as biomaterials however, their use is still limited. This award seeks to provide
foundational knowledge in the design principles of hydrogel delivery systems for
bone loss application. The results obtained from this study will improve our
current understanding of hydrogel-based biomaterials using basic science and
engineering techniques. The transdisciplinary nature of this investigation will
foster new collaborations across the campus and off-campus. This award will
provide high school students, undergraduates, and a postdoctoral fellow
training, mentoring, and research experience on the fabrication and
characterization of the hydrogel matrix, thus enhancing students and fellow STEM
training and preparing them for higher education and careers in the STEM field.
Completing these studies will provide robust evidence-based proof of principle
for the future development of hydrogel-based interventions that directly address
bone loss concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development of a
mechanically stable, functional hydrogel tailored for encapsulating and
providing sustained delivery of both anti-resorptive agents typified by the
bisphosphonates (BPs) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). This proposed study
aims to determine the feasibility of the co-existence of BPâ€™s to inhibit
osteoclasts activities and MSCs to differentiate into osteoblasts forming neo
bone with the degrading hydrogel. This study will also evaluate and characterize
BP-coated HA's dispersion along with MSCs in the hydrogel matrix. The methods
used in this investigation will include the following: fabrication and
characterization of hydrogel matrix using mechanical testing, release studies,
biochemical and cell assays, histology, quantitative reverse transcription-
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and statistical design of experiments. This
proposal will expand the field of hydrogel-based biomaterials intended for
applications in contact with biological systems. It will also contribute to
developing a potentially translational hydrogel for mesenchymal stem cell-based
therapeutics for further investigations in bone loss and other biomedical
applications. The award will also provide high school students, undergraduates,
and a postdoctoral fellow with research experiences, thus preparing them for
higher education and careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.