* 2100969
* Catalyst Award: Nuclear Science at Virginia State University, Building Connections to FRIB Science
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Thomas Redpath, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The project at
Virginia State University seeks to establish a nuclear science research group
that will investigate neutron-unbound states of oxygen isotopes at the Facility
for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) at Michigan State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed work focuses on two areas: (1)
analysis of data from past measurements performed with the MoNA (the Modular
Neutron Array) Collaboration at National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory
(NSCL) and (2) the development of a new segmented target to probe the structure
of neutron rich nuclei. The former (1) will examine past measurements of various
decay channels in order to extract information about the 27O level structure. It
will involve computer programming to analyze and visualize the data as well as
perform simulations using the GEANT4 toolkit to interpret the results. This data
set was recorded during the first experiment to utilize a new segmented target
designed to increase statistics for Radioactive Isotope Beam (RIB) experiments
to study neutron-unbound systems using the invariant mass spectroscopy
technique. The latter (2) will help inform the design, testing and construction
of an upgraded target system, the Multilayered Active target for MoNA
Experiments (MAME), that will use a gas electron multiplier (GEM) based detector
to track the outgoing reaction and decay fragments. A GEANT4 simulation will be
developed as part of the design process and for use in the data analysis of
future experiments that will use MAME. The resulting device will provide a new
tool for measuring neutron-unbound systems thus contributing to the ongoing
investigation of the rich structure of atomic nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.