* 2100214
* Characterizing and assessing number sense in third through eighth grade students
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Ying Cheng, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 03/31/2024
* USD 553,429.00

One goal of mathematics curricular and instructional reforms in the United
States is to help students build “mature number sense,” which involves making
sense of numbers and operations, using reasoning to notice patterns, and
flexibly selecting the most effective and efficient problem-solving strategies.
In support of this goal, mathematics educators have developed a variety of
instructional practices designed to move students beyond seeing mathematics as a
set of disconnected procedures and facts to appreciating it as a coherent set of
ideas and tools. These practices have been growing in popularity across
mathematics classrooms, but it is unclear if students’ mature number sense is
improving. One reason for slow progress is that the field currently lacks a
rigorously validated measure of mature number sense that is both widely accepted
and easy to use. Moreover, even though mathematics educators generally agree on
the importance of mature number sense, there is little evidence demonstrating
that it is a measurably distinct characteristic of mathematical cognition. Lack
of such knowledge is a critical problem because, without it, researchers cannot
explain, predict, and study mature number sense, and teachers are left to rely
on their own intuitions about whether and how to focus on it in their
classrooms. In this project, researchers will advance fundamental knowledge of
mathematical cognition through the development of innovative metrics and methods
to assess mature number sense with valid and reliable scores for use with
students in grades 3-8. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis is that
mature number sense is a measurable characteristic of mathematical cognition,
separable from both domain-specific knowledge (e.g., arithmetic fluency,
fraction knowledge) and domain-general constructs (e.g., creativity, cognitive
flexibility), that predicts math-related beliefs and achievement. The research
team will work with a diverse sample of students in grades 3-8 to refine,
extend, and validate a brief assessment of mature number sense. They will start
with a measure that they iteratively developed and validated in a large pilot
study with middle and high school students, and they will optimize it as the
“middle school form” (for grades 6-8). They will collect additional evidence of
validity for this form by comparing it to other, more lengthy measures of mature
number sense and by conducting a longitudinal study to examine if scores on the
measure in fall predict grade-level mathematics learning and math-related
beliefs in spring. Next, they will extend the measure downward to include upper
elementary grades 3-5. Items will be iteratively developed and examined for
construct relevance using expert ratings, classical and IRT item statistics, and
retrospective think-aloud strategy reports of students during problem solving.
The researchers will examine if the factor structure of the elementary form is
the same as that found with the middle school form, testing measurement
invariance across the two grade-level groupings. They also will develop a
technical manual for researchers and teachers. By the end of the project, there
will be a practical, validated assessment of mature number sense for students in
grades 3-8 that is easy to administer in schools, after-school programs,
research laboratories, and homes. The target audiences for this measure include
basic researchers interested in studying mathematical cognition, intervention
researchers interested in studying the effects of innovative instructional
practices on students’ number sense, and teachers who wish to monitor their
students’ progress toward the “processes and proficiencies” with longstanding
importance in mathematics education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.