* 2100889
* Advancing the Development of Realistic and Probabilistic Shear Wave Velocity Profiles Using Advanced Inversion Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Clinton Wood, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 502,214.00

This project will advance our ability to image the subsurface by utilizing
surface wave methods to develop more realistic and probabilistic shear wave
velocity profiles. In situ site characterization still remains mired in the past
and continues to rely heavily on empirical approaches developed over 100 years
ago, while the medical industry has made leaps forward in the field of non-
invasive imaging. As the profession moves forward, the advancement of non-
invasive methods is critical to meeting the challenges of tomorrow in a cost-
effective manner. As a step toward this goal, this project plans to advance our
ability to develop realistic and probabilistic subsurface models through
advanced inversion schemes. The researched framework will harness artificial
intelligence and additional wavefield information to replace a level of user
skill now required to develop subsurface models. Realistic subsurface models are
critical for applications including liquefaction triggering, site response
analysis, bedrock rippability, and settlement analyses. In addition, the boarder
impacts of the project center on promoting the use of non-invasive methods by
educating students through an international student exchange program, and
providing training to practicing engineers through a speakerâ€™s
bureau.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research lies in the
development of state-of-the-art surface wave inversion algorithms. These
algorithms will incorporate a Bayesian statistical framework into high-level
inversion algorithms using machine learning and trans-dimensional Monte Carlo
methodologies. The algorithms will incorporate expert knowledge into the inverse
problem and characterize the uncertainty of the developed shear wave velocity
profiles based on the experimental data. The use of Bayesian and machine
learning methods will allow uncertainty in the solution to be considered and
presented in a more robust way than current approaches. In addition, further
understanding of the petrophysical link between multiple data types advances our
knowledge of how different data types work together within joint inversion
frameworks to constrain the inversion problem. Advances in the inversion
framework will produce broader impacts for multiple applications including site
response, liquefaction analysis, and infrastructure evaluation. Moreover, the
development of more accurate, realistic, and probabilistic shear wave velocity
profiles allows for their inclusion into performance-based designs. Lastly,
advancements in inversion algorithms and knowledge of petrophysical links are
transferable to other non-invasive geophysical methods, which all suffer from
non-uniqueness issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.