* 2100879
* Managing Uncertainty for Productive Struggle: Exploring Teacher Development for Managing Students' Epistemic Uncertainty as a Pedagogical Resource in Project-Based Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ying-Chih Chen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2024
* USD 442,293.00

The research team is exploring teachers' capacity to manage student epistemic
uncertainty as a pedagogical resource that supports student’s productive
struggle and the development of conceptual knowledge during project-based
learning (PBL) instruction in middle school science classrooms. Although
scientists consider uncertainty to be a primary driver of the progression of
scientific knowledge and making sense of the world, the way science is typically
taught in middle school obscures the productive role of uncertainty in science.
Indeed, science is typically taught to emphasize its assuredness and authority
instead. If teachers are going to shift their teaching practice to engage
students with uncertainty in scientifically productive ways, the educational
community needs this area to be researched. It is known that managing
uncertainty in the classroom is a challenge for teachers and students. Many are
not familiar with how scientists and engineers manage uncertainty to make sense
of the real world, and few studies explore learning science as an enterprise of
uncertainty management nor how student uncertainty is identified by teachers and
students, advances discussion, contributes to knowledge development, gets
resolved, and appropriately raises new uncertainties, and what strategies are
available to teachers to manage students’ desirable uncertainty for productive
struggle. This project is exploring how teachers' instructional practices change
over time with repeated use of epistemic uncertainty as a pedagogical resource
to support students’ engagement in PBL, and what effect those changes have on
student perceptions, practice, management of epistemic uncertainty and learning
outcomes. The project will result in the following outcomes: (1) an evidence-
based model and learning materials for sustained PD that focuses on developing
teacher capacity and practice while using targeted materials and approaches; (2)
a productive teaching model for managing uncertainty that will promote a culture
of scientific inquiry and engineering design as well as a set of strategies to
foster student agency; and (3) evidence of increased student learning outcomes
when teachers adapt students' epistemic uncertainty as a pedagogical resource to
support students' productive struggle in STEM PBL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
longitudinal, design-based research, mixed-methods study structure, the research
team is investigating middle school science teachers' capacity to recognize,
utilize, and manage students' epistemic uncertainty as a pedagogical resource
for productive struggle. The study follows the same cohort of 24 sixth-grade
teachers in Phoenix, Arizona, for three years beginning in fall 2021. Program
activities are impacting approximately 1080 students’ learning outcomes over the
life of the project. The following research questions guide the study: (1) How
does sustained engagement with professional development in uncertainty
management affect teachers' capacity to recognize and utilize students'
epistemic uncertainty as a pedagogical resource for engaging students in
productive struggle to develop scientific knowledge? (2) How do teachers'
instructional practice in managing epistemic uncertainty change over time when
they utilize epistemic uncertainty as a pedagogical resource for engaging
students in productive struggle? (3) How do teachers' approach to managing
uncertainty influence students' perceptions, practice, and management of
epistemic uncertainty? Quantitatively, existing measures are being employed an
two new instruments are being developed. Qualitatively, interviews and surveys
round out the exploration of these questions. The results of this study are
informing widely-adopted learning standards, and dissemination will help science
teachers to recognize and use students’ epistemic uncertainty as a pedagogical
resource to support their learning in science and engineering classrooms. The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.