* 2100925
* Enhancing research capacity on Cape Cod for studies of coastal ecosystems that are at risk from climate change and other human impacts
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Jooke Robbins, Center For Coastal Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 177,649.00

The effects of climate change and other human impacts can be challenging to
assess, especially for long‐lived, cryptic species. The Center for Coastal
Studies (CCS, www.coastalstudies.org) has studied threatened and endangered
species and vulnerable coastal ecosystems for more than four decades. This
project establishes a molecular genetic/omics laboratory to enhance
multidecadal, inter‐disciplinary and collaborative biological research. A
dedicated lab on Cape Cod will facilitate the study of coastal and marine
species, with particular support for long‐term cetacean research, including
studies of human impacts by providing forensic data, insights into genetic
diversity and fitness, and the evolutionary context for modern population
responses. The lab will serve the extensive regional scientific community,
provide hands‐on opportunities for students and support the needs of management
agencies. Public outreach has the potential to reach 20,000 adults and children
each year through CCS outreach and education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
molecular genetics lab is an expansion of the CCS Integrated Analytical
Laboratory in Provincetown, Massachusetts, and would be equipped for genetic and
genomic assays, such as “genotype‐by‐sequencing” and whole genome sequencing, as
well as in‐house bioinformatics and data analysis. The lab further benefits from
a partnership with the Marine Evolution and Conservation Lab at the University
of Groningen, a well‐established laboratory and the primary repository for
genetic samples of North Atlantic whale species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.