* 2100988
* Collaborative Research: Developing and Evaluating Assessments of Problem-Solving in Computer Adaptive Testing Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Gabriel Matney, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2026
* USD 575,270.00

Problem solving has been a priority within K-12 mathematics education for over
four decades and is reflected throughout the Common Core State Standards for
Mathematics (CCSSM) initiative, which have been adopted in some form by 41
states. Broadly defined, problem solving involves the mathematical practices in
which students engage as they solve intellectually-challenging mathematical
tasks. In prior research, problem-solving measures aligned to CCSSM for grades
3-5 were developed and validated to supplement previously established problem-
solving measures in grades 6-8. The problem-solving measures assess students’
problem-solving performance within the context of CCSSM math content and
practices. This project expands the scope of the problem-solving measures use
and score interpretation. The project work advances mathematical problem-solving
assessments into computer adaptive testing. Computer adaptive testing allows for
more precise and efficient targeting of student ability compared to static
tests. Few measures designed to assess students’ mathematical problem-solving
ability use this technology. Shorter tests require less in-class time for
assessment than current paper-pencil problem-solving measures and increase
classroom instruction time. The computer-adaptive problem-solving measures have
sufficient reliability and strong validity evidence, and may limit test-taker
fatigue. Finally, the project will benchmark current grades 6-8 instruments
using an objective standard-setting method, which allows for improved score
interpretations with content-related feedback. Immediate results of student- and
class-level reports will be produced through the computer adaptive testing
system allowing for teachers to modify instruction to improve students’
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-year project aims to advance the use of
computer adaptive testing and assessment development for use in mathematics
instruction. The project applies an iterative and stakeholder-informed design
science-based methodology as well as employs the use of Rasch modeling for the
psychometric analysis during item development and validation. The project aims
to: (a) benchmark the previously established grades 6-8 problem-solving
measures; (b) develop, calibrate, and validate criterion-referenced computer
adaptive testing for each measure; (c) construct student- and class-level score
reports for integration into the computer adaptive testing system; and (d)
investigate teachers’ capacity for implementing, interpreting, and using the
assessments and results in STEM learning settings. The project addresses the
following set of research questions: (RQ1) What benchmark performance standards
define different proficiency levels on problem-solving measures for each grade
level? (RQ2) What are the psychometric properties of new problem-solving
measures items developed for the computer adaptive testing item bank? (RQ3) Is
there significant item drift across student populations on the new problem-
solving measure items? (RQ4) To what extent are problem-solving measures item
calibrations stable within the computer adaptive testing system? (RQ5) What
recommendations for improvements do teachers and students have for the new
problem-solving measures items, computer adaptive testing platform and reporting
system, if any? (RQ6) To what extent do teachers interact with, perceive, and
make sense of the assessment information generated for use in practice? and
(RQ7) Does an online learning module build teacher capacity for problem solving
measures, computer adaptive testing implementation, interpretation, and use of
student assessment outcomes in STEM learning settings? An experimental design
will be utilized to investigate teachers’ capacity for implementing,
interpreting, and using problem solving measures in a computer adaptive testing
system. The project has the potential to impact the field by providing school
districts and researchers a means to assess students’ mathematical problem-
solving performance at one time or growth over time efficiently and effectively;
address future online learning needs; and improve classroom teaching through
more precise information about students’ strengths with less class time focused
on assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.