* 2100343
* Understanding Roles of Masters Education in Entry Into, and Upskilling and Reskilling for, the STEM Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Julia Kent, Council of Graduate Schools
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,014,700.00

The Council of Graduate Schools examines the role of master’s education in STEM
education workforce development. The project will contribute to the development
of a data infrastructure for future research on master’s education while
providing more nuanced insights into labor market outcomes of master’s degrees
in STEM by various fields of study, gender, race/ethnicity, and career stages.
Investigators will investigate the upskilling/reskilling pathways into master’s
education and how different motivations and other factors may explain student
choices. The project also will shed light on how master’s education may
facilitate transitions to STEM careers for non-STEM undergraduate majors. In
addition to providing an evidence base for investments in STEM technical
training, the project will contribute to developing a more comprehensive
approach to improving STEM master’s education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research design is guided by the traditional human capital investment
perspective where individuals pursue master’s education to gain skills,
knowledge, and expertise to increase their career effectiveness and success.
Investigators hypothesize that (1) individuals are motivated by their desires to
upskill or reskill, thus making themselves more marketable in the labor market;
(2) individuals’ intentions to upskill or reskill and decisions to pursue
particular master’s degrees will translate into their subsequent job placements
and career trajectories. An exit survey of master’s degree recipients from ten
U.S. colleges and universities will be used to answer three research questions:
(1) What factors are associated with STEM and non-STEM students’ pursuit of
master’s degrees in STEM and non-STEM fields? (2) How does attainment of a
master’s degree explain persistence or job changes within the STEM workforce.
(3) How does the upskilling and reskilling pathways through master’s education
differ by subfields and socioeconomic attributes of master’s degree recipients?
The survey will include questions from the National Science Foundation (NSF)
Survey of Earned Doctorates, Council of Graduate Schools Professional Science
Master’s Initiative exit survey, and alumni and student surveys from the NSF
Understanding PhD Career Pathways in STEM project. Investigators will perform
logistic regression models to analyze the data. The research results will
illuminate the role of master’s education in developing a diverse STEM
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the EHR Core
Research program that funds fundamental research focused on STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM professional
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.