* 2100122
* How Do Unrepresentative College Grades Shape Race and Gender Gaps in the STEM Pipeline?
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Klasik, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2024
* USD 498,250.00

While course grades are a primary way instructors communicate with students
about their academic performance, there is less research on how grades are
interpreted differently by college students. As a result, differential responses
to grades may aﬀect which students pursue STEM degrees and may therefore be an
important contributing factor in the well documented gender and race/ethnicity
gaps in STEM degrees. Prior studies examining this hypothesis, however, have
been largely limited to analyzing data from individual courses or from single
colleges and therefore cannot rule out alternative explanations based on other
aspects of a student’s academic record or aspects of the institution where the
student is enrolled. Likewise, previous studies have not been able to account
for factors influencing students’ ﬁnal grades in a course, such as a personal
hardship. This project proposes to address these challenges by examining student
grades across all STEM courses at all campuses in the University of North
Carolina system. The study will include analyses of the Spring 2020 disruption
caused by COVID-19 and will consider how the potentially unrepresentative grades
students received in Spring 2020 may have shaped subsequent choices to pursue
STEM coursework. This project intends to generate generalizable estimates of how
students’ differential sensitivity to grades may affect the size of race and
gender gaps in the STEM pipeline. Understanding these responses has the
potential to allow schools to devise fairer grading systems and better tailor
advising programs and resources to support students pursuing STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will employ a mixed-methods
approach to better understand whether unrepresentative grades change students’
trajectories through the STEM pipeline, whether these changes vary with
students’ race/ethnicity or gender, and how departments advise students when
they receive unrepresentative grades. The team will use student transcript data
from 15 campuses in the University of North Carolina system from the academic
years 2015-16 through 2023-24 to compare the trajectories of students in STEM
majors based on whether they received uncharacteristically high or low grades in
STEM courses in Spring 2020 compared to what might be expected based on the
performance of prior cohorts of students. In addition, the team plans to
interview academic advisors from a sample of STEM departments in the UNC system
to better understand the guidance students receive about how to interpret their
grades when deciding whether to pursue a STEM degree. One potential broader
impact of this project is inform knowledge about grading policies and academic
advising with an aim to reduce achievement gaps in STEM participation. The team
plans to disseminate results in academic journals and distribute findings among
local and regional stakeholders in the form of policy briefs and presentations.
This project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.