* 2100071
* Measuring and Modeling Visual Attention in Online Multimedia Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Lester Loschky, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 540,393.00

Online multimedia instruction is expected to grow. Yet, given the tendency for
students’ minds to wander and to be distracted especially during online
instruction, it is important for researchers and educators to understand how to
help students to stay focused on the important information while ignoring the
unimportant information. This project addresses two fundamental issues: How does
the online Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) instructor
or educational materials developer know when learners are effectively paying
attention to the learning material? How can they use this information to improve
the design of their online learning materials in STEM? Attention and learning
outcomes will be collected for several hundred students as they use multiple
online modules, over a semester-long of a university introductory physics
course. These data will be used to predict students’ attention and how it
relates to their learning outcomes. This information will then be used to help
improve online multimedia instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses a gap between the known effects of attention on learning and attempts
to translate those theoretical constructs into pedagogical practice in
rigorously, reliably, and validly measurable ways. This study is the first to
bridge the theory and methods of studying attention in cognitive science with
educational practice during a semester-long university online course. It points
the way to making rapid, ecologically valid progress in understanding the
connections between students' moment-to-moment attentional states and their
long-term STEM learning. Such progress could be useful in advancing policy and
practice surrounding improving STEM learning. In Phase 1(Basic Research), the
Principal Investigators (PIs) propose a longitudinal, naturalistic study of
attention and learning from online instruction. The PIs will study several
hundred students' attention to online learning materials, and their learning,
over a semester-long of a large university introductory physics course. In Phase
2 (Applied Research), using the above information, the PIs will identify
generalizable targets of change in students' attentional states by alerting
students at critical moments of attentional lapses, or cueing their attention to
relevant information. For instructors and instructional designers, the project
will provide meaningful, high impact data on students' varying attentional
states over time, and will pinpoint attentional deficiencies. The proposed
research will develop an Attentional Toolkit that takes a two-pronged approach
to leveraging students' attentional states and improving their educational
outcomes. The first prong ("demand side") addresses the learner by measuring
their level of attentiveness and alerting/cueing their attention. The second
prong ("supply side") addresses the instructor or online materials developer. To
improve the broader impact of their research, the PIs will seek out a diverse
pool of participants and take all measures necessary to improve fairness and
reduce bias. Further, because the proposed methods are likely generalizable
across numerous educational domains, the Attentional Toolkit could be broadly
used across educational disciplines. In addition to publications and
presentations, the Attentional Toolkit will be made available to faculty. The
PIs will also provide workshops to faculty who are teaching multimedia online
courses on how to use the Attentional Toolkit. This project is funded by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental
research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.