* 2100811
* Excellence in Research: Investigation of Interfacial Chemical and Ion Transport in Solid Inorganic-Polymer Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lamartine Meda, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2024
* USD 513,443.00

Limited understanding ion transport at the interfaces in electrochemical systems
is a major obstacle in the development of safe, reliable advanced lithium
batteries with ultra-high energy density and high power-density. Such batteries
are needed for the widespread electrification of transportation and storage of
renewably generated electricity. Fundamental understanding of ion transport and
control of interfacial reactions between a composite electrolyte and electrodes
will enable engineering of new interfaces containing safer, solid polymer-based
composite electrolytes. In this project, the researchers will investigate ion
transport at the boundaries of the electrolyte/electrodes as well as between the
ceramic/polymer matrix. The team will utilize several different characterization
tools to understand the properties of the materials. The students involved in
this research project will be engaged in cutting-edge research on a topic of
importance to addressing the global energy challenge. This project will
contribute to improving diversity in the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics) workforce by recruiting and retaining highly qualified students
from underrepresented minority groups and engaging these students in cutting-
edge research and development in energy storage technologies. The overall
collaboration between Xavier University of Louisiana (XULA) and the University
of Notre Dame (ND) which includes summer visits of undergraduate XULA
researchers to the ND research group will enhance the studentsâ€™ research
experiences, promote retention of underrepresented minority students in STEM
fields, and enable research not possible by either group
individually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interfacial research is critically needed for
designing new solid electrolyte systems with both high bulk ionic conductivity
and that is chemically and dimensionally stable against the Li anode with
cycling. Composite polymer electrolytes have flexibility necessary to withstand
electrode volume changes with cycling, yet ion transport is limited between the
ceramic and polymer in the bulk electrolyte and between the composite and the
electrode surface. The interfacial resistances lead to reduced bulk ionic
conductivities, reduced safely achievable cycling rates, and poor Li anode
performance. In this project by researchers at XULA and ND, the interfacial
chemistry and ion transport within the system including composite polymer
electrolytes and Li anodes will be investigated as a function of polymer type to
allow for the fundamental understanding of each chemistry and polymer dynamics
on interfacial properties. These studies will test the hypotheses that nanoscale
void formation between the electrolyte and anode, as well as between ceramic and
polymer matrix, causes roughness and small contact area for ion transport which
increases the interfacial resistance, and a lithium deficient layer at the
interface leads to the formation of space-charge which also contributes to
interfacial resistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Broadening Participation in Engineering Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.