* 2100978
* Excellence in Research: Elucidating Factors that Affect Substrate Promiscuity of Bacterial Capsule Polymerases for Synthesis of Novel Polysaccharides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* James Wachira, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heavy metal pollution of water
poses environmental risks. Bacterial Carbohydrate biomaterials, due to their
chemical properties, can bind to metal cations very well and therefore have the
potential to be used in the development of technologies for removing
environmental heavy metal contamination, among other applications. Despite being
one of the major classes of macromolecules, such bacterial carbohydrate
biomaterials as well as the enzymes that synthesize them are not fully
understood. More specifically, there is a lack of knowledge of (1) the three-
dimensional structure of most carbohydrate-producing enzymes and (2) the rules
that determine what specific types of compounds these enzymes could use to
synthesize new carbohydrate biomaterial structures. The team of researchers on
this project seek to gain fundamental knowledge into these two areas using
computational and laboratory research approaches. Outcomes of this work will
provide key findings to inform future studies leading to the design of
carbohydrate-based biomaterials with enhanced metal-binding properties. The
proposed work will also broaden participation of underrepresented minorities
(URMs) in biomaterials research and advanced computational tools through
research opportunities and curricular revisions at Morgan State
University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial capsular polysaccharides, found on the outer surface of
many Gram-negative bacteria, differ in length, composition, and structural
properties. These polymers may provide new environmentally friendly sources of
biomaterials for bioremediation, cargo-delivery systems, and biologically active
polymers. An understanding of capsule-producing enzymes is critical to the
design of new carbohydrate structures to serve in these applications. However,
many of these enzymes have been poorly studied and there are very few known
3-dimensional structures. The proposed project seeks to study the rules
governing nucleotide donor substrate specificity of the Neisseria meningitidis
serogroup W (NmW) capsule polymerase as a basis for investigating its potential
to serve as an enzymatic tool for the synthesis of novel polysaccharide
structures. The long-term goal is to design polysaccharide-based biomaterials
with improved metal remediation activity. The project team will work in
coordination to carry out the following objectives: (1) Identification of key
amino acids that modulate specificity of the NmW capsule polymerase using
modeling, molecular dynamics simulations and mutational approaches; (2)
Determination of binding kinetics and enzymatic activity of natural and modified
substrates using surface plasmon resonance and bioluminescence assays; and (3)
Computational modeling and molecular dynamics simulations of proposed novel
carbohydrate polymers and characterization of enzymatically-produced
polysaccharides. The proposed work will broaden participation of
underrepresented minorities (URMs) in biomaterials research and advanced
computational tools through student research opportunities at the high school,
undergraduate and graduate level. In addition, a research-based bioinformatics
activity will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate Biochemistry
courses. Thus, this project will provide research and educational training to
students from URMs in the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.