* 2100808
* Supporting high school students and teachers with a digital, localizable, climate education experience
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Catherine Stimac, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 06/30/2025
* USD 2,435,025.00

Teachers regularly adapt curriculum materials to localize for their school or
community context, yet curriculum materials are not always created to support
this localization. Developing materials that are intentionally designed for
localization has potential to support rich science learning across different
contexts, especially for a topic like climate change where global change can
have varied local effects. This partnership of BSCS Science Learning, Oregon
Public Broadcasting, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
advances curriculum materials development for high quality units that are
intentionally designed for adaptation by teachers for their local context. It
will develop and test a design process bringing together national designers and
teachers across the country. Teachers will be supported through professional
learning to adapt from the base unit to create a local learning experience for
their students. The project will create a base unit on carbon cycling as a
foundation for understanding how and why the Earth's climate is changing, and it
will study the process of localizing the unit for teachers to implement across
varied contexts to incorporate local phenomena, problems, and solutions. The
unit will be fully digital with rich visual experiences, simulations, and
computer models that incorporate real-time data and the addition of localized
data sets. These data-based learning experiences will support students in
reasoning with data to ask and answer questions about phenomena. Research will
study the unit development and localization process, the supports appropriate
for teachers and students, and the impact on classroom
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will adopt an iterative design
process to create a Storyline base unit, aligned to Next Generation Science
Standards, for localization, piloting, and an implementation study with 40
teachers. To support teacher learning, the project adopts the STeLLA teacher
professional learning model. To support student learning, the project addresses
climate change content knowledge with a focus on socioscientific issues and
students’ sense of agency with environmental science. The project will research
how the educative features in the unit and the professional development impact
teachers’ practice, including their content knowledge, comfort for teaching a
socioscientific issue, and their ability to productively localize materials from
a base unit. The study uses a cohort-control quasi-experimental design to
examine the impact of the unit and professional learning experience on
dimensions of students' sense of agency with environmental science. The study
will also include exploratory analyses to examine whether all students benefit
from the unit. It uses a pre-post design to examine impacts on teacher knowledge
and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.