* 2100878
* Excellence in Research: Molecular mechanism of Tissue Factor encryption and decryption.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Alexei Iakhiaev, Texas College
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 448,258.00

This project is focused on the regulation of activity of a membrane protein
Tissue Factor (TF) that serves as a cofactor for enzymes that initiate cascade
reactions of blood coagulation. TF is inactive or encrypted in normal
conditions, while in conditions of tissue damage, TF is exposed to coagulation
enzymes and is turned into an activated or decrypted state. The primary
mechanism of TF decryption is determined by the changes in membrane
phospholipids leading to high-affinity binding of coagulation enzymes to the
membrane surface and the TF, located on the membrane. However, mechanisms of
encryption and decryption related directly to TF are not known. This project,
with the state-of-the-art computational resources of the UT System, will provide
training for undergraduate HBCU students. Outcomes of this project will have
societal impact by providing new details about critical molecules with impacts
in cardiovascular diseases and roles in viral infections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a model of TF encryption and
decryption based on the dimerization of TF. The model proposes an equilibrium
between TF monomers and dimers. Dimers can be formed by two TF molecules bound
in alternate configurations to produce encrypted, partially active, and fully
active decrypted structures. This equilibrium depends on the lipid environment
whereby specific lipids can selectively stabilize encrypted or decrypted dimers.
The project will create models composed of full-length TF and other members of
the coagulation cascade (Factor VIIa and Factor Xa)inserted into lipid bilayers
of different phospholipid compositions. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and
molecular docking will be carried out with the TF dimer models. Extensive
comparative analysis of MD trajectories will be performed to reveal amino acids
and membrane lipids essential for stabilizing TF dimers in an encrypted or
decrypted state. In addition, amino acid residues involved in selective
phospholipid binding and stabilization of encrypted or decrypted dimers will be
selected for experimental validation of their role in TF encryption or
decryption using mutational analysis combined with functional activity
assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.