* 2100823
* Community for Advancing Discovery Research in Education (CADRE): Expanding the Reach and Impact of Innovations in STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Christopher Harris, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,396,061.00

This project from the Community for Advancing Discovery Research in Education
(CADRE) will provide assistance to Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) projects in
national dissemination of the R&amp;D contributions of the DRK-12 program. This
project will strengthen the capacity, advance the research, and amplify the
impact of DRK-12 projects and researchers working in the assessment, learning,
and teaching strands. Through this effort, CADRE will advance the goals of the
DRK-12 program in preK-12 formal STEM education by responding to the continuing
need for communication, collaboration, and innovations among DRK-12 awardees and
between awardees and the education system. The DRK-12 program seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CADRE's goals to
strengthen the capacity, advance the research, and amplify the influence of
active DRK-12 projects and associated researchers are designed to contribute to
improvements in preK-12 STEM education. During this project, CADRE will continue
its work in three main areas: (1) supporting the DRK-12 community, (2)
connecting awardees in support of knowledge generation, and (3) connecting to
the larger community of education research, policy, and practice. In addition,
CADRE will bring together communities of practice to synthesize research across
DRK-12 projects to identify critical themes in successful projects. CADRE will
support early-career researchers and postdoctoral fellows through dedicated
mentoring programs. They will also launch a Community Partners program designed
to recruit a more diverse set of prospective DRK-12 researchers into the
community. CADRE seeks to bring together (virtually and in-person) diverse
audiences to contribute to and benefit from the work of DRK-12 projects, thereby
further increasing engagement in evidence-based education in the STEM
disciplines. CADRE will work to ensure that the knowledge and products produced
by and with DRK-12 projects are broadly accessible to a varied group of
stakeholders. CADRE will disseminate the research, models, resources, and
technologies--both within the program and outside--to the broader education
practitioner, research, and policymaking communities through a variety of media,
including infographics and podcasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.