* 2100833
* Collaborative Research: Co-Designing for Statewide Alignment of a Vision for High Quality Mathematics Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Katherine Mawhinney, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 166,359.00

Mathematics teaching and learning is influenced by policy and practice at the
state, district, and school levels. To support large-scale change, it is
important for high-quality mathematics instruction to be aligned and cohesive
across each level of the education system. This can be supported through
regional partnerships among state, district, and school-based leaders,
mathematics teachers, education researchers, and mathematicians. Such
partnerships create instructional tools and resources to document the vision for
instruction. For example, teams can work together to create instructional
frameworks for each grade band that describe standards, mathematics teaching,
and units for teaching. This project will develop a process for creating a
shared, state-wide vision of high-quality mathematics instruction. It will also
develop and study the resources to implement that vision at the state, district,
and school levels. In addition, the project will investigate a collaborative
process of designing and implementing high-quality mathematics instruction at a
state level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a shared vision of
high-quality mathematics instruction intended to improve systemic coherence
during the implementation of education innovations. The project uses a research-
practice partnership with a design-based implementation research design. To
examine and support implementation of the vision, partners will continue a
process of developing instructional frameworks, research and practice briefs, as
well as additional resources as needed by stakeholders in the system. Engaging
partners at all levels of the system is a central component of developing the
shared vision of instruction. This project includes three major research
questions. First, what are visions of high-quality mathematics instruction held
by educators at different levels of a state educational system? Second, in what
ways do educators' visions of high-quality mathematics instruction mediate their
use of implementation resources in practice? Finally, in what ways do educatorsâ€™
visions of high-quality mathematics instruction mediate their participation in
the co-design of implementation resources? An activity theory framework is used
to understand the interactions between partners at different levels in the
system and the creation of artifacts during the design process. The research
methods for the study are situated in design-based research to capture the
conjectures, instructional resources, design processes, and outcomes of the
process. The project will use case studies of partner districts, data gathering
from interactions with partners, artifacts of the design process, and other
documentation to understand how the vision is created and enacted in different
settings and to develop an empirically supported design framework and
methodology for implementing STEM innovations at scale that centralizes a shared
instructional vision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.