* 2100405
* A California Central-Coast Partnership for Industry-focused Micro/nanotechnology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jens-Uwe Kuhn, The Foundation for Santa Barbara City College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,974.00

Maintaining a successful workforce pipeline in modern micro/nanotechnology is a
critical national need. This project is designed to fill a demonstrated
micro/nanotechnology industry need for job-ready cleanroom-manufacturing
technicians. Although community college students could help meet these industry
needs, many community colleges lack access to semiconductor cleanroom
facilities. As a result, students at these institutions are unable to develop
the cleanroom skills needed for entry into high-tech manufacturing positions.
This project intends to provide community college students with access to onsite
learning in manufacturing cleanroom facilities at the California Nanosystems
Institute and the NSF-funded Nanofabrication Facility. Through these experiences
and related coursework, they will develop the knowledge and skills needed for
work in cleanroom facilities. The project can contribute to the local economy by
increasing the number of competitive local applicants for cleanroom technician
positions, which can in turn lower the need for on-the-job training and decrease
employee turn-over. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, Santa Barbara
City College and the University of Santa Barbara will build a partnership to
provide community college students with access to and training within cleanroom
facilities. At these facilities, both community college faculty and students
will be trained in cleanroom techniques. They will also tour local manufacturing
facilities to experience real-world applications of cleanroom technology. Santa
Barbara City College faculty members will participate in regular Industry
Advisory Board discussions, creating an avenue for two-way dialogue to align
industry needs and college curricula. Students will be able to earn industry-
vetted certificates that comply with those set by the semiconductor industry-
standards organization, SEMI. By providing community college students access to
cleanroom facilities, the project can prepare students for high-tech
manufacturing positions. This project intends to lay the foundation for building
a robust regional workforce pipeline to serve the larger micro/nanotechnology
industry. This collaborative partnership involving a community college, a four-
year institution and local industry partners to develop an industry-backed
curriculum is a model that could be adopted or adapted elsewhere. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.