* 2100378
* VESTA Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Candice Fitch-Deitz, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,646,884.00

The viticulture and enology industry is an important component of U.S.
agriculture, with an estimated economic impact of $220 billion. The Viticulture
and Enology Science and Technology Alliance (VESTA) Resource Center will support
education of the advanced technological workforce needed in this industry. The
VESTA Resource Center will help two-year colleges achieve their goals of
providing students with the STEM foundational knowledge and industry-specific
knowledge and skills needed for employment and career progression in the
industry. The Center will enable faculty and industry to share best practices,
providing access to successful recruitment and education models that can enrich
their programs and business operations. Mentoring by experts within the Center
will increase the capacity and capability of two-year colleges to access
existing resources and funding for program development, expansion, and
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VESTA Resource Center will support the
development, expansion, and enhancement of Viticulture and Enology programs in
two-year colleges through open access to successful models, expanded resources,
and active mentorship provided by a network of experienced two-year college
faculty, academic, and industry subject-matter experts. The participating two-
year colleges and industry associations will employ their complementary
expertise in a concerted effort aimed at enriching Viticulture and Enology
programsâ€™ ability to educate skilled technicians to meet industry needs.
Accessibility of program content will be enhanced and supported with online
courses and closed-captioned videos that support all learners, including
learners who are deaf or hard of hearing. Virtual and in-person workshops will
enable teachers to share with their students the career opportunities and
critical importance of a STEM foundation for jobs in this industry.
Collaboration with local industry and state-wide associations will enable
educators to fill voids in workforce development for this rapidly growing
industry. The Center will collaborate with two-year colleges and industry
associations to establish Registered Apprenticeships that may serve as a model
in other agriculture industries, an important sector in the U.S. economy that
has been underrepresented in workforce development programs. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.