* 2100874
* Excellence in Research:  Incorporating Attention into Computational Auditory Scene Analysis Using Spectral Clustering with Focal Templates
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* David Heise, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,027.00

Humans display an uncanny ability to focus on a sound of interest, even in the
presence of interfering sounds or noise. For instance, a childâ€™s voice may be
immediately recognized and reacted-to in the context of parental protection, a
bird-watcher may recognize and follow the call of a house finch, or business
associates may discuss the latest events over lunch in a crowded diner. In each
of these examples, a person directs his or her attention to the sound source of
interest. Once attention is directed, a human can continue to focus on that
sound, even to the degree that he or she may not perceive (or is able to
passively ignore) other sounds. Computational listening systems, at present, are
unable to replicate that ability. If such ability was possible, computational
listening systems could contribute to an array of application domains. Current
hearing aid technology is woefully inadequate in group settings, where noise
often overwhelms the listener and the listener is unable to compensate. Those
who suffer from hearing loss feel socially isolated, leading to a lower quality
of life. Performance of hearing aids, and the lives of those who rely on them,
would improve drastically if these devices could automatically adapt to isolate
and focus on salient sound sources. Effective acoustic monitoring could be
deployed to safety-related applications, such as automatically detecting slurred
speech from someone suffering a stroke, or to alert the deaf to important
loudspeaker announcements in a public place. Autonomous devices (robots, drones,
etc.) could employ enhanced listening techniques to guide their movements or
actions, potentially better serving or protecting the public. The ability to
focus on a particular instrument within a musical ensemble could lead to
improved automatic music transcription systems and enhanced tools for
performance analysis and training. The applications of computational listening
systems exhibiting perceptually-based attention are
boundless.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the use of focal
templates to incorporate attention into computational auditory scene analysis
(CASA). CASA attempts to reproduce (via computational algorithms and systems)
the ability of humans to perceive an acoustic scene given only auditory input,
and the underlying methods of CASA are modeled upon psychological principles of
perception. A focal template may be considered a type of dynamic time-frequency
filter that passes only those auditory elements conforming to a pattern of
interest. Sound events of interest (if present in the audio) will be detected
using spectral clustering, which has emerged as a useful technique for grouping
"like" elements within a set; here, the goal is to group auditory elements that
pass through the focal template. This work will: 1) implement a model of
attention into CASA through use of spectral clustering with focal templates, 2)
measure the impact of incorporating attention on the performance of CASA systems
in isolating particular sounds of interest, and 3) determine effective methods
to develop focal templates while considering how to scale to the "general"
listening case. This project includes development of an academic minor in "Sound
and Music Computing", a unique educational opportunity to prepare students to
contribute to the research while integrating across STEM and non-STEM
disciplines. An outcome of this work is to build partnerships and strengthen the
Computational Research on Music &amp; Audio Team of Interdisciplinary
Collaborators (CRoMA-TIC). Through these activities, the project will: 1)
advance the state of the art in CASA, 2) foster collaborative relationships
within this field, 3) develop a well-recognized area of expertise and research
capacity at Lincoln University, and 4) develop a pipeline for undergraduate
students leading to related careers or graduate study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.