* 2100804
* Research Initiation Award: Secure Spectrum Sharing for Intelligent Internet-of-Things (IoT) Wireless Communication Networks
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Monireh Dabaghchian, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Morgan State University supports research on developing systems that
defend Intelligent Internet of Things (IoT) devices – a project that supports
one of “The 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF Investments,” i.e. “Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
secure the IoT users' communication by designing and developing schemes to share
the spectrum with licensed users while circumventing the attackers, thereby
maximizing the network capacity. First, vulnerabilities of IoT wireless
communication networks will be investigated by designing optimal attacking
strategies based on adversarial multi-armed bandits, and randomized time-varying
feedback graphs. In the defense design paradigm, an intelligent IoT device will
apply novel adversarial multi-armed bandit methods for effective frequency
channel selection and data transmission while minimizing channel switching
delay. In addition, both objectives of channel and power allocation will be
integrated into a unified framework to optimize the IoT user's power
consumption. Characterizing the wireless channels' inherent conditions with a
time-varying stochastic process and considering both the attacker and the IoT
user to be learning-based, the two agents form an online repeated stochastic
game. It is intended to identify any possible equilibrium between these two
agents using stochastic optimization methods. Furthermore, using a data-driven
methodology based on statistical factor analysis approaches, the IoT device's
robustness will be characterized as a function of its intelligence factors.
Then, the proposed defense frameworks will be extended to centralized and
decentralized multi-user IoT networks where combinatorial online learning
approaches and various collision resolutions techniques will be utilized in the
centralized and decentralized settings, respectively. Eventually, the collective
intelligence of multiple IoT users will be quantitatively evaluated by
extracting the group intelligence and examining its impact on the IoT users’
resiliency and network capacity in adversarial settings. Successful
implementation of the proposed optimal spectrum access policy based on
multidisciplinary techniques will provide secure spectrum sharing mechanisms for
the IoT users with practical considerations which enables them to circumvent the
adversary and maximize the network capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.