* 2100835
* Research Initiation Award: Development of a Culturally-Specific Model and Assessment Tool for School-Based Racial Stress and Trauma among Black Youth
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Charity Griffin, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,976.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to the Winston Salem State University will support efforts to enrich
scientific understanding of Black youth’s experiences with school-based racial
stress and trauma (RST) by developing a conceptual model and assessment tool.
Knowledge gained by this research will provide insight into Black youth’s
experiences of RST and provide comparison for the more well-known studies that
pertain to adult experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ a
mixed-method sequential exploratory design whereby qualitative methods are used
to create and validate a new assessment tool based on the developed conceptual
framework. The quantitative methods will be used to establish the factor
structure and test the psychometric properties of the new instrument. The
project will include the identification and conceptualizing of the most salient
features of school-based RST from the perspective of Black youth (ages 10-18)
using a phenomenological approach to analyze data collected from daily
reporting, interviews and focus groups. It will then generate items for the
assessment tool and use expert validation and cognitive interviewing to ensure
alignment with the conceptual model and enhance validity. The survey methods to
establish the factor structure of the assessment tool and provide evidence for
measurement invariance, reliability, construct validity, and concurrent
validity. Findings will also advance science by 1) attending to the indelible
racism Black youth face in school, rather than embodying a colorblind
perspective that prevails in the majority of theoretically-derived school-based
mental health models; and 2) producing a means for measuring school-based RST
for this group. This work will inform future phases of a broader research
program which include understanding educators’ awareness and preparation for
management of Black youths’ RST and development and dissemination of a school-
based intervention grounded in the RST conceptual framework. This project also
provides intensive mentoring and training experiences for underrepresented
undergraduate students, integrates instructional activities focused on research
methodology and test development, and communicates the outcomes of this research
to school districts through workshops and outreach materials disseminating study
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.