* 2100206
* Automorphic Forms on Reductive Groups and Their Covers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Solomon Friedberg, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 309,000.00

This research project studies functions arising in number theory that exhibit
special symmetry properties under transformations, called automorphic forms.
Some of these functions have coefficients that encode important information in
arithmetic, and some have recently been connected to aspects of string theory in
physics. The fundamental Langlands Functoriality Conjectures predict subtle
relations between different spaces of automorphic forms, a structure that is
closely related to many questions in number theory and analysis. This research
project focuses on establishing properties of automorphic forms and new
connections between different spaces of automorphic forms. The project will also
support a graduate student and allow the PI and his students to disseminate the
work through conferences and seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project treats
automorphic forms and representations on reductive groups and on their
metaplectic covers of arbitrary degree. Automorphic forms on reductive groups
are the key ingredients of the Langlands Program, and automorphic forms on
covers are closely tied to reciprocity laws and related to the congruence
subgroup problem. The research focuses on correspondences and on L-functions. In
one series of projects, the principal investigator will develop and study new
theta correspondences that generalize the classical theta correspondence but
involve the tensor product of two small representations. A second project seeks
to give a new Shimura correspondence that is detected by a period involving a
theta function on an orthogonal group. This will be established by means of a
new relative trace formula. A third set of projects concerns the systematic
development of integral representations for L-functions which make use of the
residual spectrum. These projects will advance our knowledge of automorphic
forms, both on reductive groups and on finite degree covers, our understanding
of small automorphic representations, and our understanding of the relations
between automorphic forms on different groups. It will advance our knowledge of
number theory and of representation theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.