* 2100782
* Universal Secant Bundles and Syzygies of Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Kemeny, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2024
* USD 107,437.00

This research project is concerned with the study of algebraic varieties, in
other words geometric spaces that are defined by systems of polynomial
equations. The study of the qualitative features of the equations defining
algebraic varieties has a long and cherished history in mathematics, beginning
with the work of algebraists such as Cayley and Sylvester in the nineteenth
century. These questions were put into a modern framework through the pioneering
work of Hilbert, who defined a series of invariants known as Betti numbers. The
study of these Betti numbers has been an important force in the development of
the fields of both algebra and projective geometry for over a hundred years now.
These invariants capture the information about the number of equations required
to define a variety, as well as the degrees of these equations and the relations
amongst them. The aim of this proposal is to study the Betti numbers for several
fundamental classes of algebraic varieties. Moreover, the Principal Investigator
(PI) will formulate and study more refined conjectures about the rank of the
higher relations amongst the defining equations of algebraic varieties. This
provides more detail into the structure of these equations than can be provided
by the Betti numbers alone.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During this award, the PI will
study the Betti numbers of several classes of algebraic varieties using new
techniques such as the technique of Universal Secant Bundles. The PI has
previously applied this technique successfully on a series of questions about
the Betti numbers of algebraic curves which were first asked in the 1980s in the
work of mathematicians such as Green and Lazarsfeld. The PI will study these
invariants in new settings, such as the case of higher dimensional varieties,
with a particular focus on understanding the equations and syzygies of Veronese
varieties and Abelian surfaces. Moreover, the PI will provide special, explicit
bases consisting of syzygies of minimal possible rank for the syzygy spaces of
several classes of algebraic varieties, generalizing well-known work on Green on
the generation of the ideal of canonical curves by quadrics of rank four. More
generally, the PI hopes to formulate new conjectures and questions which will
open up new lines of inquiry for the field as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.