* 2100360
* Research Initiation Award - Beyond Traditional Dynamic Linkages: Reinforcing Chemical Stability and Complexity in Next-generation Covalent Organic Frameworks
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Xinle Li, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,932.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Clark Atlanta University has potential to broaden impacts in several
areas. The proposed study intends to develop and characterize new crystalline
porous materials that are important in solid state chemistry. The research will
provide a multidisciplinary platform for undergraduate students to explore
cutting-edge materials science and collaborate with researchers at national
laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work intends to develop next-
generation covalent organic frameworks (COFs) that obviate the common reliance
upon traditional dynamic linkages such as boron and nitrogen-based linkages.
COFs are 2D and 3D crystalline porous materials entirely composed of lightweight
organic elements. Due to their unique structural features such as high
crystallinity, ultralow density, large surface areas, versatile synthesis, and
predesignable structures, COFs have been at the forefront of porous material
chemistry in the past decade and garnered enormous attention in widespread
areas. However, the inherent chemical instability and inadequate structural
complexity are hindering the fullest exploration of COFs. To this end, the work
aims to develop the next-generation COFs beyond traditional dynamic linkages by
using reactions with limited reversibility, i.e., nucleophilic aromatic
substitution and aldol condensation. A series of as-yet-undiscovered aryl ether-
linked COFs and unsubstituted sp2 carbon-conjugated COFs will be produced via
conventional solvothermal and mechanochemical synthesis. Besides experimental
synthesis, the work will unveil the underlying mechanism of new COF formation
through multipronged approaches, including exchange reactions in model analogs,
computational simulation, and kinetic studies coupled with in situ
characterizations. Lastly, the research will advance the use of next-generation
COFs in heterogeneous catalysis and elucidate hitherto poorly understood
structure-catalysis correlations, which will guide the synthesis and enhancement
of COFs for catalysis and beyond. This project challenges the convention of COF
chemistry and will produce a series of robust well-ordered porous materials with
peculiar properties, thus opening numerous possibilities in widespread
applications even in harsh operating environments, which are off-limits of
current COF systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.