* 2100987
* Excellence in Research: Human Stem Cell-Derived Polarized Dorsoventral Forebrain Organoid: Effect of Matrix Stiffness and Mechanical Stimulus
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yan Li, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2024
* USD 489,765.00

This award will support research that advances our understanding of the
biophysical cues that determine stem cell fate. All tissues and organs are
derived from stem cells, and a complex array of signals influence the
development of stem cells into specific tissue types. The “fate” of a stem cell,
which means the specific cell type it ultimately becomes, depends on cues to the
cells during organ development. These cues can be biochemical, biophysical or a
combination. This work will focus on the development of the brain and the
biophysical signals that influence this process. This work will use “organoids”
– small three-dimensional cellular structures grown in a lab to mimic the
physiology and function of the full-sized organ. Many studies have used brain
organoids to examine the biochemical cues that influence the development of stem
cells into brain tissue. However, relatively few have studied the biophysical
regulation of stem cell differentiation under both static (constant) and dynamic
(varying) stimuli. This work will first develop a micro-device to generate
consistent and controllable static and dynamic forces. This device will be used
to characterize the mechanobiology of organ development. Understanding the
mechanical cues that determine the brain organoid’s stem cell fate can
ultimately provide new opportunities for studying neurological or
neurodegenerative disorders, personalized treatment, cancer, and the effects and
treatments of traumatic brain injury. This research involves several
disciplines, including micro-device development, mechanobiology, stem cell
engineering, materials science, and computational medicine. This project will
ultimately advance our knowledge of brain tissue engineering, regenerative
medicine, biomanufacturing, and pharmacology, and will be of significant
interest to the next-frontier workforce, leading to the clinical and industrial
success of such engineering systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the roles
of the biological cues that regulate lineage-specific differentiation of stem
cells is critical to the development of polarized organoid structures. However,
much of the current literature has focused on the role of biochemical stimuli to
generate region-specific brain organoids, rather than on biophysical stimuli,
the focus of this work. This work will address this imbalance by discovering how
morphogenetic chemicals, extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness, and mechanical
stimuli affect the development of dorsoventral polarized and cortical forebrain
organoids in a spatiotemporal manner. This work will provide new knowledge
addressing the roles of soluble morphogenetic factors and gradients, ECM
mechanics, mechanical stimuli, and signaling pathways in seamlessly regulating
organoid differentiation and organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.