* 2100934
* Research Initiation Award: Social Motivation Approach for Rehabilitation Through Educational Robotics (SMARTER) research
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Anshu Arora, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,982.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to the University of the District of Columbia will support research that
seeks to obtain new scientific knowledge on social, cognitive and behavioral
relationships in social-educational robotics using social motivation approach
for managing learning/cognitive disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the Social Motivation Approach for Rehabilitation Through
Educational Robotics (SMARTER) research is to obtain new scientific knowledge on
social, cognitive and behavioral relationships in educational robotics using
social motivation approach for managing learning/cognitive disabilities, social
interaction difficulties, and developmental disorders (e.g., Autism Spectrum
Disorder or ASD) in the middle and high District of Columbia Public Schools
(DCPS), and the University of the District of Columbia (UDC) in Washington, DC.
Touchless robotic technology has emerged as a critical support system for
educational, therapeutic, and emotional needs during the COVID-19 global
pandemic. SMARTER research project will advance the theory and practice of
social cognition research in educational robotics using social motivation theory
and simulation theory of cognition, and the results of the SMARTER research will
lead to a better understanding of cognitive rehabilitation amongst DCPS students
and UDC undergraduates. Specific research objectives of the SMARTER research
project are to: (1) examine social-behavioral relationships and social cognition
in ASD individuals through social-educational robotics; (2) investigate robotic
anthropomorphism and intentionality targeted at ASD students; and (3) develop
curriculum-related interactive scenarios designed for improving cognitive
rehabilitation through educational robotics’ interventions targeting ASD
students in DCPS and UDC. SMARTER research will utilize mixed methods approach,
such as surveys, focus groups, interviews, structured content analysis, and
structural equation modeling. The project will focus on synthesizing social
cognition and educational robotics’ intervention results targeted at DCPS and
undergraduate UDC students in Washington DC. The most significant impact of the
SMARTER research is strengthening the research capacity at UDC for undergraduate
students and faculty in the interdisciplinary education, social-cognition and
robotics fields, and providing research training and opportunities for UDC
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.