* 2100136
* Creation and Modernization of Technological Education in Electronics and Welding through Open Educational Resources that are Free to Share, Use, and Revise
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Priyanka Pant, Lake Washington Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 365,000.00

This project is designed to modernize technical education in Electronics and
Welding by developing and sharing openly licensed course materials. These
materials, known as Open Educational Resources (OER), can be retained, reused,
redistributed, revised, or remixed without permission from their creator. As a
result, their content is dynamic and free of cost. Although OER are common for
general education, the highly technical fields of manufacturing technology have
not widely transitioned to use of OER. This project plans to create OER for
education in Welding Technology and Electronics Technology. OER reduces barriers
to education by reducing costs and ensuring course materials are available
immediately. In addition, instructors can easily adapt materials to make
meaningful connections to diverse student experiences and interests. It is
expected that the project will broaden participation in manufacturing technology
programs by including more women, veterans, people with disabilities, adult
learners, and people from communities that are underrepresented in STEM
technical fields. In doing so, the project will directly serve the national
interest in developing and maintaining a diverse skilled technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are to: 1) create or
adapt and incorporate digitally accessible OER, including student learning
assessments, for six courses, allowing hybrid and online delivery; 2) train
faculty in OER, accessibility, the online environment, and instructional design;
and 3) engage industry partners to collaborate with faculty in reviewing and
modifying course materials for content and accessibility and to provide industry
experience for students through internships. External evaluators will provide
ongoing review of activities and a summative evaluation. Project deliverables
will be disseminated through OER repositories for use worldwide. The
instructional changes, faculty professional development, and collaboration with
industry partners are designed to prepare a more diverse, better trained
technician workforce ready to meet critical regional needs. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nationâ€™s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.