* 2100261
* Excellence in Research: The impact of cash transfers on remittances
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Angelino Viceisza, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 74,949.00

This research project will assemble a large data set from existing studies and
other sources to investigate the relationship between formal cash transfer
programs offered by governments and informal remittance programs and how the two
interact to improve the livelihoods of recipients. Formal cash transfer programs
have grown rapidly in recent years just as informal cash transfers such as
remittances (i.e., the money that migrants send to family/friends) continue to
increase and also impact these outcomes. It is not clear whether these cash
transfer programs replace or complement informal remittances. Despite this, the
relationship between formal cash transfers through government programs and
informal transfers from remittances has received relatively little attention.
Given that both types of transfers are designed to improve the lives of
recipients, understanding the relationship between the two will help guide
future cash transfer policies. Because of the large scale of budget cut, the
bulk of the award is expected to support undergraduate participation in the
research rather than to support the PI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
collect publicly available micro-level datasets from numerous cash transfer
studies and identify those that also contain variables on financial remittances.
It will then econometrically assess the relationship between remittance receipts
and participation in cash transfer programs by households using the data
assembled from multiple studies/programs. The project will identify whether cash
transfer programs and remittances are substitutes or complements. The results of
this research will significantly contribute to the remittances and cash transfer
programs literature. Several female undergraduates from a group underrepresented
in economics will support the research by conducting detailed searches for cash
transfer studies and associated datasets. Understanding the nature of the
relationship between cash transfers and remittances will provide guidance on
cash transfer policies as a mechanism to improve living standards of recipients.
This award primarily supports the participation of undergraduate students in the
research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.