* 2100396
* Defining, Measuring, and Promoting Mathematical Flexibility in Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Wes Maciejewski, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 01/31/2023
* USD 0.00

Investigating mathematical flexibility, where a user of mathematics recognizes
that a problem can be solved in multiple ways and chooses an approach that is
most appropriate to the given task, is the focus of this proposal. The
importance of the mathematical sciences to the global economy has increased
dramatically in recent years, due in part to the big data revolution and the
continued rapid expansion of the Internet and related technologies. Flexible
knowledge of mathematical procedures is known to support conceptual
understanding and is therefore an essential aspect of mathematical learning.
Much of what is known about procedural flexibility in mathematics and classroom
strategies to promote its development has centered on middle school students,
often involving their processes for solving linear equations. This project will
expand and innovate on the existing literature and contribute to increased
understanding of how procedural flexibility develops and how to teach for such
flexibility throughout a student’s education. Major project activities include
the development of a theory of procedural flexibility in undergraduate
mathematics, the creation of an instrument to measure that flexibility in
students, and a study to understand how educators’ choices in the classroom
might contribute to increased procedural flexibility. The project will also
undertake a preliminary study of how procedural flexibility impacts students’
mathematical confidence. The ultimate goal is to develop the theory and
measurement tools necessary to support simple but profound ways of developing
undergraduate students’ flexibility as a means to support their larger
mathematical learning and understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support a broader understanding of flexible procedural knowledge of mathematics
at the undergraduate level in several stages. First, an operational definition
of “flexibility” that is particularly relevant to undergraduate mathematics will
be developed. This theory will be developed through analysis of both existing
research on flexibility and authentic student procedural performances. Building
from the developed theory, the project will next develop ways of observing and
identifying flexibility in student work, including the creation of an instrument
to measure procedural flexibility in undergraduate settings. These theoretical
and measurement tools will allow for a deeper study of instructional practices
that promote growth in procedural flexibility. Through these activities, this
project aims to make significant contributions to both the theoretical
underpinnings and the teaching of flexibility in mathematics. Expected project
outcomes include expansion and generalization previous research findings,
specifically that favorable gains in students’ procedural flexibility, and
thereby their mathematical content knowledge, can be realized through
purposeful, straightforward changes in classroom practice. This project is
funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.