* 2100625
* Disentangling the developmental drivers of behavioral individuality using a clonal fish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kate Laskowski, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,129,975.00

The goal of this proposal is to understand how individuality develops and
investigate the molecular and neurological mechanisms underlying individual
variation. You are unique, as is everyone else. This age-old adage captures a
very real biological phenomenon: across the animal kingdom, individuals exhibit
distinctive patterns of behavior, similar to personality in humans. However,
despite its prevalence we still have a limited understanding of how and why
behavioral individuality emerges. Information integration theory predicts how
animals will use information and experiences to shape their behavior over their
lifetimes, but this is often difficult to test empirically, in part because the
vast majority of individuals are also genetically distinct. This project
exploits a naturally clonal fish, the Amazon molly, to isolate the effects of
experience on behavior and pinpoint the molecular mechanisms generating these
changes. An innovative tracking system will follow the behavior of individual
mollies from birth throughout their entire lives providing unprecedented insight
into how behavior changes in response to different cues. Understanding the
molecular mechanisms generating behavioral individuality will clarify how easily
such changes are triggered, and once they are, how durable they may be. By
testing key predictions from information integration theory, the results of this
project will improve our ability to predict an individual’s response to
different cues before they have even experienced that cue. This could have major
implications for our ability to predict species’ responses to climate change or
the efficacy of therapeutic interventions on pathological behavior in animals
and humans alike. In addition, the project includes the development of
classroom-based authentic research experiences for undergraduates at UC Davis,
as well as for high school students at minority-serving high schools in the
Davis, CA area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If we can understand the mechanisms through
which individuals use, value, and integrate the information they receive over
their lives, we can better predict how and why individuals behave the way they
do. The goal of this proposal is to test whether Bayesian updating provides a
framework that can predict how individuals integrate maternal and personal cues
to generate their unique behavioral phenotypes. This project will systematically
manipulate whether individuals receive cues from their mothers and/or their own
experiences to 1) test whether Bayesian updating predicts behavioral change, 2)
investigate potential proximate mechanisms underlying such change by following
changes in brain neural activation, gene expression, and methylation status and
3) test the potential adaptive value of these behavioral changes. The use of the
genetically identical Amazon molly provides a rigorous experimental system to
pinpoint experiential effects on behavior by controlling for genetic variation
among individuals. If individuals are using Bayesian or Bayesian-like processes
to build their behavioral phenotypes, then their behavioral development should
follow predictable patterns of change based on the confidence in their prior
expectations, which we can measure using our innovative tracking system, and the
new information they receive about the most likely state of the environment,
which we can control in an experimental setting. By combining a unifying
mechanistic framework with a powerful animal model and an innovative tracking
system, this work will provide deep insight into the developmental drivers of
behavioral individuality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.