* 2100013
* CIF: Small: Learning To Correct Errors
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Bane Vasic, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 507,424.00

Error-correcting codes play an essential role in ensuring integrity of data in
numerous applications, including wireless communications, computer networks and
data storage. The beauty of error-correcting codes and elegance of their
decoding algorithms reflect the rich structure of the underlying mathematical
objects, but also human creativity and ingenuity. Motivated by recent successes
of Deep Neural Networks (DNN) in various applications, this project is
investigating if, how, and how efficiently this structure and elegance can be
learned by a machine, and how the discovery of new and improved decoding
algorithms can be automated. The project is devising parallelizable neural
network based decoders with ultra-low latency and improved error performance.
The resulting decoders are intended to find broad applicability in emerging
wireless standards (5G and beyond) as well as new applications including
decoding for quantum computers, machine-to-machine communications, long-haul
optical communications and flash memories in data
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project approaches the error-correction
problem as classification of the points in a high-dimensional signal space, and
uses DNNs to learn complex codeword decision region boundaries to approach the
maximum-likelihood decoding performance. The project addresses two key practical
challenges: a) achieving extremely low misclassification rates (many orders of
magnitude lower) compared to traditional machine learning applications, and b)
maintaining low-complexity of decoding via sparse and quantized neural networks.
The first thrust utilizes coding-theory domain knowledge, and harnesses the
structural similarities between iterative decoders and neural networks for
improved learning of decoders. This is achieved by using sampled error patterns
from iterative decoding algorithms for stochastic optimization of neural-network
decoders. The second thrust focuses on using a new supervised approach for
learning decoders, in which existing high-complexity decoders are employed to
synthesize a low-complexity neural-network-based decoder with comparable
performance. The third thrust establishes theoretical results on the
generalization capabilities of neural-network-based decoders (including
convergence rates and error performance). This research is providing multi-
faceted insight into modern error-correction algorithms and machine learning,
and should lead to both theoretical and practical advances of importance to the
communications and computer industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.