* 2100629
* Excellence in Research: Near-Infrared Molecular Probes as Potential Tools for Bioimaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Fasil Abebe, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 381,086.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism-B program is
supporting Dr. Fasil Abebe at Morgan State University to develop synthetic near-
infrared fluorescent probes for rapid visualization and quantification of
cellular metal ions. This challenging objective first requires the synthesis of
a series of structurally related organic dye molecules that are designed to
undergo structural change upon metal ion coordination. The resulting
fluorophores (light-emitting structures) are expected enable the imaging of
metal ions in live cells by using high-resolution fluorescence microscopy. This
project will explore the synthesis, optical and electrochemical properties of
these dye molecules. Fluorescent probes have become indispensable tools in
modern biology and biotechnology because they provide real time information
concerning the quantity of ions or molecules of interest within the living cell.
Thus, the probes developed in this project may spur significant advances in our
understanding of metal-cell biology. Developing near-infrared fluorescent probes
for metal ions that behave well under physiological conditions is highly
desirable. The project enriches education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students from underrepresented minority groups by involving them
in cutting-edge research activities. Students will develop laboratory expertise
in microwave-assisted synthesis, spectroscopic analysis, and fluorescence
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of this project is that
principles of organic chemistry, microwave-assisted synthesis and knowledge of
photochemistry can be exploited to make an array of molecular tools capable of
investigating biological metal ions. Efforts will be focused on the development
of cyanine-coupled dye derivatives with good water solubility, cell permeability
and photostability. This project includes the following aims: (1) to develop an
efficient microwave-assisted synthesis and characterization of near-infrared dye
molecules; (2) to examine the spectroscopic, computational, and electrochemical
properties of cyanine-coupled dye derivatives by diverse methods; and (3) to
investigate the potential of cyanine-coupled dye derivatives for imaging of
metals in HeLa cells. A series of rhodamine-cyanine-coupled dyes will first be
synthesized. In the presence of metals such as copper, near infrared
fluorescence of these dyes occurs by a coordination-induced spirocycle-opening
reaction and photo-induced electron transfer (CIPET) process. The role of
various factors affecting the analytical characteristics of near-infrared
probes, their selectivity and sensitivity toward specific metal ions, as well as
other important characteristics will be studied. Metal ions of biological and
environmental interest such as copper will be studied. An integral part of this
project is the use of density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT to
understand the fluorescence change by metal ions and the ability of metal-dye
complexes to act as anion sensors. The detailed training program for
underrepresented minority students, both undergraduate and graduate, in this
area of research is expected to make an important contribution in the
development of a diverse workforce for the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.