* 2100743
* Shimura Varieties, p-Adic Shtukas, and Local Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Georgios Pappas, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 04/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The PI will conduct research in the field of arithmetic algebraic geometry. This
is a subject that blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: The geometry of
shapes that can be described by the simplest equations, namely polynomials, and
the study of numbers. This combination of disciplines has proved extraordinarily
fruitful - having solved problems that withstood generations (such as "Fermat's
last theorem"). The general field has connections with physics, and has found
important applications to the construction of error correcting codes and
cryptography. The PI's work mainly concentrates on the study of specific
equations which describe shapes with many symmetries and on connections of the
subject with certain constructions in mathematical physics. The PI plans to
involve graduate students in some of the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
is working to describe integral models for Shimura varieties at primes of non-
smooth reduction and study related spaces. In particular, he will continue to
investigate the singularities of Shimura varieties of abelian type at such
primes. He plans to characterize these integral models by using the novel theory
of p-adic shtukas and, in the case of orthogonal Shimura varieties, explicitly
study the local structure of their reductions. He would also like to interpret
Shimura varieties as special cases of more general moduli spaces of "arithmetic
shtukas" and to generalize the concept of special points of Shimura varieties to
such moduli spaces. Finally, motivated by an analogy with the theory of moduli
of bundles over Riemann surfaces as it appears in mathematical physics, the PI
will investigate symplectic properties of deformation spaces of local systems
and Galois representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.