* 2100355
* Examining the use of micro-internships to leverage scalable learning for STEM workforce development among people experiencing homelessness
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michelle Friend, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 487,909.00

Researchers at the University of Nebraska at Omaha and Southern Methodist
University will investigate the efficacy of a Work-Learn model for providing
individuals experiencing homelessness with the skills and scaffolding that will
enable them to enter the job market. The research team will examine the impact
of integrating micro-internships with online courses targeting computer science
skills for homeless adult learners and analyze the interaction among group
dynamics and learner success and barriers and successful learning outcomes. The
research focuses on theoretical and empirical connections between online
education and job opportunities. The Work-Learn model could potentially produce
scalable online training that is adaptable for previously underreached
populations. The project will advance the state of knowledge in educational
theory regarding the nexus between marginalized learners and educational
technology. The research will extend the knowledge base about online and career
technical education by testing the hypothesis that the Work-Learn model can
transform MOOCS to support the success of homeless
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target participants for the study are
individuals experiencing homelessness in the Omaha metropolitan area. The
research goal is to test the efficacy of the Work-Learn model in supporting the
ability of homeless persons to complete a MOOC and successfully transition to
information technology (IT) sector jobs. To achieve this goal, the researchers
will investigate four research questions: (1) How can the Work-Learn model
incentivize learners and support persistence in completing learning tasks and
challenges? (2) Do peer learning structures work as effectively with persons
experiencing homelessness as with traditional MOOC students? (3) What learner
attributes and experiences are associated with success? and (4) How does
industry partnership support re-training of persons experiencing homelessness
for IT jobs? The research team will develop and implement course modules, in a
peer learning context, addressing computational thinking, COBOL, and Python that
enable learners to learn by doing in a MOOC environment. They will engage
homeless shelter staff and private-sector partners to support skills development
and paid micro-internship placement. The team will investigate how these
partnerships function to support this population of learners and how learners’
well-being is impacted. The research design will address the research questions
and generate formative and summative data through interviews and focus groups.
The researchers will collect artifacts to illuminate shelter policies and
general shelter culture. The team will use R and descriptive statistics to
analyze and report the survey data, artifacts, and MOOC completion data. The
research results will inform interventions that employ scalable technology to
re-skill or up-skill adults who do not have access to workforce training
tailored to high-demand and financially stable technology jobs and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the EHR Core Research Program
that funds STEM education research projects focused on STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.