* 2100408
* Collaborative Research: What Black Doctoral Students in STEM Want and What Their Faculty are Giving: How the Differences Impact Students’ Mental Health and Career Trajectory
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Jennifer Bekki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 744,966.00

To increase the diversity of the PhD-prepared workforce, understanding
underlying issues affecting retention and completion of doctoral degrees is
essential. Researchers at Arizona State University and University of
Massachusetts Boston, propose to study the expressed needs of Black doctoral
students in relation to faculty perceptions of what they are providing during
advising relationships. Understanding the mental health impacts of cumulative
experiences that marginalize Black graduate students, will advance knowledge by
providing recommendations for developing inclusive environments and mentoring
strategies that are effective at supporting Black students. Through a two-phase
design, the project aims to use detailed interviews regarding the experiences of
marginalization, mental health, and career trajectory decisions of graduate
students, and faculty perceptions of supports and contributors or deterrents to
providing supports. The project is aligned with the EHR Core Research program’s
goal of addressing challenges in STEM interest, learning, and participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design is framed by extending Role Strain
Theory to include the tension that Black students may feel in relationships
during graduate programs. The central hypothesis is that intersectional
experiences of marginalization and the STEM environment among Black doctoral
students impact mental health and career trajectory decisions. The project aims
to understand the contributors and deterrents for faculty to address systemic
barriers. A nationwide sampling strategy will include representation from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Predominately White
Institutions (PWIs), and Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs). The project aims
to match critical identity aspects in the interviewer-interviewee pairing within
each phase of the project. Phenomenological principles grounded in a social
constructivist paradigm will guide the interpretation of individual interviews.
The research responds to the need for understanding barriers to success in
graduate programs for Black students by novel coordination and expansion of
traditional educational research strategies with strategies typically utilized
by counseling psychologists. The creation of a tip sheet on promising practices
for supporting Black students and an online repository aims to inform faculty
advisors who seek to improve communication and mentoring for their students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the EHR Core Research program
that supports fundamental research focused on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM professional workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.