* 2100401
* Recrafting Computer Science: Fiber Crafting as Computational Thinking
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kylie Peppler, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,293,245.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by paving the way to creating a
technical workforce that is able to function effectively in highly
collaborative, diverse environments. Enhanced ability to nurture these skills
and abilities will occur through development of measurement instruments, a novel
curriculum, and research into the impacts of the curriculum. The project seeks
to align with the EHR Core Research (ECR) program's intent by reflecting the
interdisciplinarity of computational thinking (CT) and encouraging critical
reflection with respect to the historical role of women and people of color in
computer science (CS) and robotics. This project moves the traditional CS
curriculum beyond the screen and back to its tangible roots to support learning,
collaboration, and participation in CS. In this project, the newly crafted CS
curriculum will engage undergraduates in the construction, programming, and use
of a robotic loom, foregrounding the inherently interdisciplinary nature of CT
in a formal CS curriculum. The project activities expect to broaden
participation and collaboration in CS and STEM, redefining what counts as a
valuable learning activity in CS education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded in
the learning sciences and embodied cognition, this project will further the
development of interdisciplinarity and address key challenges to diversity in
computing. The project activities will interweave iterative Design-Based
Research with periodic experimental research experiments to test the efficacy of
the robotic loom designs and course materials for undergraduate learning of
interdisciplinarity and collaborative computing. To ensure that the proposed
designs effectively complement curricular and practical realities, the project
team will consult with an advisory board, the undergraduates, and the
participating institution's curriculum advisory boards to inform design and
development throughout the project period. This project is supported by the ECR
program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.