* 2100483
* SaTC: CORE: Small: RUI: Improving Performance of Standoff Iris Recognition Systems Using Deep Learning Frameworks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Mahmut Karakaya, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,606.00

The iris of the eye enables one of the most accurate, distinctive, universal,
and reliable biometrics for authenticating the identity of a person. However,
the accuracy of iris recognition depends on the quality of data acquisition,
which is negatively affected by the angle of view, occlusion, dilation, and
other factors. Since standoff iris recognition systems are much less constrained
than traditional systems, the captured iris images are likely to be off-angle,
dilated, and otherwise less than ideal. This project addresses these challenging
problems and investigates solutions to eliminate their effects on standoff
systems. The project provides potential benefits from several perspectives: At
the national level, it aims to enhance the national security and competitiveness
of the United States by improving the performance of iris recognition to lead
the next generation of standoff biometrics systems. At the state level, it
improves the quality of research and education in Arkansas, an EPSCoR
(Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research) state, and contributes
to the development of a diverse and skilled workforce. At the university level,
it provides research opportunities for students from underrepresented groups and
equips them with valuable skills to build their careers including creativity,
self-confidence, critical thinking and problem
solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve the
performance of standoff iris recognition using deep learning techniques within
both traditional and nontraditional iris recognition frameworks. First, a deep
learning-based frontal image reconstruction framework is developed to eliminate
the effect of the eye structures on standoff images before comparing these
images with their frontal images in a database. It will unwrap non-ideal iris
images within the traditional iris recognition framework using non-linear
distortion maps and occlusion masks. Second, nontraditional iris recognition
frameworks are developed based on deep learning algorithms to improve the
performance of standoff systems using additional biometric information in ocular
and periocular structures. This approach also investigates the effect of the
gaze angle in iris/ocular/periocular biometrics and combines the biometric
information in different standoff images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.