* 2100745
* Research Initiation Award: Automated Distribution of Autonomous Vehicles
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Yanshuo Sun, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) supports research
in industrial engineering. More specifically, it supports research that
contributes to research questions pertaining to the distribution of autonomous
vehicles. Furthermore, the project engages undergraduate engineering students in
the research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project goal is to
develop and evaluate a novel scheme for distributing finished vehicles from
automobile manufacturers to dealers, assuming that self-driving technology is
market ready. This project is motivated by a substantial literature gap: the
implications of autonomous vehicle (AV) technologies for the distribution of AVs
themselves are not yet understood. This novel distribution scheme requires the
collaboration of larger AVs (i.e., auto-carriers) and smaller AVs (i.e.,
finished automobiles), which can bring significant benefits through the routing
cost tradeoff between heterogeneous AVs. The project team proposes a space-state
network flow formulation and algorithm for the auto-carrier loading and
unloading problem; develop learning-based algorithms to predict the loading
feasibility and the loading/unloading cost for a given auto-carrier route;
design a fully integrated auto-carrier loading and routing optimization
algorithm, with and without AV technologies. Managerial insights will be
generated through extensive computational experiments, which can inform
automobile manufacturers in making cost-effective automobile distribution plans.
The project facilitates the preparation of engineering students at FAMU for
academic pursuits in operations research and machine learning by engaging
undergraduates as student researchers, and through the integration of research
findings from this project with two courses taught by the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.