* 2100757
* Rapid, High-Throughput, and Real-time Assessment of Antibiotic Effectiveness against Pathogenic Biofilms
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Seokheun Choi, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2024
* USD 370,000.00

Bacterial infections from biofilms are a major threat to human health because
biofilm bacteria become very resistant to antibiotics and human immune
responses. Effective and rapid antibiotic-susceptibility testing (AST) for
biofilms is urgently required to guide effective antibiotic use and to survey
the spread and emergence of antimicrobial resistance. Conventional AST
techniques are not generally suitable for biofilms, thus the overall objective
of this project is to provide an innovative, practical, and reliable AST for
disease-causing biofilms. This AST will enable rapid, high-throughput, and real-
time monitoring along with controllable manipulation of bacterial
microenvironments and rapid biofilm formation from a low volume sample. This is
accomplished by continuously monitoring bacterial extracellular electron
transfers (EEFs) through their metabolic activities, which are impaired by
effective antibiotics. Furthermore, a novel strategy will be created to rapidly
construct a 3-D polymicrobial biofilm and to establish various biofilm models
that mimic natural polymicrobial communities. The project will address grand
challenges in microbial infections critical to U.S. healthcare and the economy.
Findings will first be disseminated within the discipline through local and
international conferences and journal publications; then they will be
distributed through educational venues maximizing the projectâ€™s reach and
impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide a new strategy for
rapid and high-throughput assessment of antibiotic effectiveness against
pathogenic biofilms by monitoring the energy output of bacteria in a 3-D multi-
laminate structure of papers as a scaffold to support bacterial biofilms.
Studies are designed to test a two-fold central hypothesis that: (1) the
electrons collectively harvested from a group of cells in a biofilm can be
strong enough as a transducing signal to sensitively and continuously monitor
both bacterial growth and antibiotic susceptibility, and (2) a 3-D multi-
laminate paper stack can provide a new strategy for rapid layer-by-layer biofilm
formation in a high-throughput format. The research plan is organized under
three aims: (1) create a real-time, sensitive biosensing platform to
electrically evaluate antibiotic effectiveness of bacteria in a high-throughput
(96 wells) and rapid (&lt;5 hours) manner using microbial fuel cell (MFC) based
biosensors previously developed by the investigator; (2) develop a multi-layer
hydrophilic paper-based culturing platform for rapid biofilm formation with
control of biofilm thickness and microbial concentration; and (3) demonstrate
integration as a system and practical use with model biofilms of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and Enterococcus faecalis. In summary, the AST array developed will
contribute to an in-depth understanding of the underlying dynamics of antibiotic
resistance evolution in biofilms and test the effectiveness of an antibiotic
regime for treating biofilm-associated infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.