* 2100950
* Excellence in Research:  Spectroelectrochemical Measurements on Intact Microorganisms Under Oxic and Anoxic Conditions
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Robert Blake, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,348.00

The practical goal of this project is to develop and exploit a new method, known
as spectroelectrochemistry, that permits one to measure the exchange of
electrons at liquid/solid or liquid/liquid interfaces using intact
microorganisms under physiological solution conditions. Although this project
will focus on those microorganisms that exchange electrons with solid minerals
within an ore body, it is anticipated that the same experimental method could be
adapted to study any oxidation/reduction reaction at any liquid/solid or
liquid/immiscible liquid interface. The fundamental knowledge thus acquired
regarding the mechanisms of reactivity at such interfaces could then be used to
improve manâ€™s purposeful efforts to exploit microorganisms to extract metals for
commercial gain (biomining), convert recalcitrant biomass into useful liquid
fuels (biofuel production), remediate large crude oil spills (bioremediation),
and many other applications. The immediate human impact is that 2 undergraduate
minority students will be employed in each of the 3 years of this project. Other
minority undergraduate students who are funded from other infrastructure grants
at Xavier University will also be eligible to participate in this project. Thus
a minimum of 3 or 4 minority students will each have the opportunity to
participate in this project for each of the 3 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior
studies on chemolithotrophic microorganisms utilized a novel integrating cavity
absorption meter (ICAM) to conduct absorbance measurements on electron transfer
reactions among colored prosthetic groups within intact model organisms as they
respired aerobically on soluble ferrous iron. Those studies generated hypotheses
that can be addressed only through similar studies under both oxic and anoxic
conditions. Accordingly, this project will produce spectroelectrochemical and
kinetic measurements in intact cells in both the presence and the absence of
molecular oxygen. The following hypotheses will be tested: (i) The majority of
microorganisms that respire on solid pyrite will also exchange electrons
directly with a solid working electrode; (ii) Molecular oxygen will compete with
the anodic electrode to recover electrons introduced into the bacterium during
the cathodic wave; (iii) Each microorganism will exploit the same terminal
oxidase to respire aerobically on cathodic electrons as it does to respire on
ferrous ions; (iv) The ratio of Fe(II) oxidized to O2 reduced will be four; and
(v) The same electron transfer biomolecules that participate in Fe(II) oxidation
under aerobic conditions will also participate in Fe(III) reduction under
anaerobic or anoxic conditions. The existing ICAM will be modified to exclude
atmospheric oxygen during measurement, and the existing observation/reaction
chamber will be customized to optimize the signal-to-noise characteristics of
the spectroelectrochemical measurements. The intact organisms to be examined
include members of the following genera: Acidithiobacillus, Leptospirillum,
Ferrimicrobium, Sulfobacillus, Ferroplasma, and Metallosphaera. This project
will yield fundamental information on the energy metabolism of these unusual
organisms. This project will also create the opportunity for up to 12
undergraduate students of under-represented groups at Xavier University of
Louisiana, an HBCU, to conduct publishable research on a part of the project
that each student can call his or her own, to present their results at a
national scientific meeting, and to co-author a peer-reviewed
paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities - Excellence in Research Program (EiR) and the
Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.