* 2100166
* Preparing the Skilled Technical Workforce in Controlled Environment Agriculture
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Rhiannon Lake, Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2024
* USD 569,730.00

The world's population is expected to more than double by 2050. As the
productivity of traditional agriculture becomes compromised by urbanization and
climate change, new methods of food production are needed. Controlled
Environment Agriculture (CEA) is an emerging discipline that fosters year-round
food production within local communities while reducing water use and
transportation costs. However, the industry has struggled to thrive due to a
limited skilled technical workforce. The proposed project aims to meet the needs
of the CEA industry by creating an interdisciplinary certificate for students
enrolled in agriculture, automation and robotics, business and entrepreneurship,
and/or computer technology associate degree programs. To do so, the project team
will develop four new CEA courses and provide professional development to
upskill faculty in the technologies that set CEA apart from traditional
agriculture. This effort will be supported by an engaged industry board
representing horticulture industries, extension specialists, and economic
development experts. The project expects to develop a strong CEA curriculum that
is responsive to workforce needs and builds on targeted outreach that includes
underrepresented minorities, women, and rural high school students.
Consequently, the project can help ensure that the Nation maintains a well-
prepared, diverse CEA workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to
create a pipeline of well-educated technicians for the emerging CEA workforce. A
skilled technical workforce is critical to the success of the CEA industry and
one expert has predicted the need for 100,000 workers in the next decade. This
project develop coursework in Aquaculture and Aquaponics, Automated and Smart
Technologies, Integrated Facilities Management, and Project-based Study. These
courses will use higher learning pedagogy that fosters interdisciplinary
engagement of "ill-defined problems" to help students develop complex problem
solving, higher-level thinking, and creative thinking skills. Project-based
learning will expose students to real-world applications of smart-factory
automation, growth of tilapia, and remote data collection and analysis. A
virtual Internet of Things teaching platform utilizing webcasting equipment for
online learning and remote access for data collection and monitoring of
automated systems will give students a concrete advantage when entering the CEA
workforce, where these technologies play a central role. The four new courses
will be paired with agriculture classes already part of the Ivy Tech Community
College system to create an interdisciplinary CEA Certificate. Professional
development will be designed to upskill faculty who will teach these new and
related courses at Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana, K-12 partners, and
other community colleges across the country. All project products will be
disseminated through a project website and national conference presentations.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.