* 2100995
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a lighted infusion line to optimize care and decrease complications of critically ill patients in infectious isolation (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Hans Utz, CHS HEALTHCARE VENTURES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 03/31/2023
* USD 255,957.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program (STTR) Phase I project is to make the intensive care unit (ICU)
safer for patients and less burdensome for nurses through the development of an
illuminated intravenous tubes (IVT) for easier and error-free delivery of
medications, enabling better care generally as well as during the COVID-19
pandemic. IVT identification requires an inordinate amount of nurses’ time and
confers an immense cognitive burden as it requires manual tracing of the line
from pump to patient. The errors associated with manual IVT tracing are costly,
contributing to increased ICU length of stay and hospital liability. The current
pandemic has exacerbated these issues as ICU admissions are rising and the use
of enhanced isolation requiring extended IVT. Successful completion of the
proposed program will support the development of an extended illuminated IVT
that allows for reliable identification of IVT from pump to patient through the
use of a fiber optic cable that nurses can turn on and off as needed when
identifying lines. In comparison to the manual tracing of lines, an illuminated
line has the potential to provide more rapid and error-free identification of
IVT lines, thus reducing the impact of errors on patients, decreasing associated
medical costs, and improving nurse workload.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer Program (STTR) Phase I Project will advance the
development of a novel lighted intravenous tubing (IVT) device to allow nurses
to quickly and accurately identify IVT through the use of a light-emitting fiber
optic cable attached to the outer wall of the IVT. Management of IVT and
medication delivery, requires nurses to manually trace lines from pump to
patient, which is an error prone process and particular interest for ICU
patients that require upwards of 10 or more IVT lines simultaneously. The
proposed program will advance the development of the extended illuminated IVT
through the execution of two objectives. The first objective is to engineer the
device to ensure that illumination can be maintained over the length of an
extended line used in isolation settings. The second objective is to assess the
performance of the extended prototype in a simulated ICU setting with enhanced
isolation. Successful completion of the Phase I program will demonstrate
feasibility of the extended illuminated IVT device in an isolation critical care
setting as defined by reduced nurse burden and time in
motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.