* 2100861
* Excellence in Research: Biodegradable composite nanofiber meshes that contain degradable metal particulates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Narayan Bhattarai, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant challenge in the
field of biomedical engineering is that many implanted devices stimulate immune
reactions that can interfere with tissue healing. Composite biomaterials that
mimic the properties of the tissue matrix promote faster healing of damaged
tissue and wounds. Recent methods incorporate a relatively unexplored type of
material: degradable metal particles in polymer composites. As these metals
degrade, they release metal ions and other degradation products that are
beneficial for injured tissues. However, both can damage tissues and cells if
applied in excess. In this HBCU EIR project, the team will study these
biodegradable materials with the goal of developing a family of biomaterials for
tissue delivery of beneficial degradation products of metals to promote wound
healing. One broader impact of this project is to enhance knowledge of
biodegradable metals to address the significant needs for researchers and
medical practitioners to repair multiple types of tissue injuries. Another
remarkable broader impact of this project includes establishing educational
practices that enhance the engagement of undergraduate and graduate students,
with a particular focus on including underrepresented and at-risk minorities
students in STEM research training in this area. Educational efforts will
include graduate research projects, summer research projects for undergraduate
students, and K-12 student outreach and training opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
biodegradable metals Mg and Zn in the physiological environment release Mg2+ and
Zn2+, which, along with other degradation products, have shown the potential to
improve tissue healing. Degradation rates of these metals are highly dependent
on the size and surface area exposed. In the case of Mg and Zn, both metals are
dependent on the synthesis, post-synthesis and transport/storage conditions,
since the metal is prone to oxidize very quickly when exposed to the ambient
environment. It is currently a challenge to obtain precise control over these
variables. A robust synthesis methodology will be developed to control size and
surface properties of the Mg and Zn particles in an inert environment, which
will further control degradation and release rates of metal ions. Electrospun
nanofiber composites of biocompatible polymers, poly-lactic-glycolic acid (PLGA)
and PLGA-chitosan (CH), containing embedded metal particles, will be developed,
with the ultimate goal of producing a series of material formulations that will
allow fine control over the release rate of metal ions. These composites will be
tested in vitro using fibroblast and macrophage co-cultures to identify optimal
properties of the composites and metal particles loading. Innovative elements of
this proposal are, first, controlling the size of Mg and Zn particles to allow
control over amounts; second, embedding these in ECM-mimicking nanofibers of
PLGA and PLGA-CH to provide exquisite control over metal particle degradation;
and third, testing the composite by exposing it to cells in vitro to reduce
fibroblast fibrotic responses and inflammation. The biodegradable metal-embedded
nanofiber composite achieved via this project will provide a better
understanding of the inherent healing properties of tissue including reducing
infection, stimulating recovery from inflammation, and enhancing tissue
remodeling. In this project, the broader impact of the proposed work will be
enhanced by public education and by creating research opportunities for
significant numbers of underrepresented minority students, with training and
mentoring focused on real-world biomaterials research in NC A&amp;Tâ€™s College of
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.