* 2100765
* GOALI: Coating of Rotating Discrete Objects
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Satish Kumar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 03/31/2024
* USD 413,178.00

Coating of liquid films onto non-flat discrete objects arises in the
manufacturing of a broad variety of products such as automobile and aerospace
components, medical implants, three-dimensional printed parts, and foodstuffs.
Coatings are often needed to protect or functionalize surfaces, or even to
create the final product itself. It is an essential element in American
manufacturing. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
research promotes national prosperity in this critical area while developing new
scientific insights into a complex problem. In contrast to liquid-film coating
on flat substrates, liquid-film coating on non-flat discrete objects is
considerably more challenging to understand at a fundamental level. For most
applications, a coating of uniform thickness is desired. However, the complex
interplay between forces arising from object rotation, object curvature,
gravity, viscosity, surface tension, and inertia may lead to the growth of
instabilities and thus coating non-uniformities. The overall objective of this
project is to use a combination of theory, experiment, and industrial
interaction to significantly advance fundamental understanding of the flow of
liquid films on rotating discrete objects. The general principles that the work
aims to establish provides a firm foundation for systematic design and
optimization of industrial coating processes, thereby enabling future
breakthroughs that address critical industry needs. Industrial outreach and
involvement of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups complement
the research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a combination of
theory, experiment, and industrial interaction to significantly advance
fundamental understanding of how liquid rheology, non-circular cross sections,
and end-effects influence the flow of liquid films on rotating discrete objects.
The theory involves finite-difference and finite-element simulations of
generalized Newtonian liquids and viscoelastic liquids. The simulations yield
predictions of coating-film thickness and stability limits as function of
parameters characterizing rotation velocity, object shape, and, rheological
properties. These predictions, along with asymptotic analysis of the underlying
equations, are used to generate scaling laws that provide quick and accurate
estimates helpful for industrial practitioners. The experiments involve flow
visualizations using three-dimensional printed objects having non-circular cross
sections and liquids having rheological properties consistent with the
rheological models used in the simulations. Film-thickness variations and the
onset of instabilities are inferred from the visualizations and compared to the
theoretical predictions. The interplay between theory, experiment, and
industrial interaction ultimately advances physical understanding and lead to
general principles that can be applied in manufacturing processes involving the
coating of discrete objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.