* 2100242
* ADVANCE and Beyond: Understanding Processes of Institutional Change to Promote STEM Equity and Education
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Sandra Laursen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,999,994.00

ADVANCE and Beyond: Understanding Processes of Institutional Change to Promote
STEM Equity and Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has significance in
seeking to provide evidence-based support to scholars and practitioners who are
working to promote systemic institutional change in STEM higher education. To
solve stubborn problems that lead to inequitable outcomes, such as biased
faculty tenure and promotion processes, uneven leadership opportunities, and
hostile departmental climates, requires more than a single intervention. Because
these problems are embedded in complex higher education systems, taking a
systemic approach means deploying multiple levers for change and combining these
interventions strategically. The research team will study processes of
organizational change in order to fill the gap between broadly conceived
organizational change theories and practical implementation of processes and
interventions in specific institutional change efforts to advance STEM equity
and education. Improved understanding of these essential change processes will
help to link change theories, goals, and interventions in ways that strengthen
the outcomes of such efforts. With robust research findings to guide their work,
change leaders can better promote, connect, and sustain the particular change
interventions they have designed; engage leaders and stakeholders; and respond
to resistance or setbacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the study are to
characterize important scaffolding processes that support and link a suite of
specific change interventions into comprehensive change plans, thereby enhancing
their synergistic effects and deepening institutional impact. The research team
will analyze projects supported by NSF's ADVANCE Institutional Transformation
(IT) program, which have developed portfolios of interventions to address the
multi-faceted sources of gender inequity on STEM faculties. Because these
projects already draw on a well-established body of interventions that identify
“what to do,” they serve as good study sites to learn “how” such change work can
best be accomplished. Using documents, interviews, and interactive focus groups
that we call Structured Expert Enquiry Dialogues, the study aims to identify,
analyze, and explain scaffolding processes as seen in equity-directed change
projects. The research team members will then deepen and test their
understanding of these processes with experienced change leaders of equity-
directed change projects both within and beyond ADVANCE, thereby exploring the
transferability of this new knowledge. The research findings will emphasize
processes that facilitate institutional transformation toward full and equitable
participation of diverse faculty, and the roles of both formal and informal
organizational factors that may encourage or inhibit inclusion in the academic
workforce. Communication of the results in conferences and journals will target
scholars who can connect new theory about scaffolding processes to studies of
other STEM education change projects. Dissemination through workshops, webinars,
and the web-based StratEGIC Toolkit, in partnership with the Science Education
Research Center, will target change agents who carry out work on faculty-based
institutional change to improve STEM education and broaden participation,
whether through projects similar to ADVANCE or those that address student
experiences such as ineffective teaching, disengaged learning, and exclusionary
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research
on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.