* 2100425
* Excellence in Research: Phytohormones and Heat-Induced Loss of Wheat Resistance to Hessian Fly
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Lieceng Zhu, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 599,636.00

High temperature (Heat stress) can reduce plant resistance to insects, resulting
in decreased productivity of crop plants. This research aims to understand the
role of phytohormones on the expression of wheat (Triticum aestivum) resistance
to Hessian fly (Mayetiola destructor), one of the most destructive insect pests
of wheat plants in North America. In this research, a combination of
phenotyping, biochemical, and molecular biology approaches will be deployed to
investigate the impact of phytohormones on the sensitivity of plant insect
resistance to temperature changes. The findings will contribute to the
understanding of the mechanism of heat-induced loss of host plant resistance and
co-evolution between host plants and insect pests under changing temperatures.
The implementation of this research will provide a platform to train
undergraduate students of underserved populations at Fayetteville State
University (FSU) in research, scientific communication, and molecular biology
techniques via paid research internship, biotechnology workshop, and
incorporation of research methodologies into classroom teaching. Such efforts
will improve the competency of undergraduate students, especially minority
students and/or military-associated students at FSU to enter
graduate/professional schools and STEM workforce, and therefore enhance social
mobility. Furthermore, findings from this research have the potential to be
applied to control Hessian fly damage in wheat crop under stressed environmental
conditions to improve agriculture productivity, food security, and benefit the
rural community in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat stress can
compromise plant resistance to insects. This proposal aims to understand the
role of phytohormones in resistance: (R)-gene-medicated host plant resistance to
insects under heat stress using wheat (Triticum aestivum)-Hessian fly (Mayetiola
destructor) interaction as a model. The overall hypothesis of this research is
that phytohormones jasmonic acid (JA), salicylic acid (SA), 12-oxo-phytodienoic
acid (OPDA), and auxin affect OPDA metabolism in wheat plants and influence
wheat resistance to Hessian fly under heat stress. To test this hypothesis,
‘Molly’, a Hessian fly resistant cultivar containing the R-gene H13 and its
susceptible near-isogenic line ‘Newton’ will be infested by an avirulent biotype
GP Hessian fly and subjected to heat stress, and a combination of heat stress
and external application of phytohormones, respectively. A combination of
phenotyping, biochemical and molecular analyses, and metabolomic approaches will
be deployed to achieve four objectives:1) to determine the impact of
phytohormones on wheat resistance phenotype to Hessian fly under heat
conditions; 2) to demonstrate the impact of phytohormones on OPDA metabolism in
wheat plants under heat stress; 3) to examine the impact of phytohormones on
transcript expression of wheat genes potentially contributing to wheat
resistance/susceptibility to Hessian fly under heat stress; 4) to determine the
impact of phytohormones on lipid and fatty acid metabolism at Hessian fly
feeding sites in wheat plants under heat stress. The findings will enhance the
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of heat-induced loss of plant
resistance to insects and co-evolution between host plants and parasites under
changing temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.