* 2100419
* Exploratory Evidence on the Factors that Relate to Elementary School Science Learning Gains Among English Language Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Frank Curran, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 04/30/2024
* USD 313,159.00

The nation’s schools are growing in linguistic and cultural diversity, with
students identified as English learners (ELs) comprising more than ten percent
of the student population. Unfortunately, existing research suggests that ELs
lag behind other students in science achievement, even in the earliest grades of
school. This project will provide evidence on how school, classroom, teacher,
and student factors shape elementary school science learning trajectories for
ELs. The project will broaden ELs’ participation in STEM learning by
investigating how individual, classroom, and school level situations (inputs)
such as instructional practices, learning environments, and characteristics of
school personnel relate to EL elementary school science learning. Specifically,
this study explores (1) a series of science inputs (time on science, content
covered, availability of lab resources, and teacher training in science
instruction), and (2) EL-specific inputs (classroom language use, EL
instructional models, teacher certification and training, and the availability
of EL support staff), in relation to ELs’ science learning outcomes from a
national survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study provides a comprehensive
analysis of English learners’ (ELs) science learning in the early grades and the
English learner instructional inputs and science instructional inputs that best
predict early science outcomes (measured by both standardized science
assessments and teacher-rated measures of science skills). The study uses the
nationally representative Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS-K:2011) and
employs a regression framework with latent class analysis to identify promising
inputs that promote early science learning for ELs. Conceptually, rather than
viewing the school-based inputs in isolation, the study explores how they
combine to enhance students’ science learning trajectories. The study addresses
the following research questions: How do science test performance trajectories
vary across and within EL student groups in elementary school? How do access to
school, teacher, and classroom level science and EL inputs vary across and
within EL student groups in elementary school? Which school, teacher, and
classroom level science and EL inputs are predictive of greater science test
performance gains and teacher-rated science skills in elementary school? Are the
relationships among these school, teacher, and classroom level inputs and
student test performance and teacher-rated science skills different for
subgroups of EL students, particularly by race/ethnicity or by immigration
status? Are there particular combinations of school, teacher, and classroom
level inputs that are predictive of science learning gains (test scores and
teacher-rated skills) for ELs as compared to students more
broadly?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.