* 2100334
* Personalizing Math Instruction at Scale: A Meta-Analytic and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Math Tutoring Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Kraft, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 08/31/2024
* USD 817,090.00

This project will identify the most cost-effective and scalable methods of
delivering mathematics tutoring to K-12 public school students for the purpose
of accelerating learning. While there is a notably large body of rigorous
research documenting that high-dosage tutoring produces large academic gains for
children who have fallen behind academically, less is known about the features
of effective programs needed to guide program design. Additionally, the
widespread adoption of tutoring programs has been hampered by the high upfront
costs of intensive individualized instructional programs. This project will
therefore isolate the key features of the most effective tutoring programs and
the costs associated with these programs to identify program models with the
potential to deliver the greatest benefits at the lowest cost. Program features
could relate to tutor characteristics, the dosage of tutoring delivered, the
timing of tutoring sessions, the training and support provided to tutors, tutor-
student ratios, the content of tutoring sessions, and more. The project is
particularly timely given policymakers and educators are currently looking to
invest in affordable strategies to support studentsâ€™ learning in mathematics
given early evidence that Covid-19-related educational disruptions have
negatively affected mathematics achievement. This project is funded by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental
research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
include a thorough meta-analysis of all existing studies of mathematics tutoring
interventions that use quasi-experimental or experimental methods designed to
isolate the causal effects of the tutoring program in question. More
specifically, the research team will search for, collect, and code all studies
based on the features of the intervention under examination, the size of the
effects the intervention had on student outcomes, as well as information that
will allow them to calculate costs for each intervention. Researchers will then
pool estimates across studies to identify the average effects of mathematics
tutoring on student achievement and average per-pupil costs and to examine how
the effects and costs of tutoring programs vary by design and program features.
Finally, the researchers will examine which features of interventions predict
the largest academic gains for students and calculate cost-benefit ratios for
each intervention. Meta-analytic and cost-effectiveness reviews are a critical
step in developing new scientific knowledge by generating conclusions with
greater precision and external validity and accounting for publication bias
which can skew perceptions about the overall effectiveness of an intervention
when only well-known or successful programs are highlighted in the literature.
This project will provide a comprehensive review across all existing studies,
ultimately allowing the research team to accurately identify those mathematics
tutoring models with the greatest promise for both impact and
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.