* 2100946
* Excellence in Research: Collaborative Research: Computational Modeling and Experimental Investigation on Multivalent Interaction at Nano-Bio Interface for 2D Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Paresh Ray, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-materials are extremely
small sized materials. Nano-materials become biomaterials when they directly or
indirectly interact with living things, and also when they are used as
biosensors, bioimaging or therapeutic agents. Understanding the interactions
occurring at the interface of such nano-materials and biological molecules is
very important for several potential applicatons. The current project will
develop novel, two-dimensional (2D) nano-materials and examine their physical
and chemical interactions with biomolecules. This will be accomplished by
coupling computational simulations and experimental investigations. The expected
outcome is that novel nano-platforms will be developed, and they will have
capability to be explored for numerous promising applications in industry.
Successful completion of this project will offer many fascinating
physicochemical properties that will generate exciting opportunities for future
two-dimensional nanomaterials-based biosensing, bioimaging, and therapeutic
applications. The project will provide excellent research and education
opportunities for underrepresented minority undergraduate and graduate students
from Clark Atlanta University and Jackson State University. The current project
will increase the skilled workforce in the important fields of computation and
emerging novel material design, with an emphasis on enhancing and promoting
diversity from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a better understanding of
the nano-bio interface at the cellular and molecular levels, which is extremely
important to guide the rational design of 2D material for biomedical devices.
The proposed research will address essential new questions on how the
heterogeneous nature of the biological system influences the dynamics of nano-
bio interactions. The research and educational activities of this project
include: (i) Development, computational exploration, and characterization of
chemically functionalized 2D materials of graphene oxide and phosphorene; (ii)
Elucidation of the multivalent interactions at nano-bio interfaces between 2D
materials with DNA/RNA, proteins, and peptides; (iii) Understanding how corona
formation on 2D nano-material changes the biological fate, using cell viability
and cellular uptake experiment; (iv) Performing computational modeling to
understand the interactions of 2D materials with biomolecules; and (v) Engaging
minority students in advanced research on emerging nano-bio technologies. The
current project will provide opportunities for underrepresented minority
participants to become next generation materials scientists through innovative
research and education in emerging 2D material-based biotechnology research
areas. The successful execution of this project may lead to the development of
safe nano-materials for bio-nano technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.