* 2100115
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: Authentic Learning of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity with Portable Hands-on Labware
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Whitman, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2024
* USD 279,844.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As cybersecurity threats grow in
complexity, the burden of responding to these threats also increases. Early
detection of security vulnerabilities and threats is needed. Machine learning
(ML) approaches enable the analysis of large amounts of data and could be used
to predict and prevent future cybersecurity threats. This project will enhance
the cybersecurity curricula across computing disciplines using an authentic
learning approach. Authentic learning approaches engage students’ active
learning and problem-solving capabilities by using hands-on approaches and real-
world topics. This approach has been increasingly popular for teaching
cybersecurity but is less commonly used to teach ML in cybersecurity. The
project will design and develop ten portable labware modules that will support a
broad audience to learn ML in cybersecurity effectively and result in more
efficient student engagement. The resources developed will support authentic
learning of cybersecurity topics, and increase student learning and interests as
well as faculty collaboration between Kennesaw State University and Tuskegee
University. The project will disseminate the resources via faculty workshops,
conference publications, and webinars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of the
proposed learning modules will be based on popular machine learning algorithms
and publicly available free datasets related to common cybersecurity problems
such as Denial of Service, CAPTCHA bypassing, and SQL Injection attacks. The
modules will be deployed on the open-source Google CoLaboratory (CoLab)
environment. Learners will access and practice all labs interactively using a
browser anywhere and anytime without a need for time-consuming installation and
configuration. The hands-on labs will provide students with step-by-step
interactive activities to learn ML models in the CoLab environment, followed by
testing of models. The project will seek to answer the following research
questions: (i) Do innovative, authentic learning-based ML in cybersecurity
resources increase learners’ knowledge and interest in solving real-world
problems and careers in the cybersecurity workforce? (ii) Does the hands-on
labware developed by the project impact students’ grades, learning, attitudes,
motivation, and self-efficacy towards ML in cybersecurity? (iii) What is the
relationship between students’ motivation and ML in cybersecurity learning? (iv)
Do participating faculty perceive the ML in cybersecurity authentic learning
resources as effective in engaging diverse, underrepresented students in
cybersecurity? The project evaluation will use a mixed-methods design and
administrative data, focus groups, and survey data. The quantitative and
qualitative data generated from these sources will be used for formative and
summative assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that
address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.