* 2100850
* Excellence in Research: A Cyber-Physical System Framework for In-process Quality Assurance of Inkjet-based Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Salil Desai, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,917.00

This Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Excellence in Research
(HBCU-EiR) grant supports research that contributes new knowledge related to
quality assurance for additive manufacturing, promoting both the progress of
science and the advancement of national prosperity. Inkjet printing is one
representative additive manufacturing process based on thermal or acoustic
formation and ejection of liquid droplets through a nozzle. Its great promise
has been demonstrated in electronics, energy, healthcare and biomedical
industries. However, inkjet printing is sensitive to environmental, material,
mechanical and electronical factors, and the process can easily deviate from the
desirable working status, resulting in defective parts. This tends to lead to
material and energy waste and affects the structural health and functional
integrity of many important engineering systems. This award supports fundamental
research to provide needed knowledge for the development of a holistic framework
involving neural networks for quality assurance in inkjet printing. This project
holds the potential to significantly improve productivity, quality and material
efficiency for inkjet-based additive manufacturing processes, thus benefiting
the U.S. economy and society. Using a multi-disciplinary approach involving
manufacturing, computer vision, control theory, and machine learning, this
research helps broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and
promotes engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to establish a comprehensive framework that seamlessly integrates in-process
video-based monitoring with closed-loop control and compensation to effectively
detect and subsequently correct the process drift and anomalies toward high-
quality inkjet printing. The framework consists of three synergic digital twins
based on neural networks, a technique that mimics the operations of a human
brain in the artificial intelligence field. The first digital twin aims at
closed-loop control of the kinematic and morphological status of the micro
droplets. The second digital twin focuses on closed-loop control of the
geometrical and morphological status of the printed patterns. The third digital
twin determines and implements compensation strategies for defective patterns.
Specific objectives are to 1) identify methodology for creation and integration
of digital twins to maintain desirable droplet status, obtain required patterns
and implement effective compensation, 2) derive practical guidelines of using
neural network in quality assurance, including input selection and preparation,
network design and optimization, output selection and usage, and transferability
and adaptability, and 3) understand the relationship between material
properties, control variables, in-process parameters and print outcome in inkjet
printing from the perspectives of neural network. This project is expected to
provide fundamental understanding of the design, development, and implementation
of cyber-physical systems in additive manufacturing. The developed framework can
be adapted to other macro- and micro-scale additive manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.