* 2100027
* Using Cloud Technologies to Develop the Data Analysis Skills of Community College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Monica Trujillo, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2024
* USD 359,874.00

The greater New York City (NYC) area is one of the world’s leading financial and
cultural centers. High-tech jobs are a key driver of NYC’s place in the US
economy and the need for high tech workers is growing. From 2008 to 2018, jobs
in this sector rose 45%, with jobs in the data analytics category representing
30% of that total growth. The current rate at which students graduate with
skills in data analytics is not keeping pace with the demand for skilled data
analytics technicians. This project aims to increase the number of students
graduating with the skills necessary to enter the data analytics workforce. It
will do so by improving the data analytics knowledge and skills of students at a
diverse urban community college. The project intends to increase the
participation of women and individuals from communities that are not yet
equitably represented in the technical workforce. It is expected that the
project will help prepare students for the predicted employment opportunities
and contribute to better productivity, problem solving, and effectiveness in the
workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working in collaboration with the Business
Industry Leadership Team at Queensborough Community College, the project team
intends to enhance the ability of the College to recruit, educate, and graduate
a diverse group of students to help meet regional employment needs.
Participating students will be offered a summer boot camp in Data
Science/Analysis, a year-long undergraduate research experience following the
summer camp, and a series of workshops focused on skills for internship
applications and job interviews. To meet role models and increase their sense of
belonging in Data Science/Analysis, students will also participate in a seminar
series focused on Data Science/Analysis careers that will feature professionals
from diverse backgrounds and from both academia and industry. The project will
also offer preparation for the AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner certification.
It is expected that this initiative will lay the foundation to establish a
degree program in Data Science/Analysis at Queensborough Community College. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.