* 2100040
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Impact of Mindfulness Training to Mitigate Psychological Threat and Enhance Engagement and Learning to Undergraduate Introductory Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Melanie Good, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 948,417.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and testing a
novel theoretical framework to understand and mitigate sources of disengagement
and promote sources of engagement in undergraduate introductory physics courses.
A premise of this project is that students under psychological threat—those who
appraise demands of physics as exceeding coping resources—are more likely to
disengage from physics. Critically, reducing psychological threat is suggested
to boost engagement, and ultimately, learning and retention. The focus is on
mindfulness as a tool to help students reappraise physics stressors, so that
demands posed by learning physics can be perceived as temporary challenges to be
overcome rather than permanent threats to be avoided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project tests a model of psychological threat in relation to physics engagement
and learning that integrates three separate research literatures on: 1)
motivation (social and educational psychology), 2) mindfulness and stress
(health and clinical science), and 3) learning (cognitive psychology and
disciplinary-based physics education). In a series of randomized field
experiments with undergraduates, this project tests the hypothesis that
mindfulness training can help students make more adaptive stress appraisals,
thereby mitigating psychological threat and boosting engagement. This project
also explores whether adaptive stress appraisals and increased engagement
cumulate to longer-term gains in learning and retention outcomes. Through the
use of multimethod assessments (ecological momentary assessment, performance
measures, self-report surveys, interviews, objective course records), the
proposed studies will provide critical data necessary to rigorously test
mechanisms connecting mindfulness to stress appraisals, engagement, and physics
learning more broadly. Findings from this research will provide valuable
insights into the relations between mindfulness, psychological threat, and
engagement and learning. This project is supported by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.