* 2100542
* RUI: Electronic Spectroscopy of Vanadium Hydride and Niobium Hydride
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Thomas Varberg, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 264,328.00

WIth support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Thomas D. Varberg and his
undergraduate student researchers at Macalester College will use visible and
near-infrared spectroscopy to study the structure and bonding of two transition
metal hydrides, vanadium hydride (VH) and niobium hydride (NbH), in the gas
phase. The molecules will be probed using a combination of laser excitation and
dispersed fluorescence spectroscopy to identify low-lying and excited electronic
states. Analyses of the spectra will provide values for molecular properties
such as the bond length and vibrational frequency. Transition metal chemistry
and bonding is important to other areas of modern science, including
organometallic chemistry, nanoscience, chemical catalysis, and astronomy.
Detailed studies of metal-containing diatomic molecules are useful for
understanding bonding in these more complex systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic spectra in the visible and near-infrared will
be recorded with a high-resolution continuous-wave laser capable of resolving
the vibrational, rotational, and hyperfine structures of the two molecules.
Spectral assignment and model fitting will lead to a detailed characterization
of the electronic states and the chemical bonding, as well as providing accurate
transition frequencies useful to other scientists. Supporting computational work
by collaborator Professor Keith Kuwata and his students, also at Macalester
College, will utilize density functional theory to provide accurate estimates of
the ground state magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole hyperfine constants.
Results will also be compared with multi-configurational self-consistent field
(MCSCF) calculations by other workers to test the accuracy of this computational
methodology. A substantial broader impact of this work is to prepare Macalester
students, including students from underrepresented groups, for graduate work and
employment in the fields of physical chemistry and chemical physics. Accurately
determined transition frequencies for vanadium hydride provide an additional
broader impact, as VH is a good candidate for astronomical detection in cooler
stars or brown dwarfs in our Galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.