* 2100268
* Developing the Skilled Technical Workforce for Regenerative Medicine Biomanufacturing in the Piedmont Triad Region of North Carolina
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Russ Read, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 441,028.00

A 2019 National Science Board report stressed the critical need for an
exceptional skilled technical workforce to ensure the success of the nation's
science- and engineering-driven industries. This project will serve the national
interest by preparing skilled technical workers in regenerative medicine, an
emerging field that aims to repair, regrow, or replace damaged cells, organs,
and tissues. Regenerative medicine is a cross-disciplinary field of
biotechnology and bioengineering that includes convergent technologies such as
nanotechnology, artificial intelligence and machine learning, mechanical
engineering technologies, data science, and cyberbiosecurity. Regenerative
medicine is rapidly evolving from basic research and development stages, through
clinical translation and into biomanufacturing. A significant gap in
availability of skilled technicians in regenerative medicine biomanufacturing
has been defined by identifying the required skills and the extent of the skills
gap. To help fill this need, Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine is
partnering with Forsyth Technical Community College, Simon G. Atkins High
School, regional Historically Black Colleges and Universities, employers, and
professional and trades organizations. This partnership intends to bring the new
science and technology of regenerative medicine into the community college
sector to ensure the nation prepares the needed regenerative medicine
technicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to meet this goal by
developing a regional model for education of skilled technicians in regenerative
medicine biomanufacturing. Specifically, it will develop and deliver faculty
professional development in regenerative medicine, from the high school level
through community college and university levels (through articulated programs).
It will also disseminate research-based knowledge, skills, and abilities for the
regenerative medicine field to community colleges and their partners. Finally,
the project will develop multiple career entry options and pathways for
community college-prepared technicians and incumbent employees, with a focus on
serving people from communities that are underrepresented in STEM. The project
builds upon recent NSF-sponsored Advanced Technology Education efforts, which
have provided the scientific, technical, and educational foundation for this
project. The project team plans to work with diverse teams of experts enabling
development and production of replacement cells and organs and the expansion of
cells for therapy. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.