* 2101700
* Geometric and Microlocal Study of Automorphic Periods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ioannis Sakellaridis, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 289,999.00

In harmonic analysis, one represents functions on a space as a superposition of
waves with varying frequencies. In number theory and the Langlands program, one
is interested in functions on certain homogeneous spaces, where the "waves" are
special eigenfunctions of Laplacians and Hecke operators, called automorphic
forms. Some of the most mysterious and important invariants of the automorphic
forms are the L-functions, a vast class of generalizations of the Riemann zeta
function. A significant, but not well-understood, principle is that their
superposition often represents a function that can be described independently,
in terms of what are known as spherical varieties that give rise to a
distribution called the period distribution. The amplitudes of the spectral
decomposition of this distribution turn out to be special values of L-functions.
The project will investigate conjectural connections between period
distributions and L-functions using ideas of quantization (whose roots lie in
mathematical physics). The PI also plans yearly meetings to train students and
postdocs on the topics related to this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According
to the visionary program developed since the '60s by Abel Prize recipient Robert
P. Langlands, L-functions should be understood as invariants of automorphic
representations; those are the "eigenfrequencies" of "arithmetic manifolds", or
else the representations of a (reductive) Lie group G, and of its algebra of
Hecke operators, which appear as functions on a quotient L\G, where L is an
arithmetic lattice. The precise incarnation of L-functions in this setting is by
means of certain distributions called "periods", which the PI and others have
studied and organized into a coherent theory in recent years. The present award
aims to utilize ideas of symplectic geometry in the study of these periods.
Among other goals, this project will study: (1) the duality between periods and
L-functions as a duality between Hamiltonian spaces for the group and its dual
group (building up on recent work with Ben-Zvi and Venkatesh); (2) the local
spectrum of spherical varieties by combining the relative trace formula of
Waldspurger with the geometry of the moment map studied by Knop; (3) the
"transfer operators" of functoriality, in the spirit of Langlands' "beyond
endoscopy", between the relative trace formulas of different groups and
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.