* 2101230
* SBIR Phase I: Integrated Coaxial Electron and Light Microscope for Multimodal Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Christopher Sears, SEARS SCIENTIFIC CONSULTING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2022
* USD 255,915.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
low-cost combined light and electron microscope having simultaneous view of the
same area. Such a tool will benefit any application in which information is
gathered from multiple modes to understand the sample behavior, such as in the
life sciences. Currently, this is accomplished only with two separate
instruments often in different laboratories with great care needed to track the
region of information between instruments. The microscopy market is an estimated
$9.4 billion, $3.9 billion of which comprises electron microscopes and $3.0
billion for light microscopy. This project advances a simple, easy-to-use
solution combining the two systems into one, offering significant leaps in
productivity for microscopists and advancing discoveries in the life sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is based on a
unique and simple architecture that reduces cost and complexity of the electron
microscope while also allowing for coaxial imaging of the sample by the two
modalities. In the life sciences, an increasingly popular method is to combine
high resolution structural information (context) with super-resolution
fluorescence images of key marked proteins to obtain functional understanding of
the tissue. The user does not need to worry about position tracking and
alignment. Furthermore, the architecture lends itself well to a new optical
charge control method for mitigating charge build-up on the sample, a problem
common to electron microscopy. The same optical path used for imaging allows co-
illumination of the sample by the charge control beam. Ahead of submission of
the proposal, the team completed detailed particles optics modeling and system
design optimization. This Phase I project will complete the mechanical design of
the microscope, build the prototype, and validate the particle optic modeling
and resulting imaging performance using standard electron imaging metrology
targets. Second, the project will then use the prototype to image a range of
charging samples to test the charge compensation scheme. Resulting images will
be compared to that obtained from traditional tabletop scanning electron
microscopes to understand the effectiveness and limitations of the charge
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.