* 2101040
* Integral points on stacks, hyperplane sections over finite fields, and vectors forming rational angles
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bjorn Poonen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2024
* USD 236,478.00

Aristotle incorrectly claimed that one could fill space with copies of a regular
tetrahedron. Determining which nonregular tetrahedra can fill space is a
2300-year-old unsolved problem that the investigator will study using a new
approach using tools from algebraic geometry and number theory. As a stepping
stone towards this, the investigator will study a larger class of tetrahedra,
those that can be sliced into finitely many pieces and reassembled into a cube;
no new such tetrahedra have been found since 1974. In addition, the investigator
will study other questions concerning the solutions to systems of equations; for
example, generalizing the fact that the discriminant b^2-4ac of a quadratic
polynomial ax^2+bx+c determines whether its roots coincide, the investigator
will study the geometric meaning of the discriminant of a higher degree
polynomial in many variables. Graduate and undergraduate students supported by
the award will receive training to contribute towards these projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will classify tetrahedra of Dehn
invariant 0 (scissors-congrent to a cube) by relating this vanishing to the
solutions of a system of exponential Diophantine equations, which will be
studied a combination of Galois-theoretic and p-adic methods. The tetrahedra
that can tile space are among these, so these Dehn invariant 0 tetrahedra will
be tested for the ability to tile by using geometric and combinatorial methods,
making use of computation to construct tilings or to rule them out. The
investigator will extend the theory of cohomological obstructions to understand
integral points on stacks instead of just varieties; such a study would have
implications for rational points on varieties that admit morphisms to lower-
dimensional stacks. He will relate geometry of a variety in P^n over a finite
field to the moments of point counts of random hyperplane sections. Finally, he
will explain the valuation of the discriminant of a projective hypersurface in
terms of its geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.