* 2101888
* The Arithmetic of Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Aaron Pollack, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2024
* USD 207,449.00

The area of mathematics known as number theory concerns understanding integer
and rational solutions to polynomial equations. These solution sets are
conjecturally connected to what are called automorphic forms, high-dimensional
analogues of the trigonometric sine and cosine functions. Like the sine and
cosine functions, automorphic forms are functions that satisfy certain
differential equations and have infinitely many discrete symmetries, and they
are objects of intense mathematical study in their own right, not just for their
connection to polynomial equations. The PI will investigate topics in the study
of automorphic forms, especially those automorphic forms whose system of
symmetries is "exceptional." The PI will also investigate topics in the
L-functions of automorphic forms. L-functions are generalizations of the Riemann
zeta function, and conjecturally contain large amounts of subtle arithmetic
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project has two distinct
areas of focus. The first concerns unexpected arithmeticity in a class of
special automorphic forms on exceptional groups. There is evidence that (non-
holomorphic) "modular forms" on exceptional groups behave surprisingly similarly
to classical holomorphic modular forms and possess surprising arithmetic
features. This project aims to further develop the theory of these modular forms
on exceptional groups, such as developing the mathematics that could be used to
produce a database of modular forms on the exceptional group G_2. The second
focus of this project concerns work consistent with Beilinson's conjecture about
the special values of L-functions of motives. Efforts in this direction involve
obtaining regulator formulas for generalized Beilinson-Flach motivic classes and
finding a generalization of the Kronecker limit formula. The techniques and
ideas involved in the project include exceptional theta correspondences, the
Rankin-Selberg method, and Deligne cohomology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.