* 2101190
* Research Initiation Award: Next-Generation, Atomically-Anistropic Force Field Generation for Carbohydrates
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Mary Van Vleet, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,206.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Spelman College provides an opportunity to enhance computational models
that enhance the understanding of chemical behavior. Undergraduate students at
Spelman College will gain essential skills in data analysis, programming, and
software-assisted computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbohydrates are an
essential class of biomolecules with the potential to be used in drug
development and/or alternative energy. At present, computational studies of
carbohydrate dynamics are limited due to the lack of accurate models for
simulating their molecular behavior. The goal of this project is to develop
improved models, called “force fields”, that will be used investigate the
molecular behavior of carbohydrates in aqueous solution. Specific aims of the
project are to a) parameterize and validate force fields for water and for
naturally occurring monosaccharides, and b) use simulations to understand the
underlying physics of the anomeric and exo-anomeric effects in solution. To
accomplish these goals, SAPT (Symmetry-Adapted Permutation Theory) calculations
will be employed as a benchmark for parameter optimization of the force field
using the MASTIFF (Multipolar, Anisotropic Slater-Type Intermolecular Force
Field) functional form, where the latter is used to capture the angular
dependence of the molecular electron density. The resulting carbohydrate force
fields will be made open-source and broadly available, thus providing the
scientific community with access to more accurate simulations of this important
class of biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.