* 2101169
* Bilingualtek: An integrated science-language approach for Latinx preschoolers
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Lucia Mendez, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,401,299.00

Early childhood education currently faces challenges related to effective
science instruction practices that meet the learning needs of culturally and
linguistically diverse children, such as Latinx dual language learners (DLL).
This project seeks to foster the science achievement of Latinx preschoolers by
confronting current barriers that impact their STEM education through an
integrated science-language instructional approach for preschool classrooms. The
project will use everyday science experiences to engage Latinx preschoolers in
learning the practices of scientists, including the practices of obtaining
information and using language to communicate scientific findings. These aims
will be accomplished by combining engaging science experiences delivered via
e-books, and multimedia supports for science and dual-language learning.
Consistent with the Next Generation of Science Standards (NGSS), the project
offers a transformative model of early childhood science and language education
that supports kindergarten readiness at a national level and addresses the vital
need for educational resources that build on and enhance the strengths of
underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this
project is to foster the science achievement of Latinx preschoolers by
addressing current challenges impacting their STEM education. These challenges
include; limited early science education instruction for teachers, minimal
incorporation of NGSS science principles in early science learning for
preschoolers, and increasing numbers of Latinx DLLs entering preschools
experiencing a shortage of bilingual early childhood teachers. The project
addresses these challenges by leveraging recent research with preschool Latinx
DLLs across several disciplines into a media-supported integrated science-
language instructional approach. These instructional practices provide an NGSS-
aligned model for preschool-age science education at the national level, support
kindergarten readiness, and directly address the need for educational resources
that build on the strengths that diverse children bring to their learning
experience. Supporting monolingual teachers’ use of multimedia dual-language
science materials will also address preschool teacher professional learning
related to science instruction while promoting the participation of
underrepresented minorities in STEM education at an early age. The science-
language instructional practices will be developed by bringing together
preschool teachers and Latinx families in an iterative co-design process to
develop instructional content and supports to facilitate science and language
learning by Latinx DLLs. The project will be implemented in 28 classrooms to
examine its usability, feasibility, and preliminary efficacy, including child
outcomes (science talk, science knowledge, and language skills) through a
rigorous quasi-experimental field study. The treatment and control groups will
each include 42 children and 14 teachers. The project will produce 1) an
integrated science and language instructional approach and resource materials
relevant to Latinx children’s living experiences, 2) proof of concept of the
project’s feasibility; and 3) initial findings on the impact of the project on
children’s science and language learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.