* 2101941
* Monoidal Triangular Categories: Representation Theory, Cohomology, and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Nakano, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2024
* USD 232,374.00

Representation theory has emerged as a central area of modern mathematics with
connections to combinatorics, algebraic geometry, topology and number theory. In
addition, it has many applications to chemistry and physics. Representations are
mappings of complicated algebraic objects (such as groups, rings, Lie algebras,
and Lie superalgebras) to an array of numbers (matrices). These realizations by
matrices encode important data that can yield deep insights into these
complicated algebraic objects. In recent years, a useful approach has been to
understand the entire collection of representations of an object.
Representations for a certain algebraic object often form a tensor triangulated
category. Techniques from homological algebra can be used to build bridges
between tensor triangulated categories and geometric objects. Uncovering this
hidden geometry often leads to new insights about the algebraic object and its
representations. This project includes research and training opportunities for
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in algebra and representation theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will develop new methods to
understand tensor structures in monoidal tensor categories. This will entail the
development of monoidal triangular geometry and explicit computations of Balmer
spectra. The PI will also introduce new geometric and topological methods to
provide concrete calculations of cohomology for algebraic/finite groups, Lie
superalgebras, quantum groups, and Frobenius kernels. The development of the
cohomology theory was an important tool to resolving 30 year old problems that
deal with tilting modules in connection with filtrations of representations of
algebraic groups. The PI will study representations of Lie superalgebras via the
application of super geometry to construct representations and to compute higher
sheaf cohomology. The PI will develop a new Lie theory that entails the use of
detecting and parabolic subalgebras, in addition to, a nilpotent cone to
formulate a geometric setting in order to compute characters for irreducible
representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.