* 2101227
* Excellence in Research: Integrated Sensor-Robot Networks for Real-time Environmental Monitoring and Marine Ecosystem Restoration in the Hampton River
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Zhao Sun, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 600,235.00

Estuaries are bodies of water where rivers meet the ocean. They are among the
most productive environments on earth, creating more organic matter each year
than forest and agricultural areas of similar sizes. Chesapeake Bay is the
largest estuarine system in the United States, spanning over 64,000 square miles
in six states (Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, and
New York) and Washington DC. It plays a critical role in the region’s
environment, food, economy, and recreation. Rapid industrialization and
increased pollution caused by excessive nutrient offloading from industrial
activities and agricultural runoff, as well as over fishing, are imposing severe
threat to the marine ecosystem, wildlife fisheries, and oyster population in the
Bay, and in the Hampton River, our study site. These critical environmental
challenges call for advanced scientific methods and engineering solutions to
fully understand the dynamic biochemical conditions of the water system where
the marine ecosystem reside and grow so that effective decisions for resource
management, wildlife protection, and ecosystem restoration can be made. This
project aims to develop an integrated biochemical sensor-robot network, coupled
with intelligent data sampling schemes, environmental modeling, and sensor-robot
control methods, for real-time proactive environmental sensing and marine
ecosystem restoration in the Hampton River, a tributary of the Chesapeake
Bay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will explore a joint design of
static sensor networks and mobile aquatic robots to provide proactive
biochemical sensing of the dynamic water condition at large scales in space and
time. Specific research objectives include (1) biogeochemical sensor-robot
network design, intelligent sampling, and data analysis; (2) machine learning
methods and data-driven models for marine species density and growth estimation;
(3) optimal navigation, path planning, and robust control of aquatic robots for
effective mobile sensing; and (4) field deployment and performance evaluations.
This project will develop and demonstrate a new and highly effective approach
for large-scale proactive environmental sensing, providing critical data and
models for informed decision making in pollution control, water system
management, and marine ecosystem restoration in the Hampton River and Chesapeake
Bay. This project serves the long-term goal of building the research capacity
and increasing the number of students in STEM at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs). Since Hampton University (HU) is a private HBCU, this
project will provide unique and exciting opportunities for mentoring graduate
and undergraduate students, in particular, students that are underrepresented in
STEM, for research in an interdisciplinary environment. The research will
provide valuable water quality, oyster growth and ecosystem restoration data,
and information for peer researchers and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.