* 2101343
* Facilitating Formative Feedback: Using Simulations to Impact the Capability of Novice Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Daniel Heck, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,428,709.00

During their initial teacher preparation experiences, preservice teachers need
meaningful formative assessment that can support them in developing their skills
and practices as new teachers of mathematics. While field placements offer some
such opportunities, too often preservice teachers are not able to see,
experience, and enact a full range of research-based effective mathematics
teaching practices. This Level II four-year Design and Development Study in the
Assessment strand explores the ways in which thoughtfully designed simulations
can provide preservice teachers with formative assessment opportunities that
serve as a complement to, or alternative to as needed, feedback derived from
field placement contexts. A set of simulations will be designed with a focus on
eliciting and interpreting student thinking. These simulations will be used with
preservice teachers in three elementary teacher preparation programs of varying
size and demographics. Data will be collected to understand the ways in which
the feedback from engaging in the simulations serves to strengthen preservice
teachers' abilities to elicit and interpret student thinking through an analysis
of performance in the simulations, interviews with preservice teachers, and
feedback from teacher educators. An associated study will establish the
reliability and validity of the simulations as assessment
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations will be developed and tested in three
cycles, with iterative improvements made between each cycle. The first cycle
will involve 10 preservice teachers in a pilot study separate from participation
in a course, in which preservice teachers engage in a simulation, receive
formative feedback, and engage in a second similar simulation. This cycle will
evaluate the extent to which feedback appears to influence subsequent
performance. In the second cycle, the project will work with three teacher
educators in diverse contexts to enact the simulations with all preservice
teachers in one section of their elementary mathematics methods courses. In the
final cycle, the use of the simulations will shift from a research team actor
playing the role of the student to a site-based actor recruited by the teacher
educators at each of the three institutions. To validate the tools, researcher
reliability and teacher educator reliability studies will be conducted to asses
the extent to which the four different simulation assessments provide consistent
feedback on the targeted teaching practices and the extent to which the scoring
of the assessments are reliable. A G study (generalizability study) will be
conducted to evaluate the extent to which the teacher participant is the primary
source of variation as compared to variations from student actors or the rater
administering the assessment. Results will be disseminated in a variety of
mathematics education settings and the simulation materials will be made
available to practitioners and adapted for additional use in mixed-reality
simulation platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.