* 2101590
* Supporting the Implementation of Scientific Modeling Instruction in High School Chemistry and Biology in Rural Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Soonhye Park, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,861,229.00

High school students in many rural school districts have limited access to
advanced STEM coursework and advanced technologies, including high-speed
Internet. Rural school districts face difficulties in recruiting and retaining
STEM teachers. In many cases, rural STEM teachers need additional training and
support. The project will identify these, and other barriers rural teachers face
and create professional development for teachers. The training will be designed
to increase their discipline specific knowledge and related skills in engaging
students in using models to explore, analyze, assess, and improve their thinking
about and knowledge of science. Participating teachers will receive 114 hours of
formal professional development in the summer and sustained support from follow-
up sessions and an innovative virtual mentoring throughout the academic year.
The project will revise biology and chemistry curriculum and support 30-90
teachers annually in rural areas in implementing reform-oriented MI instruction
benefiting approximately 25,000 rural students. The project will result in a
network of leader teachers who can sustain project initiatives. Online STEM
professional development courses and digital tools for rural teachers and
teachers will be made widely disseminated. In addition, project resources and
research findings will be disseminated via conference presentations and peer-
reviewed research journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research is designed to
generate knowledge about the development of rural science teachers' pedagogical
content knowledge (PCK) and the supports needed as rural teachers implement an
approach to teaching called Modeling Instruction (MI). PCK refers to knowledge
of and how to teach discipline-specific science concepts. MI is a pedagogical
approach where students are actively engaged in using conceptual models that are
created and applied to concrete physical, biological, and chemical phenomena to
promote their understanding of scientific/mathematical principles. Through
longitudinal mixed-methods research, the project will add new knowledge about
PCK and MI. The project will investigate the progression of teachers’ PCK
associated with the high-level implementation of MI that engages students in
science research practices. The research of discipline specific PCK will
significantly inform the curriculum and design of preservice and in-service
science teacher education programs. The project will also research how various
aspects of mentoring (e.g., feedback, interactions, discourse, and the modes and
quantity of mentoring activities) support teachers in the effective use of PCK
in the classroom. Qualitative research tools will include analysis of videos of
teacher implementation of lessons, interviews with teachers focusing on the
lessons, focus groups and semi-structured interviews on mentoring experiences,
and analysis of teacher mentor-teacher mentee sessions and activity. The Science
Instruction Practices Survey will collect quantitative data that will be used to
understand each teacher’s implementation of MI, looking at the science practices
that teachers in the classroom such as investigation, data collection and
analysis, explanation, modeling, and science communication. The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.