* 2101674
* Synthesis and Structure Analysis of Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Scott Rychnovsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 04/30/2024
* USD 485,005.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Scott Rychnovsky of the University of California, Irvine is
developing new strategies to assign the structure and handedness of molecules.
Molecules may exist in two possible mirror-image forms, which are commonly
described as right-handed or left-handed structures. New molecules are isolated
from plants and animals, and are created in the lab by chemists. The structure
of molecules determine their physical properties such as their physical form,
liquid or solid, and how they interact with living systems. Odor and taste come
from the shape and structure of a molecule. More significantly, molecular drugs
are effective because their shapes interact with proteins to alleviate diseases.
The Rychnovsky group is using osmium complexes to simplify the determination of
structure of new molecules, as well as computer modeling. In difficult cases,
the final step to proving a structure consists of constructing the molecule in a
lab from simpler components—chemical synthesis. Undergraduate and graduate
students will carry out the research for this project. UC Irvine is a Hispanic
Serving Institution, providing ample opportunities to recruit talented Hispanic
(and other minority) students to participate in this project. Professor
Rychnovsky works with the faculty at Santiago Community College to help their
students develop their research skills and expertise. This project is expected
to have a strong impact on student training, helping to build the future STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce for both careers in
industry and in academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports the
development of osmate derivatives to improve the crystallinity of complex
molecules. Osmates are often highly crystalline, and the density of the osmium
metal facilitates the determination of structure and handedness by X-ray
crystallography (anomalous dispersion). Chemical synthesis tools are also being
developed, including a new intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction that builds new
six-membered rings with easily predicted geometries. Computational modeling of
spectroscopic properties is used to test plausible structure to determine if
they correctly match the newly isolated molecular structures. Comparing the
computer-predicted properties with the measured properties is a powerful
technique to determine molecular structure. A final test is to build the best
proposed structure from simpler fragments to prove that it matches the newly
isolated molecule. The research is well suited for the training of undergraduate
and graduate scientists, and students with diverse backgrounds are recruited to
participate in this project. Santiago Community College has many students who
transfer to the UC system, but they rarely have the opportunity to participate
in research projects. Professor Rychnovsky works with the faculty there to
recruit summer students to take part in this research program, thus providing an
avenue for community college students to develop research skills and
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.