* 2101091
* Excellence in Research: Bending the Curve for Vulnerable Populations: A Data-Analytical and Socio-Technical Decision-Making Framework forSheltering in Hurricane-Pandemics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Mathias, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 616,472.00

Co-occurrence of geophysical hazards with the COVID-19 pandemic has challenged
the resilience of the most vulnerable populations in unique ways. In the midst
of a pandemic, a natural disaster such as a hurricane puts additional strain on
mass care resources in addition to the compounding effects of the two hazards on
the mechanisms of physical and social vulnerability. As a result of social
distancing requirements, the capacities of regular shelter spaces will be
reduced drastically and alternate non-congregate shelters— such as hotel/motels
or renovated facilities— may need to be considered. This Excellence in Research
(EiR) project takes a community-engaged, multidisciplinary approach to address
the pressing research problems for concurrently occurring hurricanes and
pandemics, with a focus on the challenges facing vulnerable populations. The
overall objective of the project is to formulate a new data-analytical framework
that integrates epidemiological models with hurricane management approaches with
a strong understanding of social vulnerabilities. This framework can help public
health and emergency managers make sheltering and resource allocation decisions
while simultaneously minimizing the disease spread. The research team brings
together investigators from engineering and social science with expertise in
statistical learning, infrastructure resilience, disaster risk analysis, and
social vulnerability in order to systematically study the research problems. By
improving the resilience of vulnerable communities in hurricane-pandemics, the
project aims to address a critical national need in disaster preparedness as
well as advance national health, prosperity, and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities will include investigation
of statistical disease spread and outbreak detection methods, integration of
epidemic models with hurricane evacuation scenario analyses to better predict
disease spread and allocate resources in the aftermath of hurricane-pandemics,
and engagement of emergency managers and social workers in vulnerability
analysis through surveys and focus groups. Specifically, the project team will
utilize the following methods: (1) risk-adjusted public health surveillance
methods to devise targeted pandemic containment and sheltering plans of
vulnerable populations, (2) network-based epidemic models to understand how
mixing of populations during sheltering operations affect disease transmissions
and to make forecasts of the size and timing of new infections, (3) network
interdiction models to explore the impacts of pandemic-induced disruptions on
geographically dispersed shelters and to determine the optimal assignments of
shelters and resource allocations in response to emerging disease outbreaks, and
(4) integrated qualitative and quantitative methods with active stakeholder
participation to gather key information on the needs of vulnerable groups and
enable definition of vulnerability indicators specific to hurricane-pandemics.
Furthermore, the research will contribute to the multi-disciplinary education
and technical training of under-represented minority students and producing
advanced-degree HBCU graduates better prepared to enter the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.