* 2101224
* Variational Analysis and Hydrodynamics of Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Changyou Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 266,679.00

The questions that will be studied as part of this project are not only
extremely challenging mathematically but also have close connections to and
important applications in other fields, including complex fluid mechanics,
materials science, and engineering (for example, in both the design and control
of optical display devices). The rigorous analysis of certain types of solutions
to the model equations for liquid crystals in either the static or the dynamic
regime can predict the formation and structure of defects, allow researchers to
better understand turbulence phenomena, and justify both experimental and
computational studies by applied scientists. The questions will also be
integrated into the training of graduate students, and the results will be
disseminated through a research monograph aimed at researchers in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical side of the project consists of three
parts: 1) Ericksen-Leslie system modeling the hydrodynamics of nematic liquid
crystals; 2) Phase transition problems on isotropic and nematic phases and
liquid crystal droplets; and 3) Fractional harmonic map heat flows between
manifolds. In the first part, the principal investigator and his collaborators
will investigate the (Lagrangian-averaged) Ericksen-Leslie system, which is a
dissipative system strongly coupling the forced Navier-Stokes equation (with
Lagrangian-average) for the underlying fluid and the evolution for the
orientation director fields for liquid crystal molecules (a transported harmonic
map heat flow). The aim is to establish both existence and partial regularity of
global Leray-Hopf type solutions for any arbitrarily large initial data. In the
second part of the project, the Gamma-convergence theory will be used to study
the sharp interface limit problem of minimizers to a singularly perturbed
Ericksen functional of liquid crystals with variable degrees of orientation;
another goal is to establish Gamma-limit results for their corresponding
gradient flows, that is, the mean curvature flow of interfaces coupled with the
generalized harmonic map heat flow for the director fields in the bulk regions.
The existence and uniqueness of minimal configurations of energy functionals
describing liquid crystal droplets will also be investigated. The third part of
the project is concerned with the study of the gradient flow of nonlocal energy
functionals of maps between manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.