* 2101906
* Modular Forms, Combinatorial Generating Functions, and Hypergeometric Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Holly Swisher, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2024
* USD 211,490.00

The branch of mathematics called number theory evolved out of the study of
integers and integer-valued functions. One of the beautiful things about number
theory is that seemingly simple questions, when deeply investigated, can blossom
into rich and intricate discoveries. The PI will investigate a number of
problems that relate to modular and automorphic forms, which have played a
central role in many major problems in number theory over the last century.
Through this research, the PI will mentor undergraduate research students,
engage PhD students in research, hold a regional number theory conference for
graduate students, utilize and develop practices to build inclusivity in
research mentoring and classroom teaching, and continue collaborations with
numerous professional women researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
investigate relationships between modular forms, harmonic Maass forms, mock
modular forms, and quantum modular forms, which is a major area of study in
modular forms theory. Historically, examples arising from combinatorial
generating functions have been a rich source of varied types of modularity
behavior, and it would be of value to determine a general theory for the
modularity of combinatorial generating functions. The PI will engage in projects
involving modularity of various combinatorial rank generating functions, as well
as inequalities for combinatorial functions related to partition theory and
their moments in order to better understand the role of combinatorial generating
functions in modular forms theory. The PI will also engage in research on
hypergeometric functions of various types, which are an important component of
many areas of mathematics and have applications to algebra, analysis, arithmetic
geometry, combinatorics, mathematical physics, and number theory. Projects of
the PI in this area include Ramanujan-Sato type series and supercongruences
related to arithmetic triangle groups, generalized van Hamme supercongruence
conjectures, and a p-adic theory of hypergeometric functions which may yield
explicit descriptions of p-adic aspects of hypergeometric L-functions. The
projects in the theory of hypergeometric series are designed to strengthen our
understanding of the role of hypergeometric functions in the larger modular and
automorphic forms landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.