* 2101981
* STTR Phase I:  A customized upper extremity telerehabilitation solution with remote therapist interaction and dynamic motor recovery feedback for individuals post stroke
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Mee Eriksson, NEUROTECHR3 INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the quality of life for
individuals suffering arm and hand impairments from stroke, through a medical
device for in-home telerehabilitation that is easy to use, engaging, and
affordable. Every year, ~800,000 people have a stroke in the United States, and
about 65% suffer long-term upper extremity impairments. Sustained and extensive
therapy is often needed to improve and regain the functions of the hand. Many
individuals post-stroke have difficulty accessing rehabilitation due to
transportation, health and mobility issues. This device can potentially reduce
long-term disability in the United States and alleviate the financial burden on
both individuals and society. By integrating the product into physicians’ and
therapists’ workflow, it expands the patient pool that can access
rehabilitation, making it more time- and labor-efficient. It will contribute to
the field of telehealth and promote decentralized health care.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR)
Phase I project will develop a telerehabilitation system that promotes
neuroplasticity for hand and arm motor recovery, to be used in the homes of
individuals with neurological disorders. The objective of this proposal is to
create a beta prototype that provides personalized intense hand and arm
rehabilitation via engaging motion based games. The proposed project includes:
1. enhancing the adaptive algorithms to dynamically adjust the games to an
individual’s needs; 2. developing a Rehabilitation Assessment Protocol by
optimizing the extensive motion tracking capabilities. This provides important
information to clinicians for making rehabilitation plan adjustments, improving
the interventions, and reaching goals faster; 3. developing a HIPAA compliant
data platform for the recommendation system to facilitate encrypted data
streaming and therapist-patient interaction in real-time or offline. This
includes the development of a therapist portal that generates automated progress
reports, allowing them to treat more patients efficiently; 4. conducting a
usability study to evaluate the capabilities of the system from the perspective
of the prescribing therapist. These capabilities of virtual rehabilitation,
remote clinician supervision, and progress tracking offer a cost-effective way
to improve patient outcomes as well as the fiscal viability and profitability
for clinicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.