* 2101670
* Using Natural Language Processing to Inform Science Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Brian Riordan, Educational Testing Service
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 06/30/2025
* USD 363,584.00

Often, middle school science classes do not benefit from participation of
underrepresented students because of language and cultural barriers. This
project takes advantage of language to help students form their own ideas and
pursue deeper understanding in the science classroom. This work continues a
partnership among the University of California, Berkeley, Educational Testing
Service, and science teachers and paraprofessionals from six middle schools
enrolling students from diverse racial, ethnic, and language groups whose
cultural experiences may be neglected in science instruction. The partnership
will conduct a comprehensive research program to develop and test technology
that will empower students to use their ideas as a starting point for deepening
science understanding. Researchers will use a technology that detects student
ideas that go beyond a student's general knowledge level to adapt to a student's
cultural and linguistic understandings of a science topic. The partnership
leverages a web-based platform to implement adaptive guidance designed by
teachers that feature dialog and peer interaction. Further, the platform
features teacher tools that can detect when a student needs additional help and
alert the teacher. Teachers using the technology will be able to track and
respond to individual student ideas, especially from students who would not
often participate because of language and cultural barriers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops AI-based technology to help science
teachers increase their impact on student science learning. The technology is
aimed to provide accurate analysis of students' initial ideas and adaptive
guidance that gets each student started on reconsidering their ideas and
pursuing deeper understanding. Current methods in automated scoring primarily
focus on detecting incorrect responses on test questions and estimating the
overall knowledge level in a student explanation. This project leverages
advances in natural language processing (NLP) to identify the specific ideas in
student explanations for open-ended science questions. The investigators will
conduct a comprehensive research program that pairs new NLP-based AI methods for
analyzing student ideas with adaptive guidance that, in combination, will
empower students to use their ideas as starting points for improving science
understanding. To evaluate the idea detection process, the researchers will
conduct studies that investigate the accuracy and impact of idea detection in
classrooms. To evaluate the guidance, the researchers will conduct comparison
studies that randomly assign students to conditions to identify the most
promising adaptive guidance designs for detected ideas. All materials are
customizable using open platform authoring tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.