* 2101278
* SBIR Phase I:  A Rapid, Sensitive Pathogen Typing and Antibiotic Sensitivity Test for Bloodstream Infections (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Rachel Tinker-Kulberg, Kepley Biosystems Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2021
* USD 255,834.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project would establish a rapid, sensitive pathogen
typing and antibiotic sensitivity test for Bloodstream Infections (BSI) that
could help guide early antibiotic therapy. Timely and accurate diagnosis of BSI
would decrease the incidence of sepsis, as well as unnecessary or inappropriate
antibiotic administration that can contribute to pathogen mutation and
antimicrobial resistance (AMR). The risk of unnecessary or under-prescribed
antibiotics during the COVID-19 pandemic has intensified future AMR threats,
especially given that the incidence of bacterial sepsis occurs in 1 out of 7
COVID-19 inpatients, with a 50% mortality rate. Thus, a rapid, reliable in vitro
diagnostic test for BSI would improve patient outcomes and have a measurable
impact on quality of care, infection control, and overall healthcare
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology for blood stream
infection (BSI) detection and antibiotic susceptibility testing (AST) is rapid,
highly sensitivity, and requires a low specimen volume. The assay would provide
advantages over current standards of care (blood culture; BC), which typically
require 24 to 72-hours to confirm the presence of a BSI. Additionally, this
novel BSI assay does not require complex amplification steps (polymerase chain
reaction; PCR) to detect pathogens. Given sepsis mortality rates increase by
7.6% per hour without appropriate antibiotic administration, septic patient care
and survival demands early screening innovations that quickly and easily type
species and determine AST to guide responsible antibiotic administration. The
delayed results associated with current BSI testing methods hinders effective
antibiotic selection, accuracy and timing. The proposed technology is comprised
of a patent-pending bloodborne pathogen enrichment innovation that combines
functionalized magnetic beads and the unique Limulus Amebocyte Lysate (LAL)
substrate. The assay is built on three principles: (1) LAL contains highly
sensitive proteins capable of detecting cell wall markers on gram-negative
bacteria and fungi; (2) Differential LAL blocking would distinguish fungal and
bacterial infection; and (3) Inclusion of a silkworm larvae plasma would provide
a colorimetric output that detects gram-positive
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.