* 2101049
* Boosting Data Science Teaching and Learning in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* William Finzer, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 3,226,155.00

Data fluency is the ability to navigate the world of data. This includes
understanding the sources of data, structuring data for analysis, interpreting
representations of data, inferring meaning from data, and explaining data and
findings to diverse audiences. Data science is becoming more important as a
career opportunity and a mechanism for addressing complex phenomena in STEM
disciplines. This project addresses a critical need to help middle school
teachers learn to incorporate data science in their teaching. It uses an open-
source platform called the Common Online Data Analysis Platform (CODAP) as a
tool for teachers to learn about data science and develop resources for
students’ learning. We will develop a framework for teachers’ knowledge of data
science teaching and learning. Insights from the project will help develop
effective practices for teaching data science and understanding how students
learn data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in two key
products: a framework for teacher data fluency and a set of resources for
teacher professional learning in data science, including cases of classroom
practice that illustrate teaching and learning progressions in data science and
surface common student roadblocks, materials for site-based Professional
Learning Communities, and professional learning modules that engage teachers in
the kind of data-rich learning called for by science education standards and
STEM education more broadly. The project will include two stages. During stage
one, the project will use a design-based research approach to develop a model of
pedagogical content knowledge for data fluency in middle school. Stage one will
answer the following questions: (1a) What do teachers need to know and be able
to do to support students in becoming data fluent? (1b) What are common student
misconceptions and roadblocks in students’ progress to data fluency? (1c) What
are the core components of professional learning that boost teachers’ data
fluency and their ability to support students becoming data fluent? During stage
two, the project will use a mixed methods approach to study the model’s
implementation. Stage two will address the following questions: (2a) What impact
does professional learning with the core components identified in stage one have
on the opportunities to learn teachers provide to their students and on their
students’ data fluency? (2b) Are the professional learning innovations usable
and feasible for the end users? (2c) In what ways do teachers’ and students’
classroom interactions reflect the model of pedagogical content knowledge
developed in stage one? What evidence supports or refutes the hypothesis about
the knowledge and skills teachers need to support students’ movement to data
fluency? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.