* 2101725
* Extraordinary Engineering Impacts on Society: Seven Decades of Support from the National Science Foundation
* ENG,EFMA
* 02/15/2021,06/30/2024
* David Butler, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cecile Gonzalez
* 06/30/2024
* USD 843,432.00

The National Academy of Engineering (NAE) will conduct a study to identify
significant engineering outcomes and impacts with origins in NSF-funded
activities and their larger effects on society. The study will cover the period
from 1950 to 2020, and it will be informed by broad engagement with engineering
and related communities of stakeholders. The study will be conducted by an ad
hoc committee of the NAE whose members will apply their expertise and experience
in industry leadership, scholarly research, product development, public policy,
and the communication of technology and science to general audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide an analysis of engineering impacts
on U.S. technical, scientific, and economic achievements; increase the
visibility of engineering among diverse audiences; and illuminate the role of
NSF on the engineering research enterprise, the economic strength of the U.S.,
and the well-being of its people. A major goal of this project will be
dissemination to illustrate how engineering impacts our lives and the role of
engineering and engineers in society and the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.