* 2101337
* The function and properties of RNA Polymerase IV in seed development
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Mary Gehring, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,113,507.00

This research investigates the mechanisms that control successful plant seed
development. Plant seeds are fundamental to of all agriculture. Seeds are
complex structures, consisting of a protective seed coat, an embryo, and a
nutritive endosperm. Endosperm is one of the most important tissues in the
biosphere – it provides two-thirds of the calories consumed by humans. Although
endosperm does not pass on any genetic material to the next generation, proper
endosperm development is essential for the formation of viable seeds and the
completion of the flowering plant life cycle. This project focuses on the
contribution of a plant-specific RNA polymerase, RNA Pol IV, to endosperm
development and function. The research will increase fundamental understanding
of endosperm biology and may facilitate the development of plant hybrids. This
project also provides interdisciplinary, cutting-edge training for
undergraduates from groups under-represented in science, graduate students, and
postdocs in genomics, plant biology, epigenetics, biophysics, and
bioinformatics. Teachers will also participate in aspects of the proposed
research, facilitating transfer of the excitement of scientific discovery and
scientific reasoning to their students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endosperm has an
unusual genetic constitution – it is typically triploid, with two maternally-
inherited and one paternally-inherited genomes. RNA Pol IV regulates
transcriptional programs and the balance of expression between maternal and
paternal gene copies in endosperm. It is known that RNA Pol IV is required for
the biogenesis of 24 nucleotide small RNAs. Typically, these small RNAs arise
from transposable elements and other repetitive sequences and direct DNA
methylation to matching genomic regions in a process termed RNA-directed DNA
methylation. DNA methylation is an epigenetic mark that can influence
transcription. However, in endosperm the relationship between Pol IV activity,
small RNAs, DNA methylation, and gene expression profiles is not predictable
based on current understanding of this pathway. The goal of the proposed
research is to determine how, when, and where RNA Pol IV acts to influence gene
transcription and to regulate expression from maternally- and patternally-
derived genomes in Arabidopsis thaliana endosperm. Current thought suggests that
RNA Pol IV mediates conflict between maternal and paternal genomes in the
endosperm. The specific objectives of the research are to determine how RNA Pol
IV activity in endosperm regulates gene expression and to determine the genetic
and molecular basis of antagonistic RNA Pol IV maternal and paternal effects.
Diverse genetic, genomic, biophysical, and developmental biology approaches will
be employed to address these aims. The research activities will provide
substantial new understanding of the epigenetic processes that act before and
after fertilization to mediate parental genetic conflicts and promote seed
viability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by
the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, both in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.