* 2101554
* Dimensions of Success: Transforming Quality Assessment in Middle School Science and Engineering
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2025
* Gil Noam, McLean Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 04/30/2025
* USD 2,036,425.00

This project represents a new approach to quality assessment of K-12 science and
engineering learning experiences. By updating and expanding the Dimensions of
Success (DoS) observation tool initially established for informal science
learning settings to middle school science and engineering classrooms (DoS-
MSSE), the project will create and implement a sustainable and scalable system
of support for teachers who are learning how to implement the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS) Framework for K-12 effectively and equitably. The
project’s goals are as follows. (1) Develop and test the DoS-MSSE observation
tool, including alignment to the NGSS and equity, to ensure scores are valid and
reliable across all dimensions. (2) Establish a video scoring method to increase
access to continuous improvement systems of support. (3) Create profiles of STEM
quality for schools and districts to inform policy decisions, professional
development opportunities, practice guidelines, and other efforts. (4) Develop
and implement a training program to certify teachers and staff in the use of the
tool and provide professional development. Extending DoS to middle schools will
support and advancing educational practice by identifying schools’ strengths and
challenges in science and engineering learning, making equity more concrete, and
enhancing school and teacher capacity through established DoS systems of
support. The tool will be developed to assess learning experiences for quality
improvement, not used for accountability or comparison. DoS-MSSE will also
support research and evaluation by providing a validated quality assessment
tool, specific to middle school science and engineering, that is flexible and
can be applied to a variety of proposals and projects, enhancing research
infrastructure. Finally, it will improve the STEM education field by providing
stakeholders with “quality profiles” to guide policy and approaches. By
promoting equitable, high-quality science and engineering learning inside and
outside of school, the expanded DoS framework will strengthen efforts across
sectors and help communities provide the inspiration, knowledge, and skills
youth need to thrive in the workforce and in life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
four years, this project will transform the DoS framework to address multiple
educational priorities for formal middle school settings by: (1) creating a new
domain that aligns to science and engineering practices, disciplinary core
ideas, and cross-cutting concepts from the NGSS/Framework for K-12; (2)
identifying observable and measurable diversity, equity, inclusion, and access
practices (and related indicators, including social-emotional learning and
development) in the context of science and engineering in classrooms, and
further revising rubric criteria. The project will build a validity argument for
DoS-MSSE using established methods for observation protocols, and analyze the
psychometric properties of all dimensions and domains using item-response theory
(IRT) methods (e.g., Many-Faceted Rasch Measurement, to model the data which
will allow for estimation of teachers’ effectiveness, rater severity, and the
difficulty of each dimension). The rubrics will be informed by content experts
and pilot observations; scores will be analyzed across dimensions, observers,
disciplinary domains, and time; and scores will be compared to other data,
including student and teacher self-report and observation scores collected with
other established measures. The project will culminate in a larger-scale
validation study, collecting observational and survey data from three
geographically different school districts (N=30 schools). This effort will
characterize the strength of evidence for indicators of classroom quality and
provide data to identify support needs across districts, schools, and teachers.
Given the ongoing need for remote learning, and the general need to increase
school capacity for non-punitive assessment, the tool will be expanded to
support both live and recorded modes of data collection, establishing a video
scoring method. A training and certification system will be field-tested in the
fourth year of the project to assure accessibility, scalability, and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.