* 2101356
* Supporting Playful Learning in Elementary Mathematics Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Amy Parks, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,206,292.00

Previous research has shown that play is an important vehicle for exploration,
understanding, and learning because play involves many of the same features as
sophisticated disciplinary engagement in mathematics. Despite work documenting
the value of play broadly, little research has directly addressed how play could
be supported or the value of doing so in mathematics classrooms. The purpose of
this project is to investigate play in early elementary math education through a
four-year longitudinal study that documents teacher learning and connects
teacher practice with in-depth qualitative analyses of children over multiple
years. The researchers will partner with kindergarten teachers for three
consecutive years. Teachers will experience professional development where they
will engage in play as learners and learn how to design tasks that incorporate
play. Subsequently, the teachers will implement strategies in their kindergarten
classrooms. The teachers will implement this model for three years, and each
year the project will add new kindergarten teachers. The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The longitudinal design will also support looking at play
in relation to grade level. Teachers will participate in summer professional
development as well as grade-specific video clubs where teachers will observe
and annotate videos of their practice. Similarly, this project will explore
children’s experiences over time by following a cohort of children in classrooms
that integrate play for three consecutive years, and in relation to teachers’
experience by contrasting kindergarteners over consecutive years. In so doing,
this project will develop three in-depth accounts using qualitative methods: 1)
How kindergarten teachers learn to integrate play into their instruction and how
their teaching changes over time; 2) How the task of integrating play changes
with respect to different grades and different content; and 3) How the
relationship that children develop with mathematics might be transformed by
experiencing playful mathematics learning over their early elementary careers.
In this exploratory analysis, the researchers will employ qualitative methods,
including video, video club, and in-class observations and teacher interviews
and analytic methods including emergent coding, and coding schemes from research
on high-quality mathematics teaching. The data collected through this project
will offer insight into children’s trajectories of participation across the
first three years of elementary school and shed light on how children’s
relationship with the discipline of mathematics could be
transformed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.