* 2101101
* Excellence in Research: The evolutionary origins of sex chromosomes in docks and sorrels (Rumex)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Janelle Burke, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 378,678.00

Many plants have both male and female function, but certain groups provide a
dynamic system in which to study the evolution of separate male and female
individuals and its control at the chromosomal level. Docks and sorrels provide
a particularly powerful system for studying the evolutionary development of
these phenomena because two distinct sex chromosome systems are present in this
plant group. Additionally, preliminary evidence suggests that some of these
plants may have an unusual evolutionary reversal from sex chromosome-determined
unisexuality to a loss of sex chromosomes and sex separation. Confirmation of
this pattern by this project would change the way researchers think about the
evolution and formation of these chromosomal arrangements in plants.
Undergraduates from Howard University will participate in this research,
collaborating with a scientist at the National Museum of Natural History, and
researchers will participate in a variety of outreach activities to educate the
general public and Howard University students about the evolution and diversity
of plant sex determination and the projectâ€™s
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heteromorphic sex chromosomes are rare in plants.
Yet, despite this rarity, plants provide a compelling system in which to study
the development of sex determination and its control at the chromosomal level
because in plants, unlike in vertebrate animals, these evolutionary processes
are often relatively recent. Among plant groups, Rumex in particular provides a
unique system for investigating the evolutionary development of these phenomena
because two separate sex chromosome systems are present in the genus. For this
project, the researchers will use next-generation sequencing techniques to
construct a high-quality de novo nuclear genome for one species with a
heteromorphic chromosome system, Rumex acetosa, and lower coverage genome
assemblies for 25 other Rumex species, representing diversity in reproductive
system. With the data generated from this project, the researchers will be able
to unravel the evolutionary origins of complex reproductive systems and
reconstruct sex chromosome structure in the genus. In addition, they will be
able to identify structural variants that have occurred within the evolution of
the chromosomes over time. This award was co-funded by the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities - Excellence in Research Program and the Systematics
and Biodiversity Science cluster in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.