* 2101441
* Measuring the Effectiveness of Middle School STEM-Innovation and Engineering Design Curricula
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Meltem Alemdar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,154,057.00

Inclusion of engineering in the Next Generation Science Standards has led to
increased opportunities for K-12 students to learn engineering related concepts
and skills, and learn about engineering career paths. However, a persistent
challenge is the lack of high-quality, research-based engineering curricular
resources that align with science and math education standards. Further, the
opportunities for K-12 students to also learn about manufacturing and how
manufacturing is related to engineering, math, and science are limited.
Researchers from Georgia Tech have developed a three-year middle school
Engineering and Technology course sequence that introduces students to advanced
manufacturing tools such as computer aided design (CAD) and 3D printing,
incorporates engineering concepts such as pneumatics, robotics and aeronautics,
increases student awareness of career paths, and addresses the concerns of
technical employers wanting workers with problem solving, teamwork, and
communication skills. This DRK-12 Impact Study project will investigate the
effectiveness of STEM-Innovation and Design (STEM-ID) curricula in approximately
29 middle schools, targeting 29 engineering teachers and approximately 5,000
students across middle grades in Georgia. This impact research study will
determine whether STEM-ID courses are equally effective across different
demographic groups and school environments under normal implementation
conditions and whether the courses have the potential to positively impact a
vast number of students around the country, particularly students who have
struggled to stay engaged with their STEM education. It is a critical part of a
larger effort to move the STEM-ID curricula, developed with NSF support, from
the research lab to large-scale practice in schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
facilitate large-scale implementation, the project will transfer all curriculum
and teacher support materials to an online dissemination site, develop just-in-
time teacher support materials to embed within the curriculum, create an online
professional development platform, and conduct professional learning in multiple
areas of the state. The project team will then assess the transferability of the
STEM-ID curricula and identify teacher outcomes that affect the implementation.
They will also examine the generalizability of the curriculum by measuring
student outcomes in STEM academic achievement and on social-emotional scales.
The project’s research questions consider 1) contextual factors that influence
scaling; 2) the fidelity of implementation, curriculum adaptations and
sustainability; 3) the effects of professional development on teachers’
engineering self-efficacy and instructional practices; 4) the effect of
participation on student academic performance in mathematics and science; 5) the
effect of participation on student social-emotional outcomes; and 5) the
relationship between the way STEM-ID is implemented and the student outcomes. To
examine the effects of STEM-ID on achievement and achievement growth, the
investigators will use a multilevel growth model and mediation analysis to
explore if the intervention’s effect on achievement was mediated by students’
engagement, academic self-efficacy, and/or interest in STEM. Additionally,
drawing upon Century and Cassata’s Fidelity of Implementation framework (FOI),
they will examine the array of factors that influence implementation of the
STEM-ID curricula across diverse school settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.