* 2101769
* Zeros and Moments of L-Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexandra Florea, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 230,991.00

This award is in the area of analytic number theory, focusing on the study of
L-functions, which play a central role in the field. L-functions are
generalizations of the Riemann zeta function, which encodes important
information about the distribution of prime numbers. More generally, L-functions
package information about important arithmetic objects (such as the rank of an
elliptic curve or the class number) which are of great interest. This project
aims to develop new tools in the study of L-functions, particularly by focusing
on their zeros and their central values, with the hope of extracting arithmetic
information. The investigator will advise PhD students and provide mentorship to
students coming from groups that are underrepresented in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will study moments and ratios of
L-functions in families, both in the number field and in the function field
setting. The final goal is that of understanding the mechanism through which
lower-order terms in the moment asymptotics work and the structure of each
family. Another theme of the project is studying zeros of L-functions in
families, focusing on obtaining vanishing and non-vanishing results. The methods
employed will be analytic number theory techniques, including use of functional
equations, summation formulas, exponential sums, sieve theory ideas and random
matrix theory inspired insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.