* 2101665
* Collaborative Research: Developing and Researching K-12 Teacher Leaders Enacting Anti-bias Mathematics Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Eva Thanheiser, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2025
* USD 408,060.00

There is increased recognition that engaging all students in learning
mathematics requires an explicit focus on anti-bias mathematics teaching.
Teachers, even with positive intentions, have biases, causing them to treat
students differently and impacting how they distribute students’ opportunities
to learn in K-12 mathematics classrooms. Research is needed to examine models of
mathematics teacher professional development that explicitly addresses bias
reduction. The goal of this project is to study the design and development of
community-centered, job-embedded professional development for classroom teachers
that supports bias reduction. The project team will partner with three school
districts serving racially, ethnically, linguistically, and socio-economically
diverse communities, for a two-year professional development program. The aim is
to reduce bias through: analyzing and designing mathematics teaching with
colleagues, students, and families to create classrooms and schools based on
community-centered mathematics; engaging in anti-bias teaching routines; and
building relationships with parents, caretakers, and community members. The
project team will study teacher leader professional development, including the
professional development model, framework, and tools, along with what teacher
leaders across district contexts and grade-levels take up and use in their
instructional practice. This will potentially have wider implications for
supporting more equitable mathematics teaching and leadership. Project
activities, resources, and tools will be shared with the broader community of
mathematics educators and researchers for use in other contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this two-phase, design based research project
is to iteratively design and research teacher leaders’ (TLs) participation in
community-centered, job-embedded professional development and investigate their
subsequent impact on classrooms, schools, and districts. The project builds on
the existing Math Studio professional development model to create a Community
Centered Math Studio, integrating the Anti-bias Mathematics Education Framework
into the work. The project seeks to understand how the professional development
model supports the development of teacher leaders' knowledge, dispositions, and
practices for teaching and leading anti-bias mathematics education, and how
teachers' subsequent classroom practice can cultivate students' mathematical
engagement, discourse, and interests. The project will measure aspects of
teacher knowledge and classroom practice by integrating existing classroom
observation rubrics and STEM interest surveys to assess the impact on teacher
classroom practice and student outcomes. The project will engage 12 TLs and
approximately 60 additional teachers working with those TLs in two years of
professional development using the Community Centered Math Studio Model to
support anti-bias mathematics teaching. Data will be collected for all teachers
related to their participation in the professional learning, with six teachers
being followed for additional data collection and in-depth case studies. The
project's outcomes will contribute to theories of how TLs build adaptive
expertise for teaching and leading to reduce bias in classrooms, departments,
schools, and districts. In addition, the project will contribute new and adapted
research instruments on anti-bias teaching and leading. The research outcomes
will add to the growing research base that describes the nature of equitable
mathematics teaching in K-12 classrooms and increases access to meaningful
mathematics for students, teachers, and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.