* 2101961
* Multiscale Mechanisms of Dissolution and Reactivity of Calcium Aluminosilicate Glasses: Towards Rational Design of Low-Carbon Cement Substitutes
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Prannoy Suraneni, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 04/30/2024
* USD 431,614.00

Cement, the binding agent of concrete, is the most widely used human-made
material worldwide and is responsible for about 5 percent of global carbon
emissions. Replacing cement in concrete has therefore emerged as one of the most
effective strategies to mitigate the environmental impact of the concrete
industry. The aim of this project is to formulate physics-based guidelines,
using computer simulations and experimental testing, to advance the design of
low-carbon cement substitute materials. Currently available low-carbon cement
substitutes exhibit slow reactivity, and their availability continues to decline
as the key supplier industries are phasing out for environmental reasons. The
ability to predict and design the reactivity of low-carbon cement substitutes
remains limited because of the poor understanding of the basic mechanisms that
govern these reactions. This research aims to provide fundamental insight into
the multiscale mechanisms that govern the reactivity of calcium aluminosilicate
glasses, which are the main reactive phases in cement substitute materials. A
comprehensive outreach plan developed in collaboration with local non-profit
partners will also be implemented. The focus of the outreach plan is to promote
scientific literacy and environmental leadership among K-12 students, especially
those from underserved communities and underrepresented minorities in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the dissolution and reactivity of calcium aluminosilicate
glasses as a function of glass structure and composition. The research will
combine a multiscale framework based on density functional theory, molecular
dynamics, and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, together with glass
characterization, dissolution measurements, and reactivity testing. This hybrid
approach will bridge the gap between molecular-level understanding of glass
reactivity and macroscopic reactivity measured in experiments. This research
will result in the following outcomes: (1) full characterization of the
reactivity spectrum of calcium aluminosilicate glasses at the molecular level,
(2) fundamental understanding of the mechanisms that govern the dissolution
behavior of calcium aluminosilicate glasses at the mesoscale, and (3)
comprehensive understanding of the relationship between glass
structure/composition, dissolution, and reactivity for a wide range of glass
compositions. The findings from this work will shed light into the reactivity of
disordered materials, which has broad cross-disciplinary applications, and will
pave the way for the rational design of highly reactive low-carbon cement
substitutes, a key step towards sustainable concrete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.