* 2101214
* Decadal Regime Shifts in the Pacific Ocean: Mechanisms, Hydroclimatic Imprints, and Predictability
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Richard Seager, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2024
* USD 871,446.00

A map of the difference in Pacific sea surface temperature (SST) between two
decades might show a wedge-shaped region of relatively warm sea surface
temperatures (SSTs) extending west and toward the equator from the coasts of
North and South America, covering much of the tropical Pacific and flanked by
cold SSTs in the higher latitudes of both hemispheres. This pattern and its
negative, with a wedge of colder SSTs spanning the tropical Pacific, account for
a large fraction of Pacific decadal SST variability, referred to as PDV. The PDV
pattern is of interest due to its association with prolonged periods of drier
and wetter conditions around the world. In particular more precipitation is
found over the western and central US in decades featuring the warm Pacific
wedge while the cold wedge favors drought. The association of warmer with wetter
and cooler with drier is also found in South America, as might be expected given
the equatorial symmetry of the wedge, and model simulations in which the PDV
pattern is imposed can reproduce the wetter and drier conditions over the
Americas. The PDV pattern has attracted considerable attention but our
understanding of it is limited by the length of the observational record for
SSTs, which goes back roughly a century and a half and thus only captures a
handful of events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award extends our
understanding of the PDV pattern and its connections to continental hydroclimate
using climate reconstructions for the last millennium based on tree rings and
other proxy data. These include drought atlases for North America (The North
American Drought Atlas, or NADA), Monsoon Asia (MADA), South American (SADA),
and Europe and North Africa (the Old World Drought Atlas), among others, as well
as the Paleo-Hydrodynamics Data Assimilation (PHYDA) and Last Millennium
Reanalysis (LMR) products. These proxy-based datasets are complemented by
analysis of simulations from the Paleoclimate Model Intercomparision Project
(PMIP4) and the Community Earth System Model Last Millennium Ensemble (CESM
LME). One question to be addressed is the extent to which the behavior of the
PDV pattern is characterized by abrupt "regime shifts" between its warm and cold
phases. Abrupt shifts are a notable feature of the PDV pattern in the 20th
century but gradual transitions might be more common if a longer period is
examined. Another question is whether the PDV warming and cooling were as
pronounced in earlier centuries as in the 20th century, and whether PDV impacts
on continental hydroclimate were as pronounced. The research also considers the
extent to which the PDV pattern is predictable, a question which is pursued
through additional model simulations including initialized hindcast simulations
from the Decadal Climate Prediction Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
broader impacts due to the societal and ecological impacts of prolonged pluvials
and droughs. Given the similar PDV impacts over North and South America the
project builds research connections to South America by hosting scientists from
Argentina and Chile and convening a week-long workshop offering remote
participation to a an online audience at several South American universities.
The project also hosts a website for the dissemination of results. Project
participants conduct a variety of education and outreach activities including
presentations at the American Museum of Natural History, the Columbia Youth
Summit, and local public schools. In addition, the project supports a graduate
student, thereby supporting workforce development in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.