* 2101127
* Methods to Mitigate Dopant-Induced Disorder in Organic Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Dhandapani Venkataraman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2024
* USD 347,643.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors are promising
materials for low cost, flexible electronics. Their electrical conductivity can
be increased by adding positive or negative charges, a process known as
molecular doping. However, the attraction between the opposite charges in
organic semiconductors is stronger than in conventional semiconductors such as
silicon. This can limit charge transport and reduce device performance. The goal
of this project is to identify the physical properties that can weaken the
attraction between the opposite charges. The PIs will combine experiments with
simulation to understand which experimental parameters impact charge transport.
These studies are important steps for realizing efficient and low-cost organic
electronics such as solar cells, light-emitting diodes, transistors, and
sensors. This work will train students at the frontiers of interdisciplinary and
convergent materials research that combines experiments with computation. K-12
and undergraduate students will be introduced to materials science and the PIs
will create on-line educational modules to teach numerical simulation to
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doping is
required to raise the conductivity of organic semiconductors. However, doping
adversely impacts charge transport through Coulomb interactions between charge
carriers and ionized dopants, which are poorly screened by the low dielectric
constants of organic materials. The goal of this project is to determine the
influence of properties such as dielectric screening, ion-macromolecular
interaction, and dopant distribution on the dopant-induced energetic disorder in
a wide range of conjugated polymers without the need for additional synthetic
modification. These studies test the hypothesis that the dopant-induced
energetic disorder can be reduced by decreasing the Coulomb interaction between
the dopant and the polymer. The investigators will measure two complementary
charge transport parameters, the Seebeck coefficient and electrical
conductivity, over a broad range of carrier concentrations and develop phonon-
assisted hopping model to generate maps of the electronic density of states.
This combined experimental-computation approach allows the investigators to
extract carrier mobility and correlate dopant-induced energetic disorder with
charge transport. The investigators combine space-charge limited current and
Mott-Schottky measurements data with conductivity to validate the calculated
mobility. These studies represent a significant and transformative step forward
in the physical explanation of charge transport in doped conjugated polymers and
providing structural design criteria to improve their performance. The
investigators are training and mentoring a diverse next generation of chemists
and materials scientists, performing outreach activities to introduce materials
science to students across levels, and disseminating the hopping transport
simulation tool on-line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.