* 2101908
* Collaborative Research: Digitization TCN: Extending Anthophila research through image and trait digitization (Big-Bee)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Naomi Pierce, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 177,103.00

Declining populations of bees impact plant-pollinator interactions in both
natural and agricultural systems. While bees and other insects pollinate most
wild plants, and are critical to sustain a large proportion of global food
production, they are decreasing in both numbers and diversity. Our understanding
of the factors driving these declines is limited because we lack sufficient data
on the distribution of bee species, and on the behavioral and anatomical traits
that may make them either vulnerable or resilient to human-induced environmental
changes, such as habitat loss and climate change. Fortunately, wild bees have
been collected by researchers and deposited in natural history collections for
over 100 years, retaining a wealth of associated attributes that can be
extracted from specimen images. This project will digitally capture data and
images from these historic specimens, develop tools to measure bee traits from
these images, and generate a comprehensive bee trait and image dataset to
measure changes through time. This will increase our understanding of specific
traits that put bee species at risk of decline - a critical need for both
sustaining our agricultural economy and the conservation of our natural
resources. In addition, the large image datasets created by this project can be
used for new artificial intelligence identification tools that will help improve
our future pollinator observation and monitoring
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Big-Bee Thematic Collection Network (Big-Bee
TCN) will create over one million high-resolution 2D and 3D images of bee
specimens, representing over 5,000 worldwide bee species, including all of the
major pollinating species of the United States. The Big-Bee network includes 13
institutions and partnerships with US government agencies. Novel mechanisms for
sharing image datasets will be developed and datasets of bee traits will be
available through an open data portal, the Bee Library, for research and
education. The Big-Bee project will engage the general public in research
through community science via crowdsourcing trait measurements and data
transcription from images. In addition, training and professional development
for natural history collection staff, researchers, and university students in
data science will be provided through the creation and implementation of
workshops focusing on bee traits and species identification. All data resulting
from this award will be shared with and publicly available through the national
digitized biocollections resource, iDigBio.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.