* 2101467
* Pollen-stigma interactions: events and players that set off the path to reproductive success
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2025
* Alice Cheung, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2025
* USD 950,000.00

Pollination in flowering plants is the requisite process for fertilization. The
production of seeds and fruits, preservation of plant species and generating
diversity all rely on pollination success. This project focuses on understanding
how pollen and stigma, the pollen receptive surface on the pistil (the female
reproductive organ) interact to initiate pollination. The first event on the
stigma is for the pollen to germinate, thereby generating a pollen tube which
penetrates the stigma and elongates inside the pistil to deliver sperm to the
egg. The mechanisms underlying the activation of dormant pollen grains are
poorly understood. The process requires the pollen cytoplasm to distribute to a
small area where a pollen tube emerges from the grain and grows into the pistil
to start a fruitful journey. This project focuses on obtaining a molecular
understanding of these earliest pollination events. Water transfer between the
stigma and pollen to activate the pollen grain, cytoplasmic reorganization in
the pollen to engineer the tube extrusion and tube growth process, and the
enzymes that modify the pollen and stigma cell walls to facilitate tube
extrusion and its penetration of the pistil will be examined for their
contribution to the success of the early pollination events. The project will
train undergraduates, Master’s, Ph.D. students, and post-graduate level
scientists, feeding the pipeline for the research workforce and future leaders
in science. A collaboration with Girls Inc. of the Valley (Holyoke MA) will
bring high school girls for a summer experience centered on the project research
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important advances have been made in recent years in
the molecular and cellular understanding of the reproduction process in
flowering plants, especially in how the sperm-bearing pollen interact with
tissues in the pistil to enable fertilization to produce seeds. Important but
under-explored are the earliest events which occur upon pollen landing on the
receptive surface of the pistil, the stigma, to set off the pollination process.
This project focuses on obtaining a molecular and cellular understanding of
these early events. Specifically, the project explores how the stigmatic papilla
cells mobilize water from the stigma to hydrate a dry and dormant pollen grain
to activate germination, which involves the extrusion of a polarized outgrowth
from the grain and its development into a pollen tube. It also examines how the
pollen grain mobilizes its cell surface signaling and cytoplasmic components to
orchestrate pollen tube extrusion and penetration of the stigma. Considerable
cell wall degradation and modification activities occur in both the pollen and
the pistil to enable the germination and tube growth process. Therefore, how
cell wall degradative enzymes contribute to these processes will also be
examined. The research uses Arabidopsis as the model system and relies on
combined molecular, transgenic, cell biological and biochemical approaches. The
project will provide students from undergraduate to postdoctoral levels with a
broad range of scientific knowledge and experience in research approaches that
can be broadly applied. A summer workshop related to plant reproduction will be
developed for high school students from neighboring inner cities. The Cellular
Dynamics and Function cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences is co-funding this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.