* 2101791
* Modular Representation Theory and Categorification with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexander Kleshchev, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2024
* USD 270,540.00

Groups are mathematical objects arising in the study of symmetry. The main foci
of this project are some of the most fundamental and universal examples of
groups: symmetric groups, which arise as symmetries of finite sets, and general
linear groups, which arise as symmetries of finite-dimensional vector spaces.
Representation theory studies groups via their actions on other mathematical
objects, such as vector spaces. Very informally, representations of a group are
snap-shots of the group taken from different directions. In the past few years,
the idea of categorification has become very important and has led to the
development of higher representation theory. This involves actions of groups on
higher mathematical structures called categories, utilizing not only the
relations between these structures (functors) but also relations between the
relations (natural transformations). In particular, Khovanov-Lauda-Rouquier
(KLR) algebras encode higher symmetries underlying a large part of
representation theory, including classical objects like symmetric and general
linear groups. The goal of this project is to further build the theory of these
and other algebras and apply it to improve our understanding of the classical
objects of group theory. The research in this project has potential future
broader impacts in computer science and theoretical physics. More directly this
award will have important educational impact through the training of graduate
students and mentoring young researchers in this area. In more detail, this
project is concerned with several diverse projects in representation theory of
Lie algebras, finite groups, and related objects such as Hecke algebras, quantum
groups, Schur algebras and KLR algebras. Our perspective draws on recent
advances in higher representation theory, namely categorification, with various
diagrammatically defined monoidal categories and 2-categories playing a
prominent role. On the other hand, many applications are to classical problems
in representation theory such as block theory of finite groups and Schur
algebras as well as structure theory of finite groups. We will study local
description of blocks of Schur algebras up to derived equivalence, cuspidal
algebras for KLR algebras, thick Heisenberg categorification, super Kac-Moody
2-categories and applications to blocks of double covers of symmetric groups,
homological properties of KLR algebras, decomposition numbers, and irreducible
restrictions from quasi-simple groups to subgroups. The project will have
applications to other areas of mathematics including finite group theory (and
its applications), Lie theory, combinatorics, representation theory, knot theory
and category theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.