* 2101983
* Rapid Collaborative Proposal: Characterization, Quantification, and Transport of Incidental Nanomaterials from Wildland-Urban Fires in Surface Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Mohammed Baalousha, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 10/31/2023
* USD 180,016.00

Fire is a natural process in many ecosystems worldwide, however it is also a
serious environmental concern with implications human and environmental health.
Fire activity and associated environmental impacts are projected to increase
globally as a result of climate and societal changes. On August 15th, 2020, a
large lightning storm moved across the western United States igniting many
wildfires. These fires have burned more than 8 million acres of land and more
than 10,000 urban structures in 12 states with California being the most
impacted. Fire liberates metals stored in plants, soils, and structural
materials, likely in the form of incidental nanomaterials. This Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) Collaborative project will collect time-sensitive samples and
data related to the 2020 fire season. Researchers at California State
University, Chico, California will collect ash and water samples and will
perform water analysis. Researchers at the University of South Carolina,
Columbia, South Carolina will perform incidental nanomaterial analysis. This
research will examine the composition, properties, transformations, and
mobilization of fire-generated incidental nanomaterials in surface water
receiving runoff from burned areas. This project will support the training of a
postdoctoral fellow. Methods, data, and tools generated in this project will be
integrated into existing undergraduate and graduate curricula at the University
of South Carolina and California State University. Broader impacts to society
will result from an improved understanding of pollutants generated by wildland-
urban fires and their potential impacts on water resources. Such information can
lead to better management strategies of water resources during and after
wildland-urban fires to protect environmental and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2020 fire season is one of the worst on record
in the western United States, affecting more than 8 million acres of land and
destroying more than 10,000 urban structures. The combustion of vegetation and
structural materials in the wildland-urban interface liberates metals stored in
these materials, likely in the form of incidental nanomaterials in residual and
transported fire ash. Overland runoff mobilizes these incidental nanomaterials
to downstream surface waters, causing environmental and human health concerns.
This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) Collaborative project will collect time-
sensitive samples and data related to the 2020 fire season. Researchers at the
California State University will collect ash and water samples and will perform
water analysis. Researchers at the University of South Carolina will perform
incidental nanomaterial analysis. This research seeks to answer the following
fundamental questions: 1) what metal-based incidental nanomaterials are formed
due to the burning of different forests and structures? 2) what transformations
do incidental nanomaterials undergo following rainfall events? and 3) will
incidental nanomaterials persist in the environment? The proposed research will
provide a comprehensive understanding of fire-formed incidental nanomaterials by
generating complementary data on incidental nanomaterial size, shape,
composition, and phase. These data will be generated by adopting a state-of-the-
art multi-method approach to characterize the properties of incidental
nanomaterials including single particle–inductively coupled plasma–time of
flight–mass spectroscopy, high resolution-transmission electron microscopy,
X-ray diffraction, X-ray absorption spectroscopy, and Mössbauer spectroscopy.
The broader impacts of the proposed research include: 1) identifying novel
research questions in the area of wildland-urban fire-borne contamination; 2)
providing data to other fields such as public health to improve understanding of
diseases linked to fire incidental nanomaterial exposure; 3) providing data that
can be used to develop and validate incidental nanomaterials fate models; 4)
providing data to public utilities such as drinking water treatment plants to
improve their treatment design to ensure safe drinking water treatment, and 5)
integrating the methods, data, and tools generated in this proposed research
into existing undergraduate and graduate curricula at the University of South
Carolina and California State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.