* 2101102
* Excellence in Research: Ultrasensitive Electromagnetic Field Detectors Based on Quantum Defects in 3C Silicon Carbide and Cubic Boron Nitride
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Birol Ozturk, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2024
* USD 573,018.00

Quantum science has attracted extensive attention in the recent years due to its
potential in revolutionizing computing, telecommunication, and sensing. Native
or intentional defects in wide bandgap semiconductors with spin dependent
electronic transitions have demonstrated the ability to produce quantum
communication, computing and sensing systems that operate at room temperature.
In this project, we will study the potential of using defects in 3C silicon
carbide and cubic boron nitride (both wide bandgap materials) for the
fabrication of ultrasensitive electromagnetic field detectors. These
ultrasensitive detectors can be used in a multitude of versatile applications
including brain signal monitoring, GPS-free navigation, and Quantum Light
Detection and Ranging (LIDAR). Our initial focus will be on electric field
detectors. The literature on quantum sensing of properties 3C-Silicon (the cubic
modification of silicon carbide) and cubic boron nitride is sparse or
nonexistent. We anticipate that this will significantly contribute to the study
of solid-state spins by demonstrating the feasibility of using 3C SiC and cBN in
ultrasensitive electric and magnetic field detection. SiC has well-established
industrial processes which is expected to enable fast large-scale manufacturing
of the proposed devices. Cubic Boron Nitride is an emerging ultra-wide bandgap
material, has similar mechanical strength as diamond and can be doped n or p
type. This project will also have a major impact in the training of
underrepresented minority undergraduate and graduate students at Morgan State
University (MSU), K12 students and the public on the concepts and applications
of quantum information science. The proposed project will improve the existing
research and STEM training infrastructure at MSU significantly by complementing
the establishment of a quantum materials research center and a new Ph.D. program
in Materials Science with a focus on quantum materials. The findings of the
project will be broadly disseminated through publications, conference
presentations, and seminars to enhance scientific and technological
understanding of ultrasensitive electric and magnetic field detection using
defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the objectives in the proposed
project, photonic crystal (PhC) structures with high quality (Q) factors
(&gt;10^3) and small mode volumes will be simulated, designed and fabricated
around quantum defects in order to achieve room temperature operation by
enhancing PhC cavity resonance coupled defectâ€™s Zero Phonon Line (ZPL) emission.
3C-Silicon carbide material grown on Silicon and purchased from commercial
vendors as well as cBN material fabricated on diamond using our in-house growth
capability will be used in this project. After growth the defects in wide
bandgap materials will be characterized with photoluminescence (PL) and
Optically Detected Magnetic Resonance (ODMR). These materials will be fabricated
into detectors of our design. The fabricated detectors will be able to detect
electric fields in the millivolt m^-1 Hz^-0.5 range and magnetic fields with a
sensitivity of nanotesla Hz^-0.5.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.