* 2101672
* The Crotonyl-CoA-dependent NADH:ferredoxin Oxidoreductase from M. Elsdenii
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Russ Hille, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Russ Hille from the University of California, Riverside
will examine the behavior of a flavoprotein known as EtfAB/bcd. Flavins, such as
the vitamin riboflavin, play important roles in the generation and utilization
of metabolic energy by mediating the transfer of electrons from one biological
site to another. So-called bifurcating flavoproteins are a class of
flavoproteins containing multiple such sites in addition to their flavins. In
bifurcation, electron pairs are delivered one electron at a time to two
different sites. This provides a viable means by which energetically uphill and
downhill reactions can be coupled together greatly increasing the reducing power
of the electrons. The extraordinary energetics of bifurcation are well
characterized, but little is known regarding the rates of this process and the
mechanism, the paths that the electrons follow through the flavoprotein
molecules. The proposed work will lead to a deeper chemical understanding of the
process of electron bifurcation, a fundamentally important and evolutionarily
ancient mechanism of energy conservation in living organisms. It will also lead
to the identification of the defining properties of the electron-transfer
processes that are specific to bifurcation. The work will provide graduate
students with extensive training in a variety of spectroscopic and reaction rate
measurements and is integrated into an outreach program to provide high school
teachers, students and college undergraduates with research experience in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypotheses of the proposed work are
that: (1) there is a kinetic as well as a thermodynamic aspect to bifurcation
that is central to its physiological function; and (2) that
protonation/deprotonation events play a critical role in modulation the electron
transfer events associated with bifurcation. The experimental approach will
involve a range of rapid reaction kinetic studies of the crotonylCoA-dependent
NADH:ferredoxin oxidoreductase, ETF/bcd, from the bacterium Megasphaera
elsdenii, focusing on the reduction of the system by NADH and its reoxidation by
the high-potential acceptor crotonyl-CoA and the low-potential acceptor,
ferredoxin. The reactions will be followed by a combination of stopped-flow
spectroscopy and freeze-quench EPR (electron paramagnetic resonance)
spectroscopy. The experimental approach taken includes a wide range of rapid
kinetic techniques, including solvent isotope studies to probe the mechanism of
bifurcation. The goal is to probe the elements of electron-transfer processes
involving flavin chemistry that are intrinsic to bifurcation. It is hoped that
these studies will provide fundamental insights into one of the most
evolutionarily ancient mechanisms for energy conservation in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.