* 2101696
* III: Small: DeepRep: Unsupervised Deep Representation Learning for Scientific Data Analysis and Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chaoli Wang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 515,944.00

Learning features or representations from data is a longstanding goal of data
mining and machine learning. In scientific visualization, feature definitions
are usually application-specific, and in many cases, they are vague or even
unknown. Representation learning is often the first and crucial step toward
effective scientific data analysis and visualization (SDAV). This step has
become increasingly important and necessary as the size and complexity of
scientific simulation data continue to grow. For more than three decades, manual
feature engineering has been the standard practice in scientific visualization.
With the thriving of AI and machine learning, leveraging deep neural networks
for automatic feature discovery has emerged as a promising and reliable
alternative. The overarching goal of this project is to develop DeepRep, a
systematic deep representation learning framework for SDAV. The outcomes will
provide a paradigm shift to best represent scientific data in the abstract
feature space, helping scientists better understand various physical, chemical,
and medical phenomena such as those from climate, combustion, and cardiovascular
applications. This project thus serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's
mission: to promote the progress of science; to advance the national health,
prosperity, and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SDAV mainly deals with unlabeled
data. Therefore, the project team will investigate unsupervised learning
techniques and explore their uses in learning abstract, deep, and expressive
features. The proposed framework considers a broad range of inputs, including
three-dimensional scalar and vector data and their visual representations (i.e.,
line, surface, and subvolume). Specifically, the team will study different
unsupervised deep representation learning techniques, including distributed
learning, disentangled learning, and self-supervised learning. The DeepRep
project aims to demonstrate their utility in various subsequent SDAV tasks, such
as dimensionality reduction, data clustering, representative selection, anomaly
detection, data classification, and data generation. The proposed research
includes four primary tasks: (1) autoencoders for distributed learning of
volumetric data and their visual representations, (2) graph convolutional
networks for representation learning of surface data to support node-level and
graph-level operations, (3) ensemble data generation from independent features
via disentangled learning, and (4) self-supervised solutions for robust data
representation via contrastive learning. Furthermore, the team will perform
comprehensive objective and subjective evaluations using multilevel metrics to
evaluate the framework's effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.