* 2101425
* Doing the Math with Paraeducators: Enhancing and Expanding and Sustaining a Professional Development Model in PreK to Grade 3 Math Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Brandon Sorge, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,063,663.00

Paraprofessionals (often referred to as paras) in educational settings have
critical roles in supporting student learning in classrooms, particularly in the
elementary grades where paras are much more prevalent. Yet little is known about
the professional needs of paraeducators and how they can be supported in
learning to teach mathematics in the early elementary grades. This project
builds on exploratory work engaging in mathematics professional learning with
paras to enact and study a professional learning experience with paraeducators
focused on teaching and learning mathematics in grades PreK-3. This work will
take place in over the course of two years in two different large urban school
districts in different parts of the country. This model includes professional
development experiences for paras and the teaches with which they work, support
for teachers to improve their guidance for paras as they work together to
support mathematics learning, professional learning support for school-based
mathematics coordinators, and the study of the model's effectiveness through
surveys, interviews, and classroom observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project begins with the revision of the professional development model based on
prior exploratory work, expanding the model to include aspects geared towards
teacher and district-based support as well as strengthening the professional
learning opportunities for paras. This phase of the project will develop
measurement tools to assess the impact of the para and teacher learning,
including the use of surveys to assess the practice and confidence of paras in
implementing ambitious mathematics instruction, observation tools to measure
para instructional behaviors, individual and focus group interviews to provide
paras and their teacher mentors opportunities to describe their learning in
depth, and analytical strategies related to the professional development
artifacts. The second year will implement the model with 20 paras and their
mentor teachers, along with 8 district-based mathematics facilitators. The
second year of the project will engage an additional 20 new paras in each of the
two districts involved with the project. The final year will focus on data
analysis and the development of a generalizable model for para-teacher mentor
professional development in mathematics. Dissemination of such a model is likely
to have a meaningful impact on professional learning opportunities for this
traditionally undersupported population and will support stronger mathematics
outcomes for PreK-3 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.