* 2101726
* New Frontiers of Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Evgueni Tevelev, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 272,000.00

Algebraic geometry is one of the most advanced and multifaceted areas of modern
mathematics. The objects of study are algebraic varieties: shapes defined by
systems of polynomial equations. Polynomial constraints on variables are
commonplace both in mathematics and in applications ranging from physics, where
varieties are used to describe configuration spaces (and even the shape of the
universe!), to computer science and statistics. The Principal Investigator's
research focuses on describing algebraic varieties in a concise coordinate-free
way that reveals hidden essential features of their geometry. The projects
connect many different areas: birational geometry, derived categories,
arithmetic geometry, mathematical physics, toric geometry, deformation theory,
and transformation groups. The research program contributes to the development
of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through recruiting, training,
and supervising of graduate and undergraduate students, including those from
underrepresented groups, and providing resources for their research, teaching,
and professional development. In particular, the project includes two projects
designed for summer REUs in Algebraic Geometry. The Principal Investigator will
organize and lecture at conferences, professional development events, and summer
schools for graduate students and junior researchers including AGNES (Algebraic
Geometry Northeastern Series), and schools in Latin America attended by U.S.
graduate students. The research will advance inter-university and international
cooperation. This research program includes collaborations with high energy
physicists as well as software development of interest to mathematical
cryptography (arithmetic of elliptic curves). The Principal Investigator will
continue to develop graduate and undergraduate courses, including courses
designed to introduce the broader public to mathematics and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the earlier work of the
Principal Investigator (PI) on a broad range of foundational topics in algebraic
geometry, including tropical compactifications, birational geometry of moduli
spaces of curves and surfaces, compactifications of moduli spaces and derived
categories of moduli spaces. The PI will advance modern algebraic geometry on
several important frontiers: (1) Applications of derived categories to geometry,
cohomology and K-theory of algebraic varieties, including moduli spaces of
algebraic curves and vector bundles, toric varieties and Mori Dream Spaces. (2)
A new interface between birational and arithmetic geometry exploring effective
cones of algebraic surfaces via arithmetic geometry of curves. (3) A novel
geometric interpretation and generalization of leading singularities of
scattering amplitudes of elementary particles. (4) Development of kinematics,
scattering equations and propagation of their solutions. (5) A new class of
polyhedral approximations of geometric varieties via spherical tropicalization
with the potential to develop new compactification techniques. (6) A new
approach to parametrizing moduli spaces of surfaces near the stable limit using
deformations of exceptional collections of vector bundles and semi-orthogonal
decompositions for Q-Gorenstein degenerations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.