* 2101217
* COVID Connects Us: Nurturing Novice Teachers’ Justice Science Teaching Identities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* David Campbell, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,492,218.00

This project relates to two contemporary concerns in the US: the devastation
felt by racial and ethnic minoritized communities during the COVID-19 pandemic;
and the challenges states face as they strategically navigate the adoption of
the Next Generation Science Standards. These concerns necessitate a shift in the
culture of science classrooms to align with the following findings from current
research on learning. (a) Students are best motivated when they need to explain
real world events and solve problems that are meaningful to them. (b) When
students develop explanations of these real-world events or societal problems
and are allowed to participate in creative ways, they can develop deep
understandings of core science ideas similar to that of scientists and
engineers. (c) Students need to develop a critical lens about what science is
studied, how it is studied, and who is left out of what is studied to understand
how science is impacted by issues of power and to engage in more just forms of
participation. Realizing these cultural transformations in science classrooms
will require teachers to develop professional identities that are justice-,
student- and culture-centered. In COVID Connects Us, the project team
investigates the challenges of learning how to support justice-centered
ambitious science teaching (JuST). The project team will partner with networks
of secondary science teachers as they first implement a common unit aimed at
engaging youth in science and engineering practices in ways that are culturally-
sustaining, focused on explanation-construction and intentionally anti-
oppressive. The teachers will then use their shared experiences to revise future
instruction in ways that are justice-centered and that engage students in the
ways research suggests is important for their learning.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this three-year project center on developing and
understanding core culture-setting teaching routines that can serve as powerful
footholds to realize cultural shifts in science classrooms. The project team
will collect and analyze teacher narratives to study the impact of two core and
focal teacher supports on participating teachers’ professional identity
development as practitioners of JuST practices. The supports include 1) a
culture setting unit that all teachers will implement on the science of COVID;
and 2) teachers’ engagement in a network of learning communities. During each of
the first two academic years of the project, about 20 learning communities made
up of four teachers in three different sites will engage in design-based
implementation research cycles. These learning communities will collectively
study videos of their teaching and samples of student-work to understand and
address the challenges of JuST practices. Expected contributions of the study
include: (a) a set of JuST routines that teachers find to be effective across
curricular units; (b) exemplar JuST units including, but not limited to, the
initial unit on the science of COVID; (c) research-based findings about how
science educators develop critical consciousness related to disciplinary racism
and practices that support students’ in developing the same; and d) vignettes
and in-depth case studies of teachers’ development of JuST
identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.