* 2101221
* Excellence in Research: Developing Molecular Probes to Study the Brain
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Jill Keith, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 05/31/2024
* USD 600,001.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Jill Keith of Winston-Salem State University is
studying the development of designed chemical probes that have the potential to
yield information about how their molecular structure impacts their recognition
by receptor regions in the brain, which are key to understanding fundamental
neurochemical signaling events, and eventually certain human behaviors. This
project relies upon the use of computational methods to design and then
chemically make probes with the needed properties for studying these important
signaling events, which is envisioned by using the designed molecules as imaging
probes. The physical location of the probes will be provided by their unique
chemical signal upon their selective interaction with chemical receptors.
Successful completion of this project has the potential to offer imaging probes
that may be used to further understand neurochemical pathways linked to learning
and memory. Taking a cue from the NSF BRAIN Initiative, this interdisciplinary,
collaborative research project will focus on fundamental chemistry approaches
that have the potential to help unravel the brain’s complexity, while also
training the next generation of neurochemists, many of whom are individuals from
underrepresented groups. As most students who perform research in the Keith
group are African American women, completion of this project will increase the
number of women and minorities who are trained to perform rigorous fundamental
research in neurochemistry, thereby enhancing a diversified workforce while
sustaining global competitiveness. Further broadening the impacts of the project
is its focus on showing high school and undergraduate students the importance of
team science in a multidisciplinary setting, as well as engaging them in hands-
on experiments with K-12 youth from underrepresented populations in an effort to
encourage them to pursue a science career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate
goal of this project is to synthesize selective chemical probes that may be
important candidates for positron emission tomography (PET) studies of
dopaminergic and cannabinoid receptors/transporters. A hybrid approach will be
used to determine the compounds to be synthesized and evaluated. It is
hypothesized that manipulating the aromatic rings and/or nitrogen group of the
diphenylmethoxypiperidine, that is diphenylpyraline (DPP), will yield compounds
that selectively bind the dopamine transporter (DAT) or cannabinoid-1 receptor
(CB1R). The synthesis, purification, characterization, and biological testing of
diphenylpyraline (DPP) analogs using procedures in Professor Keith's
laboratories will be conducted. Biological testing of these probes will be
performed to determine DPP analogs’ ability to bind to the DAT and/or CB1; the
DAT and CB1 selectivities will also be determined. Additional assessment of the
probes will be conducted, and an iterative approach with "go - no go" criteria
will be used to identify the best candidates for PET probe development.
Importantly, activities associated with this project will strengthen the
existing partnership with Wake Forest School of Medicine (WFSM) faculty who
collaborate with Winston-Salem State University (WSSU) faculty to train WSSU
students in research lab and classroom settings, as well as disseminate their
work through scientific publications and presentations. This partnership is
anticipated to grow the number of student participants who go on to receive
their PhD and is built upon past successes of students from WSSU who received
their advanced degrees from WFSM and other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.