* 2101464
* Stability and Instability in Conservative Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bassam Fayad, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 213,732.00

The theory of dynamical systems seeks to describe the behavior of systems that
evolve with time, such as the motion of planets or of gas particles in the air.
Dynamical systems play an important role in mathematics, as well as having
numerous applications in physics, biology, computer science and other sciences.
Their range of application is growing, and will continue to grow given the
widespread use of mathematical models by scientists and engineers. A modern view
of dynamical systems contains three classes, called elliptic, parabolic and
hyperbolic, depending on the increasing sensitivity to initial conditions of the
system. The principal investigator will study this classification, with
particular interest paid to the interconnections between the three classes and
their interactions with various areas of mathematics and other sciences. The
large span of the project provides rich training opportunities for graduate
students. In addition, there are likely to be successful transfers of
methodologies from one field to another in the theory of dynamical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elliptic dynamics often refers to recurrent behavior in
dynamical systems that is at the other end of the spectrum from chaotic
dynamics. The systems with stable asymptotic behavior that are best represented
by quasi-periodic motions on tori, and which appear for example in KAM theory,
are within elliptic dynamics. But instability is also possible in elliptic
dynamics, due to the so-called Liouville phenomena, where the existence of fast
periodic approximations may be the source of very complex ergodic behavior.
Since chaotic dynamics, that is best represented by hyperbolic dynamical
systems, is associated with exponential growth of orbit complexity, one may
consider slow growth of various characteristics of such complexity as a hallmark
of elliptic dynamics. In between the elliptic and the hyperbolic world lie the
so-called parabolic dynamical systems, that are best represented by unipotent
actions on homogeneous spaces. The polynomial shear or rate of separation
between orbits of these flows makes their ergodic theory very special. The goal
of this project is to push forward the study of these three paradigms, as well
as to explore the interconnections between them. Some main directions are: KAM
stability results beyond the classical theory; robust unstable behavior in
analytic Hamiltonian dynamics; approximation by the conjugation method beyond
its usual limits; extension of Ratner theory to non-algebraic parabolic flows;
developing a KAM rigidity theory for higher rank parabolic actions; developing
limit laws for higher rank hyperbolic actions and exploiting them in a
systematic approach to Diophantine approximation theory; counting problems from
a statistical point of view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.