* 2101121
* Excellence in Research - Collaborative Proposal: Investigation of Quantum Effects and Nanostructures Through Research &amp; Educational Partnership Between NCCU &amp; Howard Univer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Raul Garcia-Sanchez, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 358,169.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum-information science promises
to revolutionize computation and communication. Qubits, the fundamental units of
quantum computation, must retain information long enough to be useful. The
investigators propose to dramatically increase qubit lifetimes by taking
advantage of piezoelectric effects. These couple electrical charge with
mechanical stress in certain materials. The project will enhance cutting-edge
research in nanoscience through a collaboration between researchers in Howard
University and North Carolina Central University, two leading HBCUs. A
combination of theory and modeling with advanced experimental techniques will
provide students with strong training in key frontier areas of quantum computing
and nanoscience and technology. The project will promote and inspire the
education and training of minority and underrepresented undergraduate and
graduate students. It will also enhance the professional development of young
faculty members. This collaboration will also help the recruitment, enrollment,
and retention of STEM students at both institutions. The involvement of
researchers ranging from undergraduates to doctoral students will train a new
generation of minority scientists in key frontier areas of quantum computing and
nanoscience that will impact their everyday
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common
synergistic themes pursued by researchers at both institutions will focus on:
(1) electron tunneling and exciton dynamics phenomena in binary quantum
nanostructures, (2) piezoelectric quantum dot molecules for qubits, (3) charge
dynamics and optical spectroscopy of nanowires and nanoribbons, and (4) the
optical and Raman spectroscopy of graphitic nanomaterials and piezoelectric
quantum dots. The PIs will develop a novel approach for designing qubits for
quantum computers based on excitons in piezoelectric quantum dots that are
expected to have longer entanglement times and higher operating temperatures
than present qubits. Increasing tunneling between nanostructures that is
correlated with entanglement is crucial for quantum computers and for the novel
kind of quantum detectors that the PIs are proposing, which are based on
controlling the tunneling between an analyte and the detectorâ€™s nanostructures
by the changes in the overlap between their densities of states and the change
in the symmetry between them. In order to achieve the proposed objectives, the
PIs will develop new theoretical and modeling approaches to calculate and
simulate the properties of a variety of nanostructures (e.g. quantum dots,
nanowires, nanoribbons, carbon nanotubes, and functionalized graphene) and
employ state-of-the-art novel characterization techniques that include
combinations of Raman spectroscopy, photoluminescence, fast femtosecond
spectroscopy, and contactless charge dynamics spectroscopy in the GHz to THz
range. The proposed research partnership will bring together subject matter
experts in the following niche areas: charge tunneling associated with
nanostructures; quantum dot molecules for novel qubits and quantum computing;
metamaterials and plasmonic physics; and the Raman and laser spectroscopy of
graphitic nanomaterials and piezoelectric quantum dots. The involvement of
researchers ranging from undergraduates to doctoral students will train a new
generation of minority scientists in key frontier areas of quantum computing and
nanoscience that will impact their everyday lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.