* 2101926
* Digitization PEN: Adding a world-class flea collection to the Terrestrial Parasite Tracker network
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Ainsley Seago, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,570.00

Parasitic insects have a global impact on human health, livestock production,
and wildlife conservation. Building robust datasets of parasites’ host
preferences, seasonal activity, and geographic range can help scientists and
public health professionals understand and predict patterns of disease
transmission; however, much of the data needed for these assessments is
accessible only through museum collections. The primary goal of this project is
to extract this data from a world-class collection of fleas and associated
parasites at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History (CMNH). As part of the
Terrestrial Parasite Tracker Thematic Collections Network (TPT TCN), high-
quality specimen images and host/locality data will be captured, digitized, and
shared via public data portals. This will allow entomologists, epidemiologists,
and other researchers to make essential connections between disease vectors and
their host species. In turn, understanding these connections will support future
assessments of economic and health risks from insect-vectored disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Robert Traub flea collection at CMNH is one of the
largest and most meticulously curated collections of mammal parasites in the
world, with 74,897 specimens mounted under glass on 60,596 glass slides with
4,615 associated genitalic dissections. This project will use automated slide
scanning technology developed for pathology laboratory use to capture whole-
slide and specimen images efficiently. These images will then be linked with
digitized host and locality data from both slide labels and Traub’s fieldwork
logs. This project will more than quintuple the Siphonaptera specimen records
for the Terrestrial Parasite Tracker TCN and complete its representation of flea
families. This will represent a valuable dataset and image resource not just for
TPT TCN and epidemiology research, but for systematic research on Siphonaptera
in general. Disseminating this data through the online data portals, including
iDigBio.org, Symbiota Collection of Arthropods Network (SCAN), and the Global
Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF). Broad digital access will enable
researchers and diagnosticians worldwide to access an enormous database of host-
parasite relationships as well as to compare their specimens to high-quality
specimen images with reliable species-level
identifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.