* 2101806
* Moments of Large Families of L-Functions and Related Questions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Vorrapan Chandee, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2024
* USD 93,225.00

One of the most famous conjectures in mathematics is about zeros of the Riemann
zeta function. This interest extends to the study of L-functions, which have
connections with many diverse areas of mathematics such as harmonic analysis,
random matrix theory and probability. In this area, there is a foundational
heuristic that the distribution of values and zeros of L-functions should match
analogous statistics from classical compact groups of random matrices. It has
led to a deep set of conjectures, which remain unresolved at many levels.
Indeed, rigorous proofs of even special cases of these conjectures are almost
non-existent. The proposed research will lead to a better understanding of these
conjectures by proving special cases for certain large families of L-functions
that have previously not been understood in this context. The award will provide
opportunities for research training and collaboration for graduate students and
postdocs. The PI will also use the grant to organize number theory seminars and
mentor students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The aim of
this award is to study statistics involving values and zeros of families of
L-functions. To be precise, the PI will aim to prove new instances of the moment
conjectures for high moments of large families of L-functions, as well as extend
the current knowledge on the distribution of their zeros (e.g. n-level density).
Moreover, attention will be paid to certain attractive applications of
understanding of high moments, especially subconvexity bounds and simultaneous
non-vanishing results. The techniques employed include traditional Fourier
analysis, spectral theory, and combinatorial number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and
Number Theory program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.