* 2101153
* Leveraging Protecting Groups, Lewis Bases, and Backside Attack for 1,2-cis-Selective Glycosylation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Justin Ragains, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 05/31/2024
* USD 559,109.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Justin Ragains of Louisiana State University will work with
undergraduate and graduate students in his organic chemistry laboratory to
develop new approaches to the synthesis of oligosaccharides. Oligosaccharides
are polymers of carbohydrates attached at specific loci and in controlled
fashion in three-dimensional space. However, isolation of oligosaccharides from
their natural sources is not a practical approach to obtaining authentic samples
of specific oligosaccharides. The variety of biologically relevant carbohydrates
requires that the community continue to develop controlled methods for their de
novo synthesis. In the research planned here, key building blocks in the
laboratory synthesis of oligosaccharides will be synthesized. An understanding
of organic chemistry will then be used to ensure that the building blocks bond
to one another in the correct three-dimensional orientation, an important
problem in oligosaccharide synthesis. Successful execution of this research will
advance the science of oligosaccharide synthesis and provide tools to study the
chemical biology of carbohydrates with potentially important implications for
biomedical research. Planned public outreach activities include partnering with
Lousiana State Universityâ€™s Upward Bound program to teach low-income, first-
generation high school students about chemistry and basic skills in the
chemistry lab to help prepare these students for future pursuits of science
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ragains and his students will study the
1,2-cis-selective glycosylation of alcohols with glycosylation electrophiles
including trichloroacetimidates, N-phenyltrifluoroacetimidates, and
thioglycosides. The aforementioned glycosylation electrophiles will be
substituted with electron-withdrawing protecting groups, and glycosylations will
be performed with a series of alcohols in the presence of Lewis-basic additives.
The synergy of electron-withdrawing protecting groups and Lewis bases is
proposed to promote high 1,2-cis selectivity. The activation of thioglycosides
using in-situ-generated benzynes will also be studied, and unique mechanistic
features of this reaction will also be exploited for the development of 1,2-cis-
selective glycosylation. Furthermore, synthetic approaches to 1,2-cis-selective
glycosylation developed herein will be leveraged toward the synthesis of a
synthetically challenging and 1,2-cis glycoside-rich tetrasaccharide repeating
unit from the multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii strain D78. The
successful execution of this work will advance the understanding of the
challenge of 1,2-cis-selective glycosylation and provide steps toward a
generalized approach to this transformation. This work has potential long term
implications for glycoscience and glycobiology studies in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.