* 2101129
* EAGER: Sustainable Manufacturing of Lithium Ion Battery for Electric Vehicles Using Recycled Battery Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Chris Yuan, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 423,633.00

This exploratory research will create an innovative mechanical hybridization
process to address environmental sustainability challenges of the electric
vehicle (EV) battery industry. The project will test the hypothesis that the
active materials from spent lithium ion batteries can be directly recycled in
their original structures, hybridized with their pristine counterparts, and then
reused in the manufacturing of new lithium ion battery pouch cells with desired
electrochemical performance. The research will be carried out systematically
through both mathematical modeling and experimental investigation, to generate
new knowledge on direct recycling of EV batteries, material science of hybrid
electrode materials, electrochemical science of pouch cells, life cycle
assessment, and techno-economic analysis of EV batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, a novel electrochemical model will be
developed to simulate and optimize pouch cell performance using the hybrid
active materials, to be validated and improved through experimental
investigation. Potential savings on environmental impact and economic costs from
employing the recycled battery materials in new battery manufacturing will be
quantified and evaluated through development of a comprehensive life cycle
assessment model and a process-based techno-economic analysis model. Improving
environmental sustainability and reducing economic cost of lithium ion batteries
are critical for future large fleet deployment of EVs. This project will
generate broader impacts through exploratory research to develop a circular
economy for the EV battery industry and educating students, industrial
professionals, and public stakeholders through research training, enhanced
curriculum, industrial seminars/workshops, news releases, and Youtube videos.
Research results will be disseminated through academic journals, conference
presentations, and internet media, with the aim of improving peopleâ€™s
understanding on the potential environmental and economic performance of the
future EV industry with a possible circular economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.