* 2101384
* Supporting teacher customizations of curriculum materials for equitable student sensemaking in secondary science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Katherine McNeill, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,315,927.00

This project is developing and researching tools to support teachers’
instructional shifts to achieve equitable sensemaking in middle school science
classrooms. Sensemaking involves students building and using science ideas to
address questions and problems they identify, rather than solely learning about
the science others have done. Despite it being a central goal of recent national
policy documents, such meaningful engagement with science knowledge building
remains elusive in many classrooms. Students from non-dominant communities
frequently do not see themselves as “science people” because their ways of
knowing and experiences are often not valued in science classrooms. Professional
learning grounded in teachers’ use of innovative high quality curriculum
materials can help teachers learn to teach in new ways. Yet teachers need
guidance to customize curriculum materials to fit their own local contexts and
leverage students’ ideas and experiences while maintaining the goals of recent
policy documents. This project is researching and developing customization tools
to support teachers in their principled use and adaptation of materials for
their classrooms. These customization tools will help teachers to better notice
and leverage the ideas and experiences of non-dominant students to support all
students in equitable sensemaking. During the project, 74 teachers from diverse
schools will participate in professional learning using these customization
tools. After testing, the customization tools and illustrative cases will be
disseminated broadly to support teachers enacting any science curriculum in
leveraging the ideas and experiences that students bring into the classroom. In
addition, the research results in the form of design principles will inform
future design of curriculum materials and professional learning resources for
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key element in science education reform efforts
includes shifting the epistemic and power structures in the classroom so that
teachers and students work together to build knowledge. Research shows that
shifts in science teaching are challenging for teachers. Researchers and
practitioners have collaborated to develop curriculum materials that begin to
support teachers in this work. But teachers need to interpret these materials
and customize the tasks and strategies for their own context as they work with
their own students. Curriculum enactment is not prescriptive, but rather a
“participatory relationship” between the teacher, curriculum materials, students
and context, where teachers interpret the materials and the goals of the reform,
and customize them to adapt the tasks and activity structures to meet the needs
and leverage the resources of their students. The field needs to better
understand how teachers learn from and navigate this participatory relationship
and what supports can aid in this work. This project will include design-based
research examining teachers’ customization processes and the development of
tools to support teachers in adapting curriculum materials for their specific
school context to facilitate equitable science sensemaking for all students,
where all students engage in ambitious science knowledge building. The major
components of the research program will include: (1) Empirical study of
teachers’ customization processes; (2) Theoretical model of teacher thinking and
learning that underlies customization of curriculum materials; (3) Tools to
support principled customization consistent with the goals of the reform; and
(4) Empirical study of how tools influence teachers’ customization processes.
The project is addressing the urgent need for scalable support for teacher
learning for recent shifts in science education in relation to both a vision of
figuring out and equity. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.