* 2101582
* Generation of Single Cation Sites Supported on Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Matthew Conley, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Matthew Conley of the University of California â€“ Riverside is studying ways
to accelerate chemical reactions using designer heterogeneous catalysts. These
new catalysts are engineered to provide more energy-efficient reaction
conditions than traditional approaches. Professor Conley and his research team
are invested in developing specialized high surface area materials that can
react with metal reagents to form surface-supported metal sites with
understandable structures and tunable catalytic activity. This flexible system
will be employed to investigate a variety of important processes to generate
commodity and specialty chemicals that are important to everyday life. Dr.
Conley will be involving students from a Moreno Valley high school in this
research program to help foster interest in STEM disciplines and encourage
interest in STEM career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single atom catalysts
(SACs) provide a more atom-efficient strategy for heterogeneous catalysis than
noble metal nanoparticles where only surface atoms are exposed to reagents. The
generation of SACs involves the dispersion of very small quantities of noble
metal atoms onto a redox active oxide support. Dr. Conley and his research team
are developing a new approach to preparing single cation site catalysts (SCSs)
and studying the catalytic reactivity of these new materials towards
transformations that are important to both the fine and commodity chemical
industries. The team will be using this synthetic technology to access high
surface area oxides that support very strong silylium Lewis acids as precursors
for the targeted SCSs. The silylium-coated oxides will be treated with metal-
halide bonds in organometallic complexes to form single cation sites (SCSs) in
well-defined coordination environments. This methodology is being used to
install single transition metal cations uniformly dispersed on oxide surfaces
doped with weakly coordinating anions and is complementary to known methods that
generate SACs. Because this approach to generating SCSs can be paired with a
variety of organometallic reagents, the Conley group is investigating a range of
catalytic activity supported by these materials including olefin polymerization,
hydroamination, and hydrosilylation chemistry, as well as the partial oxidation
of methane. These efforts to develop SCSs for heterogeneous catalysis also will
serve as a strong training environment for a diverse group of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.