* 2101493
* Crowd-Sourced Online Nexus for Developing Assessments of Middle-school Physical Science Disciplinary Core Ideas
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Susan Sunbury, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 981,684.00

This project will develop and test a web-based platform to increase the quality
of teacher-administered tests in science classrooms. It draws on classroom
teacher knowledge while employing the rigorous statistical methods used in
standardized assessment creation and validation. The content focus is on the
disciplinary core ideas for grades 6-8 physical science in the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS). Teachers now spend an estimate 20% of their time in
assessment, yet have relatively few tools to draw upon when creating them. Over
time, they learn to adapt items from available curriculum materials and
textbooks. On the other hand, standardized assessment developers have the
benefit of expert item writers, long development cycles, a large and diverse
student population, and sophisticated psychometric tools. This project combines
these two approaches, drawing upon teachers to contribute their best items, then
immediately piloting them using crowdsourced subjects. Psychometric analysis
generates measures of item quality and then “recycles” items to participating
teachers for improvement. In this way, a large test item bank will be
constructed utilizing teacher input with each item possessing: appropriate
reading levels, NGSS alignment, scientific accuracy, appropriate difficulty,
high statistical discrimination, and negligible difference by gender, race, or
ethnicity. Involvement in this project has potential benefits for teachers
lacking formal training in assessment, familiarizing participants with the NGSS,
and with the elements of high-quality test development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will gauge the merits of a novel collaborative system for the
development and validation of high-quality test items and assessment
instruments. It will measure the degree to which teachers can generate effective
items and improve existing items exhibiting problematic issues when given the
guidance of rigorous psychometric measures that estimate item quality. It will
build on earlier research showing that an adult, crowd-sourced sample works well
as an initial proxy for grade 6-8 science students, allowing for extremely rapid
feedback on item quality (often overnight), with item response theory
computation used to establish item difficulty, item discrimination, guessing
levels, and differential item functioning (gender and racial/ethnicity bias). In
addition, computed measures of misconception strength, scientific correctness,
reading level, and match to the NGSS will help to guide revision by teachers.
Use of Bayesian futility analysis will “triage” items, minimizing costly testing
of items when deemed unlikely to meet item quality criteria, lowering costs.
Field testing with a large sample of grade 6-8 students will provide a final
check on item quality. Items will be developed much more inexpensively than by
methods used for standardized test development. Two pairs (public-release and
secure for chemistry and physics) of assessment instruments will be constructed
and be freely available to science teachers for classroom use and by education
researchers and curriculum developers. A system that provides quick feedback on
item quality could potentially transform university instruction and professional
development opportunities in assessment. While starting with selected response
(multiple-choice) items, the project will be able to implement a larger variety
of formats in the future, incorporating automated approaches as they become
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.