* 2101209
* Research Initiation Award: Investigating the Efficacy and Stability of Charred Nanocellulose Materials in High Temperature  and High Performing Polymers
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Tracy Brown-Fox, Johnson C. Smith University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 298,886.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Johnson C. Smith University will support research in the design of
novel materials enhanced with cellulosic nano-additives. The project will also
develop an undergraduate research program that will prepare undergraduate
students for careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to investigate the addition of pyrolyzed nanocellulose materials – in
the form of char residue – as an additive into high performing and high curing
temperature polyimide resins and examine the resulting mechanical properties of
the new polymer/char composite. The char residue of cellulose nanomaterials is
an attractive additive that can be added into high performance polyimides
resins, because it does not degrade at cure temperatures above 350 °C. The
project will involve the integration of the char-residue into high-temperature
polymers non-covalently via the pyrolysis of nanocellulosic materials into the
polymeric matrices final composite. This approach opens additional opportunities
for cellulose nanomaterial applications. Since the char residue has higher
carbon content and surface area than the original polyimide material, its
addition to the material as a reinforcement agent is expected to improve the
mechanical properties of the resultant polyimide
composite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.