* 2101775
* I-Corps:  Automated, noninvasive critical congenital heart disease (CCHD) screening algorithm/software
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Heather Siefkes, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

There are nearly 4 million babies born in the US every year. All US newborns,
and most internationally, undergo oxygen saturation (SpO2) based Critical
Congenital Heart Defects (CCHD) screening with pulse oximeters. However, this
screening still misses hundreds of babies with life-threatening heart defects in
the US every year. The proposed NeoPOSE technology could prevent deaths
associated with late detection of heart defects in babies. Moreover, its
noninvasive approach and automated interpretation make it easy to use to reduce
nursing time associated with CCHD screening. Most US states (80%) require
reporting of the CCHD screening data to public health departments. Most health
care facilities submit data manually, which is labor intensive and error prone.
Even those with automated reporting have data management difficulties that are
labor intensive. NeoPOSE will ease the data transmission process while improving
its accuracy, thus decreasing manual labor associated with data management and
also providing more reliable data to guide future CCHD screening research and
quality improvements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores the
commercial potential of noninvasive blood flow measurement technology for
improved timely detection of Critical Congenital Heart Defects (CCHD). In their
current form, oxygen saturation (SpO2) blood flow measurements cannot be used
clinically for this purpose. The proposed NeoPOSE technology takes readily
available, yet unused, noninvasive pulse oximetry data and makes them clinically
relevant. In addition to detection of CCHD, the proposed technology may be
helpful for a number of other medical diseases with abnormal blood flow (i.e.
atherosclerosis or blood vessel graft monitoring).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.