* 2101931
* CAS: Dinuclear Metallacycles as Intermediates in Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Christopher Uyeda, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Christopher Uyeda of Purdue University is studying catalytic reactions that
will improve the efficiency and sustainability of chemical synthesis. There are
numerous scientific and technological advances that rely on synthetic organic
molecules. For example, the ability to selectively deactivate a protein using a
small molecule inhibitor forms the basis for understanding and treating human
diseases. Molecules can also store or convert energy, allowing them to be used
in devices such as solar cells and batteries. Often, the molecules that are
required for these applications have complex structures and are prepared using
lengthy synthetic processes. A major challenge in modern chemical synthesis is
to improve the efficiency and sustainability of these processes by reducing the
number of steps that are required and the amount of waste that is generated. In
this project, Dr. Uyeda will address these goals by studying transition metal
catalysts that can rapidly generate complex molecules from readily available
starting materials, ideally with little to no waste byproducts. A diverse group
of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers will be involved this
research project. In the process, they will gain technical and non-technical
training that will prepare them for future careers in STEM and STEM-adjacent
fields. Outreach activities will communicate the impact that catalysis research
has on society to a broad audience of other scientists, students, and the
general public. Additionally, mentorship activities are geared toward broadening
the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis
program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Christopher Uyeda of Purdue University
is studying metal–metal bonds as active sites for catalysis. Metallacycles are
key catalytic intermediates in many organic transformations, including
cycloadditions, bond insertions, and rearrangements. In this project, Dr. Uyeda
will explore how dinuclear active sites can be used to access metallacycles with
unique catalytic properties. The overarching goal is to use multiple metals to
cooperatively activate substrates that are typically inert toward monometallic
complexes. Furthermore, the orbital symmetry properties of metal–metal bonds
will be leveraged to control chemo-, regio-, and stereoselectivity in
multicomponent reactions. This project will involve synthesizing new bimetallic
complexes, studying stoichiometric organometallic reactions, and developing
selective catalytic transformations. Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers involved in this project will work at the interface of organic and
inorganic chemistry. They will gain a fundamental understanding of transition
metal chemistry while learning to apply this knowledge to develop useful
catalytic reactions. Results from this project will be communicated to a broad
audience through review articles, seminars, and podcast interviews. This project
will also support outreach activities that engage high school and undergraduate
students, with an emphasis on retaining underrepresented students in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.