* 2101456
* Collaborative Research: Connecting Elementary Mathematics Teaching to Real-World Issues
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Mathew Felton, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 06/30/2024
* USD 985,598.00

There are long-standing calls to make mathematics more meaningful, relevant, and
applicable both inside and outside of the K-12 classroom. In particular, there
is a growing recognition that mathematics is a valuable tool for helping
students understand important real-world issues that affect their lives and
society. Further, mathematics can support students in becoming mathematically
literate and engaged democratic citizens. Despite the increased interest in
connecting mathematics to real-world issues in the classroom, many teachers feel
unprepared to do so. This project will engage students and teachers in rich,
real-world math tasks; will support future teachers and mathematics educators in
adapting, designing, and implementing similar tasks; and will provide a basis
for further research on the most effective ways to design and implement real-
world tasks in the mathematics classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three goals
of the Connecting Elementary Mathematics to the World project are: (1) To
explore how mathematics teachers adapt, design, and enact tasks that connect
mathematics to the real world. We will study the teaching practices of the
project team as they engage in this work in two summer camps and in elementary
classrooms at two sites. (2) To develop a collection of exemplar tasks and rich
records of practice for each task. These records of practice will detail the
mathematical and real-world learning goals, background knowledge needed for both
goals, common student responses, and videos or vignettes of the task in
progress. A team of six teachers at two sites will be recruited to collaborate
with the team throughout the project. Teachers will provide input and feedback
on the design of, appropriateness of, and relevance of the tasks and the support
materials needed to implement the real-world tasks. Initial tasks will be field
tested with elementary students and additional tasks will be developed for
subsequent week-long summer camps and for teaching in elementary classrooms. (3)
To research both the development and enactment of these tasks. We will develop a
theoretical framework for creating and implementing real-world tasks that can
inform future practice and research in this area. The research products of this
project will result in (a) an understanding of effective teaching and design
practices for connecting mathematics to real-world issues, (b) a theoretical
framework of how these practices are interconnected, and (c) how these practices
differ from practices when teaching typical school mathematics
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.