* 2101161
* Excellence in Research: Collaborative Research: Detecting Vulnerabilities in Internet of Things with Deep Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Hongmei Chi, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 401,724.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) integrates software applications, physical devices,
and algorithms to interact with the physical world and humans. The economic and
societal potential of such systems is vastly greater than has been realized, and
major investments are being made worldwide to develop the technology. The
technology for building IoT is based on embedded systems, scientific
computations, and software embedded in devices. Because the physical components
of IoT are directly interactive with humans, the security and reliability
requirements are qualitatively different from those in general purpose
computing. Failure to meet the security and reliability requirements exposes IoT
and humans to malignant attacks. The goal of this project is to conduct
interdisciplinary research that utilizes artificial intelligence methodologies
against cybercriminals who initiate attacks or target internet connected devices
and users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore applications of
Deep Learning in cybersecurity research to detect security vulnerabilities in
the Internet of Things through automated digital forensic evidence analytics.
The project will actively engage a team of researchers in the investigation of
deep learning, which includes a broader family of Artificial Intelligence that
has produced results comparable and in some cases superior to human experts, to
conduct the following research activities: (1) Assessing potential data
vulnerabilities related to personal data privacy violations by analyzing the
extracted hidden contents evidence and encrypted messages from IoT devices in a
forensically sound manner; (2) Evaluating IoT software forensic evidence.
Analyzing software vulnerabilities in IoT application source code to better
mitigate the risk to software systems. Typical source code vulnerability
evidence in applications includes buffer overflow, integer overflow, and
Carriage Return and Line Feed injection; (3) Reconstructing attack scenes based
on forensic evidence to find existing system vulnerabilities of IoT; (4)
Increase research capacity and collaborations to generate new research
opportunities for undergraduates from underrepresented communities to pursue
advanced degrees in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.