* 2101001
* Excellence in Research: Development of a Non-Fluorinated Etching Procedure to Prepare MXene Hybrid Materials for Composite Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Natalie Arnett, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: MXenes are 2D materials with excellent
electrical/magnetic properties for use in a number of applications such as
electromagnetic radiation shielding, supercapacitors and batteries. In this
project, a team of researchers at the Florida A &amp; M University (FAMU), FAMU-
FSU (Florida State University) College of Engineering (COE), and Clark Atlanta
University (CAU-Chemistry), aim to prepare a class of MXenes with homogenous
surface functionality using a less hazardous procedure. This novel method of
synthesizing MXenes will open new avenues of developing hybrid materials for
different applications and the generation of unique composite materials.
Subsequently, this project seeks to increase the number of undergraduate and
graduate minority students enrolling in engineering and science programs to
pursue advanced degrees through involvement in MXene materials research. Student
interest about graduate programs and summer research opportunities will also
increase, leading to the establishment of a 2+3 dual-degree engineering program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: MXenes are derived from MAX phases,
where the A element, usually aluminum, is removed by etching with toxic hydrogen
fluoride. The systematic investigation of MXene with a novel non-fluorine based
method using the following research aims to understand the
synthesis/etching/exfoliation processes using a non-fluorinated etching
procedure allows for control of the resultant microstructure and macroscopic
properties crucial to MXenes applications: 1) Preparing MXenes with improved
stability and homogenous surface functionality using non-fluorinated etching
techniques on MAX phases. 2) Understanding the impact of this etching process on
the MXene chemistry, morphology, and chemical environment on rheological,
electronic, and magnetic/spin properties. 3) Building a MXene model based on
specific functional groups terminations using thermodynamic stability
calculations of bromine or other functional group terminations, geometry
optimizations for single and bilayer MXene structures, and vibrational frequency
calculations to compare with experimental results. 4) Developing novel MXene
composite structures for manufacturing devices with desirable magnetic and
electronic properties. 5) Exploring the suitability of a novel etch method for
other types of MAX phases. The findings from this EiR project will contribute to
institutional change by aligning the qualities of interdisciplinary research
with educational outcomes and exposing students to new chemical synthesis and
exfoliation techniques, instrumentation at the National High Magnetic Field Lab
(NHMFL) national user facility, and 3D printing using state-of-the-art equipment
to fabricate MXene structures and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.