* 2101162
* Evidence Quality and Reach Hub for the DRK-12 community
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Melissa Rasberry, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 12/31/2024
* USD 945,722.00

Understanding the impact of STEM education efforts requires researchers to have
cutting-edge knowledge of advanced research methods and the ability to translate
research knowledge to multiple and diverse stakeholder audiences. The Evidence
Quality and Reach (EQR) Hub project will work explicitly to strengthen these two
competencies through focused work with the Discovery Research PreK-12 research
community. The hub will develop and implement workshops and learning
opportunities for researchers in the community, convene communities of practice
to discuss specific research methods, and engage in individualized consultations
with DRK-12 projects. These activities are designed to strengthen current and
future work in PreK-12 STEM education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will work at multiple levels to support the DRK-12 research community.
Universal activities such as webinars will be developed and deployed to support
researchers in learning about new research methods and strategies for
translating research for a broad set of stakeholder communities. Collective
activities will involve a small number of DRK-12 projects in discussing
particular research and dissemination issues common to their work in communities
of practice and via virtual workshops. Individual projects will also be offered
consultations on their current work. The project will begin with needs-sensing
activities that will identify important themes and areas of focus for the
universal, collective, and individual work. The project will collect data about
the efficacy of their endeavors through surveys, user analytics from online
collaboration spaces, and interviews with approximately 10 projects per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.