* 2101350
* CRII: III: A Socio-technical Approach for Biomedical Content Authoring and Structured Web Publishing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Syed Ahmad Chan Bukhari, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Efficient retrieval of context-appropriate, accurate and valuable information
from the myriad of information available in the world is the bedrock of any
successful search engine. For instance, in a library, librarians employ complex
strategies with varying degrees of success to retrieve the appropriate book for
a reader out of the many available titles. Similarly, a large volume of digital
biomedical textual content such as research papers, clinical notes, biomedical
reports, etc., has been produced in recent years due to the unprecedented growth
of biomedical research and clinical practices. Efficient strategies for
accessing these biomedical contents are crucial for allowing a timely transfer
of correct information from the scientific research community to peer
investigators and interested individuals. Even though valuable information is
embedded in online biomedical contents, it remains opaque to information
retrieval and knowledge extraction search engines. It is mainly because most
biomedical contents are unstructured with minor or no explicit machine-
interpretable semantic (context-aware) markups or annotations. For example,
Google search engine algorithms require metadata to properly tag biomedical
contents in a context-aware (semantic) fashion enabling more precise searches.
Thus, developing an apt technology infrastructure to empower content users to
add context-aware tagging (semantic annotations) to the biomedical content and
later share them to promote their accessibility with improved accuracy would be
a game-changer and the need of the hour. This project promotes the progress of
science and technology by developing state-of-the-art freely accessible
interactive systems that enable individuals at different expertise levels in the
biomedical domain without any technical background to collaboratively author and
publish biomedical semantic content. Hence, this research democratizes the
process of semantic content authoring currently available to elite users. This
project intends to involve a socio-economically diverse pool of learners in
getting hands-on experience, enabling peer-to-peer knowledge sharing and opening
up many career progression opportunities. The research will not only generate
public educational material, bibliographies, and reusable empirical data to
support wide-ranging biomedical stakeholders, but it will also provide
opportunities for curriculum enhancement by integrating research results in
biomedical informatics courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research introduces an out-of-the-box socio-technical approach and a novel set
of semantic content models to develop open interactive systems overcoming the
research challenges of balancing speed and accuracy and semantic preservation
during semantic content authoring and structured publishing. Balancing speed and
accuracy is the key research challenge; finding the right semantic annotations
in real-time during content authoring is extremely difficult since often one
semantic annotation is available in multiple biomedical ontologies with
different text or connotations. This research develops a biomedical semantic
content authoring system to balance the speed and accuracy of available
biomedical annotators by keeping the original author in the loop during the
entire process. Intelligent algorithms such as AuthorsLikeMe and RecommendMe are
developed to get real-time help from other fellow authors working on similar
biomedical contents. Semantically Cafe: A virtual collaboration environment in
tandem enables novice authors to seek help from experts where the experts are
attracted based on an incentive model for helping others. Preserving content-
level semantics remains the key challenge and center of attention of online
publishing. The team addresses this by developing novel semantic models
extending the research engines endorsed controlled metadata to publish the
biomedical contents on the web. Multiple user-friendly, customizable interfaces
are developed for authoring, publishing, concept searching, and knowledge
sharing with peers. One of the by-products of this research will be one-of-its-
own kind of biomedical annotations corpus that will be openly available through
the API for any potential usage. Understanding the system's efficiency and the
quality of the content from the users' perspective will be studied through user
studies and system evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.