* 2101056
* Excellence in Research: Identification of absolute sea level rise and land subsidence from long-term tide gauge records along coasts of the Gulf of Mexico and the Chesapeake Bay
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jiang Li, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 549,616.00

Global warming causes worldwide sea level rising due to a combination of
meltwater from glaciers and ice sheets and expansion of ocean water. As a
result, flood risk and ecosystem change are elevated in the Gulf of Mexico and
the Chesapeake Bay, two of the globe’s hot spots, where the sea level rise is
about two to four times greater than global mean sea level rise. The
sustainability and resiliency of the nation’s coastal communities to evolving
needs of the environments in response to past and future sea level rise
necessitates identification of it from long-term tide gauge records along the
nation’s coasts. This research will develop an innovative methodology to
accurately identify and predict sea level rise along any coasts. The proposed
research activities will impart an improved understanding of sea level rise and
its adverse impacts on coastal communities, which thereby inspires scientists
and engineers to face various environmental challenges caused by sea level rise.
In order to disseminate new knowledge and research findings, the program plans
to deliver lectures or talks with research results to K-12 students, college
students in three undergraduate courses, and graduate students in four graduate
courses in Civil Engineering at Morgan State University. One postdoctoral
researcher and one graduate student will be hired each year to participate in
the proposed research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gauged sea level rise
comprises of absolute sea level rise, in light of the Earth’s climate system
change, and land subsidence, due to the Earth’s geological system change. The
latter change includes four sub-components: tectonic subsidence from basement
rocks, basement rock creep, primary consolidation subsidence due to subsurface
fluid withdrawal from compressible coastal aquifer systems and creep subsidence
due to geohistorical overburden pressure of the same aquifer system. A novel
piecewise equation of relative sea level rise comprising of absolute sea level
rise and four sub-components of land subsidence can help scientists and
engineers identify and project relative sea level rise value for adaptive
engineering design and construction necessary with a view to increase the
resilience of coastal communities against sea level rise as well as other
natural hazards. To these ends, this project aims to raise public awareness of
the importance of sea level rise in environmental sustainability and coastal
community resilience in the coastal areas of the Mexico Gulf and the Chesapeake
Bay and promote science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
education for underrepresented minorities. This project is co-funded by the
Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics (GLD) Program and the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities - Excellence in Research (HBCU-EiR) Program, along
with support from Integrative and Collaborative Education and Research (ICER)
funds of the NSF Geosciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.