* 2101181
* Excellence in Research: iMed-Sec: Exploring Hardware-Assisted Solutions for Energy-Efficient Low-Overhead Security and Privacy for the Internet-of-Medical-Things
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Saraju Mohanty, Grambling State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,500.00

The combination of a network of physical devices embedded with electronics,
Internet connectivity, and sensors, that can communicate and interact with
others over the Internet is known as the Internet of Things (IoT). An IoT-based
framework for the healthcare industry is called the Internet of Medical Things
(IoMT). Security of Implantable Medical Devices and Wearable Medical Devices is
one of the major concerns of IoMT, in addition to medical data privacy. Imminent
threats to the safe use of IoMT include the vulnerability of IoMT-devices to
hacking. The project will undertake research to explore Hardware-Assisted
Security with low-overhead, energy-efficient solutions for the IoMT. The
uniqueness of the iMed-Sec project is a unified multilayer effort involving
devices, circuits, and systems for robust cybersecurity. The project will build
IoMT security course materials (such as modules, training materials, and
syllabi) to boost various interdisciplinary STEM undergraduate curricula to
train students in smart healthcare paradigms, thus serving the national
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iMed-Sec is a novel unified multilayer
effort involving devices, circuits, and systems using a Security-by-Design (SbD)
paradigm for energy-efficient robust cybersecurity of internet-connected smart
systems used in healthcare industry, popularly known as the Internet of Medical
Things (IoMT). The project will address research to integrate IoMT devices with
hardware security primitives called Physical Unclonable Functions (PUF) so that
these can be used to perform real-time security and privacy functionalities,
without using the resources of the devices, thus ensuring low-overhead. PUF-
based unified security and privacy protocols are not available in the current
literature. The project will determine appropriate device technology and circuit
topologies for robust, energy efficient PUFs useful in smart healthcare security
and privacy. The project will result in energy efficient novel protocols for
IoMT device cybersecurity. The project will build IoMT cybersecurity course
materials (such as modules, training materials, and syllabi) to boost various
interdisciplinary STEM undergraduate curricula to train students in smart
healthcare paradigms at Historically Black College and
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.