* 2101841
* Automorphic Forms, Crystallization in the Plane, and Arthur’s Unitarity Conjecture
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Stephen Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 180,000.00

This award centers around two central mathematical problems. The first comes
from mathematical physics and discrete geometry, and is known as “Wigner
crystallization” after the physicist Eugene Wigner’s landmark 1934 paper. Here
one wishes to give a rigorous proof explaining why electrons (or, more
generally, certain molecules) arrange themselves in a crystalline, honeycomb-
shaped grid. This is related to the sphere packing problem (which asks to find
exactly how densely space can be filled by equal-sized, non-overlapping balls),
and the PI and collaborators plan to use tools from number theory to attack the
problem. The second problem is an important case of the “Unitary dual problem”,
which more generally asks to determine all the possible incarnations of a
symmetry group which preserve distances (known as “unitary representations”).
Conjectures of James Arthur predict exotic, special types of unitary
representations, which are of special interest because they appear to be related
to number theory (and also to string theory, in many cases). The bulk of the
funding from the award will support graduate students working on aspects of
these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed plan of attack for Wigner
crystallization is to prove that the hexagonal lattice is universally optimal in
the plane, in that it minimizes potential energy for any completely monotonic
function of distance-squared. Such a result was proven by the PI and
collaborators in 8 and 24 dimensions, and is known (by work of Mircea Petrache
and Sylvia Serfaty) to imply Wigner crystallization. This will require
developing more machinery from classical modular forms, which were the key
ingredient in 8 and 24 dimensions, since the problem is quite different in two
dimensions. Arthur’s conjecture will also be attacked via automorphic forms, to
construct realizations of Arthur representations (when possible) using
Eisenstein series. Other tools will be the unitarity algorithm which has now
been implemented as part of the Atlas of Lie Groups software package, as well as
important results of Adams-Barbasch-Vogan on the structure of Arthur
packets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.