* 2101800
* A Unified Perspective on Singularities in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Karl Schwede, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2025
* USD 182,466.00

This research project brings together different perspectives on singularities in
commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. Both algebraic geometry and
commutative algebra concern shapes defined by polynomial equations, such as the
parabola that is the graph of the equation y = x^2. Not every shape is so
smooth; some, such as the graph of the equation y^2 = x^3, have sharp points or
other singularities. Study of geometric singularities is important in
mathematics and has application to mathematical models for a wide range of
important physical, social, and economic systems. Researchers have long known
that important types of singularities in classical geometric settings also
appear naturally when studying geometric shapes in modular (or clock)
arithmetic. In fact, algebraic geometry in the clock arithmetic setting is a key
component of modern communications infrastructure. This project aims to develop
a theory of singularities in mixed characteristic, a middle ground between the
classical and clock arithmetic worlds (that possesses aspects of both). The
project also aims to develop geometric applications of this theory and to
develop open-source software to study singularities in commutative algebra and
algebraic geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques developed in number theory
and arithmetic geometry have given rise to numerous recent breakthrough results
in mixed characteristic commutative algebra. This project aims to use these
methods to develop a singularity theory suitable for studying higher dimensional
birational algebraic geometry in mixed characteristic, which would also
facilitate translating many of the successes of positive characteristic
commutative algebra to this setting. The project additionally aims to develop an
analog of F-pure or log canonical singularities (and their centers) in mixed
characteristic, to study fundamental groups of singularities, and to study
boundary divisors in this setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.