* 2101310
* Building Insights through Observation: Researching Arts-Based Methods for Teaching and Learning with Data
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Amy Busey, Nurture Nature Center
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,001,564.00

Innovations in data collection, infrastructure, and visualization play an
important role in modern society. Large, complex datasets are accessible to and
shared widely with the public. However, students need to learn how to interpret
and reason about visualizations of scientific data. This project will use
visualizations from an easily accessible tool from NOAA, Science On a Sphere, to
help students develop critical thinking skills and practices required to
effectively make meaning from authentic scientific data. The project will use
arts-based pedagogies for observing, analyzing, and critiquing visual features
of data visualizations to build an understanding of what the data reveal. The
project will work with middle school science teachers to develop tools for STEM
educators to use these data visualizations effectively. This project focuses on
visual thinking skills that have been found to apply in both science and art:
describing, wondering, recognizing uncertainty, and interpreting with evidence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct foundational research to
understand the ways in which arts-based instructional methods and geospatial
data visualization can be successfully applied by science teachers. The research
will examine: (1) the ways in which arts-based instructional methods can be
successfully applied by STEM teachers; (2) critical elements in the process of
learning and applying these techniques to influence teachers’ content,
pedagogical, and technological knowledge; and (3) for which transferable data
literacy skills these approaches show most promise with children. This project
will use a design-based research framework to develop data literacy teaching
approaches in partnership with middle school teachers. The research process will
include data about teachers’ development and students’ learning about data
literacy. Data to be collected include qualitative and quantitative information
from teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.