* 2101080
* Excellence in Research: A Data-Driven Computational Framework for Seismic Detection, Modeling and Prediction
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Mulugeta Dugda, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 348,331.00

This project is co-funded by the Geophysics (PH) Program and the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities - Excellence in Research (HBCU-EiR) Program,
along with support from Integrative and Collaborative Education and Research
(ICER) funds of the NSF Geosciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embarking
on innovative scientific approaches that fully exploit fast-growing datasets
across different disciplines is necessary to achieve great scientific discovery.
Such necessity stimulates urgent research initiatives across various scientific
disciplines. Seismology, being a data-driven science with huge datasets recorded
for more than a century, will definitely benefit from the developments of new
scalable algorithms that can process such massive data volumes. Having
tremendous potential, geophysics and particularly seismology innovation using
machine learning and big-data analytics based on multiple seismic datasets has
so far been trailing behind. Broader impacts of this project include: (1)
launching a new interdisciplinary research in the areas of machine learning,
big-data analytics, computational techniques and geophysics in which
undergraduate STEM students and graduate students of the research project will
be cross-trained to transcend traditional disciplinary boundaries, (2) creation
and distribution of big-data analytics machine learning techniques useful for
detecting underground nuclear explosions, modeling crustal structure and
predicting the spatial distribution of aftershocks following major earthquakes,
(3) delivering analytical and computational techniques that have much to offer
to the field of seismology and solid-Earth geophysics at large, and (4)
imparting research-enriched learning experiences to STEM undergraduate and
graduate students through educational activities at Morgan State University and
summer research internships at national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on developing a data-driven computational framework for seismic
detection, modeling and prediction. Having the training and expertise in
geophysics/seismology, machine learning and big-data analytics to explore
computational techniques, the investigators of this project will address the
challenges in the development of underground nuclear explosion detection
methods, predicting the spatial distribution of aftershocks following major
earthquakes, and modeling crustal structure. The specific objectives of this
research are: (i) to investigate the development of automatic nuclear explosion
detection methods utilizing approximate nearest neighbor methods to search large
archives along with the integration of template matching and iterative seismic
processing framework, (ii) to explore machine learning methods to predict the
likelihood that aftershocks would occur in a particular location on a spatial
grid based on modeling transfer of elastic energy between regional stress fields
and a set of localized faults, and (iii) to examine data analytics algorithms
for modeling crustal structure using multiple complex seismic datasets that
provide research communities with open source big-data analytics
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.