* 2101934
* I-Corps: A machine learning and video-based sensor for measuring sewer flows
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Henry Medeiros, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
improvement of water reclamation operations and associated positive impacts on
human and environmental health. Water reclamation facilities in the U.S.
discharge billions of gallons of untreated wastewater into the environment each
year due to large storms that cause overflows in their collection systems.
Failures in these systems can also result in basement backups of untreated water
into citizens' homes, which can cause property damage and risk of serious
illnesses. To overcome these challenges, water reclamation facilities rely on
sewer flow data to get a picture of what is happening within their pipe
networks; however, existing sensors have several shortcomings including
inaccurate data, high costs, and an inability to detect low flows. The proposed
technology seeks to overcome these challenges through a machine learning and
video-based sensor for measuring sewer flows and water quality. This technology
has the potential to provide water reclamation facilities with accurate and
reliable data across all pipe flow conditions to inform decision-making on
costly infrastructure and operations. In addition, by helping to reduce basement
backups, this technology has broader social implications as low-income and
minority communities are disproportionately affected by flood
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a low-cost, video-based sensor to measure flows in sanitary sewer systems
using machine learning and spectral analysis. Specifically, the proposed
technology captures video of sewer flow and processes using a machine learning
algorithm to estimate velocity and water level. In addition, it uses spectral
analysis to determine the clarity and color of water that can be used to
identify sources of pollutants within the sanitary sewer system. This technology
is novel in that for the first-time a video-based sensor is applied to
accurately measure flow and water quality in sanitary sewers. The proposed
technology has the potential to advance water reclamation operations through
less expensive, more reliable, and more accurate data on the magnitude and
quality of water flow in sanitary sewers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.