* 2101085
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Expanding the Frontiers of Isogeny-Based Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Reza Azarderakhsh, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 428,940.00

According to our current understanding of the laws of quantum mechanics,
computers based on quantum phenomena offer the possibility of solving certain
problems much quicker than any classical computer. Included among these problems
are the majority of mathematical problems that form a basis for almost all
currently deployed public-key cryptosystems. Current public-key cryptographic
technologies are all known to be highly vulnerable to attacks by large-scale
quantum computers. Although such quantum computers have not yet been built,
substantial progress has been made in recent years. It is widely accepted that
it is prudent to plan ahead for future needs, as adoption of new cryptosystem
deployment takes several years to align networks, industry, and the general
public. This project aims to develop frontiers of quantum-safe cryptography
systems to address the need of forward secrecy in the quantum age. The project’s
novelties include design, and development of protocols and algorithms based on
elliptic curve and isogenies (maps) between them. The project’s impact is on the
standardization of such cryptosystems in first place as well as directions and
insights on the implementations and deployments afterwards. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses mainly on efficient development of isogeny-based
cryptography system as it is one of the candidates for National Institute of
Standards and Technologies (NIST) post-quantum cryptography standardization
process offering smallest public key sizes in comparison to the counterparts.
This and other unique characteristic of isogeny-based cryptography make it
suitable for certain applications such as embedded devices. The investigator
will focus on efficient development and implementations of supersingular
isogeny-based key encapsulation (SIKE), isogeny-based signatures, group key
exchange mechanisms, and their integration into real-world applications. This
research provides impact and influence on the design and security analysis of
the next generation post-quantum cryptosystems which is the main focus on
cryptography community these days. The investigator’s ultimate objective is to
establish isogeny-based cryptography as a mainstream option for post-quantum
cryptography and get standardized through NIST and other standardization
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.