* 2101829
* Mesophase Engineering through Coarse-to-fine Grained Modeling
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Fernando Escobedo, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 329,815.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Fernando Escobedo of Cornell University aims to
create computational tools to engineer organic materials that organize into
intricate structures at molecular scales. Simple physical models are very
efficient in charting the generic properties and molecular organization of soft
materials, but they lack the detail necessary to assign specific chemistries to
the molecules, and to guide the materials synthesis to realize the sought-after
properties. Escobedo will develop methods to allow the predictions of widely
used physical models to be realizable by adding the missing chemical details.
Escobedo will combine advanced molecular simulation methods and machine learning
strategies to systematically identify chemistries most likely to fulfill the
simple-model predictions of materials that form complex structures of interest.
While the methods developed are expected to be applicable to many classes of
organic materials, Escobedo will demonstrate their use with benchmark examples
involving large multi-functional molecules capable of self-assembling into
three-dimensional networks. Accordingly, results from this work could impact the
advanced materials industry by guiding researchers to formulate stable
composites for separation membranes and photovoltaics, and porous networks for
catalysts and adsorbents. The project will enable the training of doctoral and
undergraduate students in computational materials research. For outreach and
education, the PI will coordinate a new workshop series organized at Cornell to
celebrate the student accomplishments in research and in
inclusivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. Escobedo is developing
and applying molecular simulation strategies to identify polyphilic oligomers
and functionalized nanoparticles capable of forming complex phases with partial
structural order, called mesophases. In particular, starting from a
computationally efficient but chemistry-agnostic (CA), coarse-grained (CG) model
that forms a target mesophase, Escobedo will develop a scheme able to find
chemistry-specific (CS) models which are fine-grained (FG) or atomistically-
detailed that preserve the mesophase-formation ability. This approach will be
applied to two distinct classes of CG models that have shown significant promise
in generating complex mesophases: (I) Non-linear polyphilic oligomers whose
distinct chemical blocks bring about nano-phase segregation, and (II) binary
blends of nanoparticles exhibiting non-additive mixing behavior. In both cases,
multiple complex 3D network phases have already been predicted and many others
are potentially accessible. The mapping a given CA CG model into a CS FG model
exhibiting the same sought-after mesophase behavior will entail the iterative
use of a machine learning model to search through a predefined chemical space.
Importantly, instead of directly searching for a CS FG model that maps into a
target CA CG phase, Escobedo will use a selection “filter” at the fast,
computationally efficient CG level. Specifically, the candidate chemistries will
be first mapped into simple CS CG models to readily identify those able to form
the target phase; these will then be mapped onto candidate CS FG models for
further validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.