* 2101382
* Leveraging Dynamically Linked Representations in a Semi-Structured Workspace to Cultivate Mathematical Modeling Competencies Among Secondary Students (M2Studio)
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jie Chao, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,983,986.00

Mathematical modeling can support people in making sense of complex and critical
unanswered questions related to real-world phenomena. For example, mathematical
modeling can help determine the speed at which an infectious disease will
spread, how interventions can limit the spread, and how sea level change can
impact coastal populations and ecosystems. While educators and policymakers
recognize the importance of mathematical modeling in K-12 education, the
complexities of modeling and modeling tasks often create barriers for classroom
implementation. Such tasks are complex, open-ended, and require iterative
thinking and the coordination of multiple mathematical representations. This
three-year Design and Development project seeks to build a semi-structured
workplace to support students' mathematical modeling competencies called
M2Studio. This technology integrates aspects of two existing and widely used
technologies (CODAP and SageModeler) into a single workspace that can
effectively capture students' activities, representations, problem solving
sequences, and thinking as they work individually or in pairs on mathematical
modeling tasks. The project will develop aspects of M2Studio across five design
cycles, study student engagement and learning via the platform, and collect data
from teachers on the conditions under which M2Studio implementation is
particularly effective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a
theoretical conceptualization of mathematical modeling that involves five sub
competencies: simplifying, mathematizing, working mathematically, interpreting,
and validating. In building the M2Studio and dynamically linking the CODAP and
SageModeler, the system will provide opportunities to be able to assess the ways
in which students are engaging in these sub competencies. The project will
engage in five design cycles to design the technology and associated curricular
modules, deploy and test the technologies with students and teachers, and assess
the impact on students' mathematical modeling competencies. The first two design
cycles will focus on technology development and short in-person lab tests with 4
teachers and 16 students. Design Cycles 3 and 4 will involve two field tests
with 8 teachers and 400 students. The fifth design cycle will involve an
implementation study to further explore the research questions. Student learning
will be assessed via a mathematical modeling sub-competencies test. Student
interaction patterns will be evaluated through the qualitative analysis of
screencast and classroom videos. The conditions under which the program is more
or less effective with respect to classroom implementation will be measured by
observations, interviews, and logs from implementing teachers. The final version
of the platform will be hosted and made available widely in various K-16
mathematical modeling communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.