* 2101235
* Learning by evaluating: Engaging students in evaluation as a pedagogical strategy to improve design thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Nathan Mentzer, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 851,426.00

The Learning by Evaluating (LbE) project will develop, refine, and test an
educational innovation in which 9th grade students evaluate sample work as a
starting point in engineering design cycles. Students will compare and discuss
the quality and fit to context of completed design artifacts. Teachers will
collaboratively review and refine the LbE approaches and map the LbE materials
into the curriculum. Prior work suggests this will allow students to improve
understanding of the content, context, and ways of thinking for an assigned
project; identify strengths and weaknesses of existing approaches; and recognize
key features related to work quality before working on an assignment. The
project will work directly with DeKalb County School District in Atlanta,
Georgia, and connect to an internationally implemented 9th grade course offered
through the International Technology and Engineering Educators Association STEM
Center. The pedagogical strategies emerging from this project could be embedded
in other STEM Center courses offered in K-12 classrooms internationally, or
incorporated by individual teachers in a variety of disciplines through the
dissemination of freely available instructional resources. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This three-year exploratory project consists of two years of design-
based qualitative research, followed by one year of quasi-experimental mixed-
methods research to test the hypothesis that LbE will significantly improve
student learning. The theoretical foundation of this inquiry is based on
Collins, Brown, &amp; Newman’s “cognitive apprenticeship” approach: students
learn from models, articulating knowledge, and reflecting on personal
experience. The design phase research questions are: What quality of examples
should be used in LbE? How related should examples be to the students’ project?
What is the teachers’ role in LbE? What timing provides optimal impact for LbE?
The quasi-experiment will randomly assign participating teachers’ class sections
to an LbE or a comparison condition, and assess three outcome variables: student
design thinking mindset, student critical thinking and reasoning, and student
performance. The project leadership team combines design education researchers
from Purdue, Brigham Young, and the University of Georgia, the director of the
International Technology and Engineering Education Association’s STEM Center,
and the Career Technical and Agricultural Education Instructional Coordinator
for the DeKalb County School District. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.