* 2101781
* EAGER: Capturing the Stars: Exploring Digitization of Photographic Glass Plates for Scientific Analysis
* MPS,AST
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Richard Kron, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 10/31/2022
* USD 167,215.00

The historic Yerkes Observatory in Williams Bay Wisconsin has contributed to
research and education in astronomy and astrophysics since 1897. The Observatory
has over 170,000 astronomical glass photographic plates and observational
logbooks which are important both historically and for research, but which are
largely inaccessible due to their present geographical location and their rather
fragile state. This project will research, analyze and develop both methods and
procedures to use financially accessible equipment to digitize the glass plates.
It will also work out how to transcribe complex data from the logbooks, and
evaluate how best to make all of the plate images and meta-data records
accessible and usable by researchers and historians worldwide. The project
includes collaboration between librarians and astronomers and provides paid
research opportunities to undergraduates. It will facilitate scientific and
historical research, and create openly accessible data that will be a source for
astronomy education and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By creating scalable and
cost-effective practices for digitization of astronomical glass plate
collections, this work will help to protect and preserve unique and
irreplaceable observational archives. These data will be a most valuable
contribution to time domain astronomy, and add a wealth of primary source
information to the history of astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.