* 2101868
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Bringing Asia to digital life: mobilizing underrepresented Asian herbarium collections in the US to propel biodiversity discovery
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Brad Ruhfel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2025
* USD 420,761.00

Asia is the largest continent on Earth, and includes the world’s tallest
mountains, lowest landscapes, and habitats ranging from arctic tundra to
tropical rainforests and mangroves to deserts. The plants of this region are
incredibly diverse in their identities and functions. More than one-third of the
world’s 350,000 plant species grow in Asia and include tiny alpine cushion
plants, medicinal herbs, ancient crops, and some of the planet’s tallest
rainforest trees. But documentation of this diversity remains inaccessible and
research about it is difficult because most herbarium specimens of Asian plants
have not been digitized. The All Asia Thematic Collections Network (TCN) will
mobilize online 15 million specimens of Asian plants currently housed in the US
and around the world. The project will especially focus on digitizing specimens
from the unique and critically endangered biodiversity hotspots of Southeast
Asia and the Himalaya-Hengduan region. These mobilized digital data will
accelerate research to conserve endangered plant species and understand the
interacting effects of evolution and global environmental change on plant
species diversity. The project will apply state-of-the-art informatics tools and
high-throughput digitization methods to efficiently and affordably digitize an
unprecedented number of herbarium collections. This effort will connect and
build long-lasting relationships among 25 large and small consortium
institutions in the U.S., Europe, and Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focal
areas from which specimens will be digitized encompass five biodiversity
hotspots that include ~20% of the world’s vascular plant flora and historically
spanned 3 million km² of primary vegetation that now covers less than 300,000
km². Fundamental biodiversity data for these biodiversity hotspots are lacking,
along with the necessary baselines required to characterize species’ identity,
range, and responses to ongoing climatic change. The overall goals of the All
Asia TCN are to rapidly digitize herbarium specimens of Asian plants to advance
biodiversity discovery and provide critical baseline assessments essential for
establishing floristic change in the Anthropocene. The project will accomplish
this by (1) digitizing 3 million Asian vascular plant specimens from U.S.
herbaria; (2) developing and applying novel informatics tools and high-
throughput digitization methods to massively scale herbarium digitization; (3)
aggregating and mobilizing the digitized records from the project with those by
international partners in China, France, the Netherlands, and Russia to
establish a single online All Asia portal of ca. 15 million specimens; and (4)
enhancing opportunities for early career learners in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics by stimulating synergies between biodiversity and
computer scientists who will use design thinking principles to create real-world
informatics solutions to biodiversity challenges. To stimulate curiosity in
plant diversity and botanical exploration among the general public, the
consortium members will host several Asia-themed Notes from Nature virtual
expeditions to facilitate additional specimen digitization by citizen-
scientists. Digitized specimen data mobilized through this project will be
shared and made available through iDigBio.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.