* 2101526
* Collaborative Research: Accessible Computational Thinking in Elementary Science Classes within and across Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Contexts
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Diane Ketelhut, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,172,781.00

Currently, students who are white, affluent, and identify as male tend to
develop a greater interest in and pursuit of science and computing-related
careers compared to their Black, Latinx, Native American, and female-identifying
peers. Yet, science, computing, and computational thinking drive societal
decision-making and problem-solving. The lack of cultural and racial diversity
in science and computing-related careers can lead to societal systems and
decision-making structures that fail to consider a wide range of perspectives
and expertise. Teachers play a critical role in preparing students to develop
these skills and succeed in a technological and scientific world. For this
reason, it is crucial to investigate how teachers can help culturally and
linguistically diverse students develop a greater understanding of and interest
in science and computers. This research project aims to enhance elementary
teacher education in science and computational thinking pedagogy through the use
of Culturally Relevant Teaching, i.e. teaching in ways that are relevant to
students from different cultural and linguistic backgrounds The project will
support 60 elementary teachers in summer professional development and consistent
learning opportunities during the school year to learn about and enact
culturally relevant computational thinking into their science instruction. In
doing so, the project aims to increase both the quantity and quality of
computing experiences for all elementary students and support NSF’s commitment
in broadening participation in the STEM workforce. The project will also produce
resources, measures, and tools to support elementary teachers to do this kind of
work, which will be shared with other STEM researchers and teacher
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to design
and promote teaching practices that integrate computational thinking in the
elementary science classroom in culturally relevant ways. This project will seek
to empower practicing elementary teachers’ approaches to meaningfully and
effectively integrate and adapt computational thinking into their regular
science teaching practice so that all students can access the curriculum. It
will also explore the impact of these approaches on student learning and self-
efficacy. The scope of this project will include working with multiple highly
distinct school settings in Maryland, Arizona, and Washington DC across three
years, reaching approximately 60 elementary teachers and 1,200 students. To
achieve the project objectives, the research team will leverage concurrent mixed
methods approaches that include teacher and student interviews, reflections,
observations, descriptive case study reports as well as regression and
multilevel modeling. The project’s findings will inform the fields’
understanding of: (a) teachers’ conceptualization of computational thinking; (b)
the barriers elementary teachers encounter when trying to integrate
computational thinking with culturally relevant teaching practices; (c) the
types of support that are effective in teacher professional development
experiences and throughout the school year; and (d) the development of a cohort
of teachers that can maintain integration efforts in different
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of STEM subjects by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.