* 2101124
* Excellence in Research:  Coupling of DNA Replication and Cell Division at Low Temperature in E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Pamela Jones, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 490,303.00

Adverse environmental conditions such as extreme temperatures can have
deleterious effects on cellular structures, processes and growth. Bacteria often
encounter temperatures that are at or near their minimum temperature of growth.
At temperatures just above the minimum temperature of growth, bacteria adapt and
grow by inducing physiological changes that counteract the damaging effects of
the cold stress. The long term goal of this project is to characterize the
adaptive response to cold stress and identify factors that determine the minimum
temperature of growth. In the bacterium Escherichia coli, an adaptive
physiological change in response to low temperature is a decrease in cell size.
Several proteins that function in DNA replication and cell division are
specifically required for this adaptation. This research project aims to
determine the connection between replication and cell division that facilitates
growth and small cell size at cold temperatures. Broader impacts include the
importance of understanding bacterial survival at cold temperatures because of
our use of refrigeration in preserving and selling food. Additionally, the
project will broaden participation by providing closely-mentored, hands-on
research experience to train undergraduate students from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The E. coli minimum
temperature of growth is just above 8oC. The cells adapt to low temperature by
increasing cell division and thereby reducing cell size. Compared to the large
rods formed at 37oC, wild type E. coli are smaller rods at temperatures just
above 8oC and filamentous rods at temperatures below the minimum temperature of
growth. Late cell division proteins FtsN and DedD, which stimulate septal
peptidoglycan synthesis and septation, are specifically required for growth and
the formation of small rods at low temperature. A nucleoid-associated protein
that enhances DNA replication is also required for growth and the production of
the small rods. This project aims to test the hypothesis that replication and
cell division are intricately linked, facilitating the small cell size and
enabling growth at low temperatures. This hypothesis will be tested using two
approaches. Flow cytometric and nucleoid staining analyses of the various cold-
sensitive mutants will be performed to investigate the requirement for specific
cell division and nucleoid-associated proteins for DNA replication at low
temperature. Genetic screens will be done to identify suppressors of the cold-
sensitive mutations, thereby elucidating the proteins required to couple DNA
replication and cell division at low temperature. This research project should
give novel insights into the differential requirements for the progression of
the cell cycle as a function of temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.