* 2101766
* Diverse and Selective Catalytic Pâ€“C Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Rory Waterman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 477,344.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Rory Waterman of the University of Vermont will study catalysis that
promotes formation of phosphorus-carbon bonds. Phosphorus-carbon bonds appear in
all living things, are in consumer goods, and are even present in some of the
COVID-19 vaccines, among other pharmaceutical agents. However, methods to
prepare molecules containing this element are limited, particularly those that
are catalytic. Catalysis can create efficiencies in both resource utilization
and synthesis that would aid in the challenges with phosphorus. As such, this
project aims to deliver a new generation of faster, more efficient, and better
controlled catalysts that use phosphorus, benefitting researchers in a range of
fields. These efforts have the potential to have a large impact for the
synthesis molecules related to biomedical science and chemical biology. Another
more ambitious aim of the project is to use catalysis to generalize a rare but
very efficient phosphorus-carbon bond forming reaction. The project also aims to
establish light as an energy source for phosphorus-carbon bond forming
catalysis, so-called photocatalysis, and understand how this photocatalysis
operates to facilitate its expansion to catalytic reactions with other elements.
Professor Waterman has a strong history of involving high school students from
historically underrepresented groups in NSF-funded research and will use this
project to increase capacity to involve pre-college students in research,
helping to meet long-standing workforce development goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, Professor Rory Waterman of the
University of Vermont will study catalysis that promotes P-C bond formation from
both P(III) and P(I), improved enantioselectivity in hydrophosphination, and
expand photocatalytic hydrophosphination. The project builds on an initial
discovery that photocatalytic hydrophosphination is general and aims to unravel
the mechanisms that unfold for both early and late transition metal catalysts.
This effort compliments innovations in bench-stable hydrophosphination
catalysis. The project will also combine these efforts to investigate
enantioselective hydrophosphination catalysts for unactivated substrates,
potentially availing hydrophosphination as a late-stage synthetic tool in the
synthesis of complex molecular architectures, particularly those scaffolds that
are likely to engender biological activity. Additional efforts in the project
aim to leverage cyclophosphines as P(I) precursors via catalysis with an eye
toward controlling singlet phosphinidene formation. Cyclophosphines can also be
primary phosphine precursors, and this understanding will aid in the expansion
of hydrophosphination catalysis through expansion of phosphine substrates. These
efforts are directed at making an end-run around limitations in
hydrophosphination and phosphinidene transfer. This work holds promise to
advance fundamental understanding of catalysis in P-C bond formation, with
potential application to other catalytic systems. Additionally, many specific
catalytic reactions targeted in this study have the potential for much broader
application in the larger synthetic chemistry
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.