* 2101719
* Parahydrogen Matrix Isolation Infrared Spectroscopy and Kinetics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* David Anderson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor David T. Anderson and his group
at the University of Wyoming are using extremely cold crystals made from
molecular hydrogen as a reaction vessel to investigate chemistry at low
temperatures. The first thrust of the research project examines the diffusion
and reactivity of hydrogen atoms. At extremely low temperatures (-457°F),
hydrogen atoms are better described as matter waves instead of particles, which
has a major impact on how they diffuse through the crystal and react chemically
with other species. Chemistry is transformed under these low-temperature
conditions into the fully quantum mechanical regime where unexpected chemical
behavior can be discovered. The second thrust of the work involves experimental
studies of nuclear spin states in polyatomic molecules that undergo rapid
cooling, photochemistry, or chemical reactions. Nuclear spin refers to the
internal state of an atom, and sometimes has an orientation. Certain molecules,
like water, come in two different forms, one where the two hydrogen atoms have
their nuclear spins aligned in the same direction, and the other with the two
hydrogen atom spins aligned in opposite directions. These different nuclear spin
isomers of water have different magnetic properties. The research team led by
Professor Anderson is examining to what extent nuclear spin is conserved during
various physical and chemical processes, with the goal of learning how to use
nuclear spin to control chemical reactions and to enhance magnetic imaging
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental work uses a custom-designed
cryogenic apparatus to synthesize cryocrystals of para-hydrogen (a specific
nuclear spin isomer of molecular hydrogen) doped with parts per million
concentrations of chemical impurities at temperatures in the 1.5 to 5 K range.
Hydrogen atoms are created in situ using a variety of ultraviolet light sources
and the ensuing reaction kinetics are measured using high-resolution Fourier-
transform infrared spectroscopy. Professor Anderson and his group utilize a
liquid helium cryostat to achieve such low temperatures and have built a
dedicated helium recovery system to recycle the spent helium gas to minimize
supply costs. The students working with Professor Anderson gain experience using
sophisticated methods in experimental physical chemistry that probe the physical
and chemical properties of quantum materials, materials whose properties are
dominated by the laws of quantum mechanics. The involvement of students in the
research has a significant impact by training future scientists in the
techniques of low-temperature chemistry and the quantum-mechanical manipulation
of matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.