* 2101547
* Supporting teacher understanding of emergent computational thinking in early elementary students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Katherine McMillan, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,603,239.00

There is an increasing focus and interest in teaching computer science and
computational thinking in early elementary school. The project will engage
researchers, professional development providers and early elementary teachers
(K-2) in a collaborative research and development process to design a scalable
professional development experience for grade K-2 teachers. The project will
field test and conduct research on the artifacts, facilitation strategies and
modes of interaction that effectively prepare K-2 teachers to learn about their
students’ emergent use of computational thinking strategies. The teachers will
collaborate using an online platform for sharing resources, and the project will
also study how the online platform can help to reach and support more teachers.
The teachers’ learning will be supported by instructional coaches who will help
the teachers to integrate computer science into their teaching, and to interpret
evidence of their students’ understanding of computational
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores how to help teachers
identify and support about early elementary children’s emergent computational
thinking. The professional learning model for teachers includes a community of
practice supported by an online platform and a coach with expertise in
computational thinking. The work leverages models for professional development
in early grades mathematics. The project focuses on creating systems and
conditions for scalable professional learning including coherence, coaching,
teacher networks, and engagement with school and district leadership. The
research questions are: (1) What kind of professional development and guidance
do teachers need to identify and support emergent computational thinking
development in young students’ language and work process? (2) What kind of
professional development and guidance do teachers need to identify emergent
computational thinking development in young students’ work products? (3) How can
a scalable professional learning system help teachers understand the development
of emergent computational thinking in K-2 students? The teachers will develop
lessons, use them with students, and reflect about their work with the coach and
the other teachers in their community of practice. The data collection and
analysis include interviews, surveys, observations, and documentation from the
online platform to understand teachers’ professional learning and development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the CS for All: Research and
RPPs program. This program aims to provide all U.S. students with meaningful
opportunities to participate in computer science education in their schools at
the Prek-12 levels. Computer science, in this program, includes use of
computational tools, but also the broad range of understandings, competencies,
and skills needed to apply computation in our digital world. These are often
referred to as computational literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12), which has co-funded this project, seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.