* 2101341
* Mapping, Clarifying, and Communicating Key Ideas about Collaborative Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jeremy Roschelle, Digital Promise Global
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 05/31/2024
* USD 599,976.00

This project will synthesize research on computer-supported collaborative
learning (CSCL). Collaborative learning occurs often in preK-12 STEM teaching--
yet most teachers are unaware of research findings on how to organize
collaboration among students to increase learning. These research findings can
support key STEM teaching practices such as argumentation, project-based
learning, peer instruction, equitable participation, and inquiry-based learning.
The science of CSCL achieved advances in the past decade, including producing a
research handbook--however, practitioners do not have easy access to research
journals, nor time to sift through the latest findings to guide their practice.
Further, conventional forms of research synthesis, such as research handbooks or
long synthesis papers, serve narrow audiences and are rarely read by
practitioners. Digital Promise, a nonprofit organization that connects
researchers, educators, and developers—with a team of external researcher and
practitioner advisors and partner organizations—will investigate and develop a
novel synthesis approach to provide educators and researchers with a novel form
of synthesis organized around an interactive map of topics and subtopics. By
working with national practitioner organizations, the project will achieve broad
and deep dissemination. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To develop the synthesis, a
multidisciplinary team of both researchers and educators will use a visual,
interactive bibliometric approach to understand the research literature
landscape. Key novel elements of the innovative synthesis approach are: (1)
involving practitioners and researchers in each stage of the work—mapping,
clarifying, and communicating; (2) using visual maps as a tool for organizing
and navigating interconnected ideas; (3) involving both expert review and
bibliometric techniques to identify topics and connections for the map; (4)
using a qualitative process inspired by the Delphi method to iteratively develop
a consensus map that both respects the scientific literature and addresses
practitioners’ needs; (5) writing a short, concise primer for each topic within
the map, to enable multiple entry points, accessibility, greater reader-
navigability, and easier readability; and (6) during dissemination, involving
multiple practitioner organizations and approaches for learning which
dissemination channels and methods achieve broad and deep reach. The project
will establish a new mode of synthesis that, if successful, could be applied to
other high-interest topic areas, yielding additional research maps and concept
primers to serve the needs of STEM researchers and practitioners. Finally, this
process will also strengthen the large field of research that studies CSCL by
increasing awareness of the gaps in knowledge between what researchers have
established and what practitioners want to know. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.