* 2101053
* Excellence in Research: Delineating the characteristics, transformation and water quality impacts of landfill leachate induced dissolved organic nitrogen
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Hans Paerl, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 417,590.00

In the United States, the discharge of excess nitrogen into surface water bodies
(e.g., lakes, rivers, and estuaries) is causing pervasive and vexing
environmental problems ranging from harmful algal blooms (HABs) to complete
eutrophication that negatively impact water quality nationwide. Current research
on nitrogen (N) water pollution has primarily focused on inorganic nitrogen
(e.g. nitrate). Dissolved organic nitrogen (DON), while often a large fraction
of the nitrogen from wastewater plant effluents, has been historically
overlooked. Recent studies by the Principal Investigators of this project and
others suggest that landfill leachates are significant sources of DON with
comparable N mass flows as wastewater effluents and agricultural runoffs. The
goals of this research are to characterize DON from landfill leachates, evaluate
its eutrophication potential, and its removal efficiency in wastewater treatment
plants using biological nutrient removal processes. The successful completion of
this project will benefit society through the development of new fundamental
knowledge that could be used to inform nitrogen removal during wastewater
treatment as well as water quality managers interested in mitigating HABs.
Further benefits to society will be achieved through stakeholder/public outreach
and student education/training including the mentoring of one doctoral student
and an ungraduate student enrolled at an HBCU (North Carolina A&amp;T State
University).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research on nitrogen (N) pollution in
surface water bodies has focused primarily on inorganic nitrogen, i.e., nitrate
from agricultural runoff and wasterwater plant effluents. However, there is
growing evidence that dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) from landfill leachates
is a significant source of N pollution. DON from landfill leachates has been
shown to consist of two broad classes of compounds 1) proteinaceous DON and 2)
humic substances (HS) derived DON. These two fractions have different molecular
compositions with distinctly different behaviors during algal growth stimulation
and N removal in wastewater treatment plants using biological nutrient removal
(BNR) processes. The overarching goal of this research is to comprehensively
investigate the occurrence, characteristics of DON from landfill leachates, its
degradation and transformation patterns in various BNR process
scenarios/configurations, and its impacts on harmful algal blooms. To advance
this goal, the Principal Investigators of this project propose to carry out an
integrated experimental program structured around three specific objectives: 1)
Correlate occurrence and composition of DON with landfill characteristics (e.g.,
age and stabilization stage), 2) Elucidate the degradation, transformation, and
removal of landfill leachate induced DON in conventional and short-cut BNR
processes, and (3) Evaluate the impacts of landfill leachate induced DON on
harmful algal bloom dynamics. These specific objectives will be accomplished by
coupling state-of-the-art DON characterization studies with laboratory scale BRN
experiments and field DON leachate collections followed by bioassays of algal
growth and stimulation. The successful completion of the proposed research could
provide new data and fundamental knowledge to guide the mitigation of water
pollution and HABs by DON.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by
the Environmental Engineering and Evironmental Sustainability programs of the
NSF/ENG/CBET Division and the Broadening Participation in Engineering program of
the NSF/ENG/EEC Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.