* 2101068
* RAPID: Wildfire impacts on snowpack, flow paths, and sediment dynamics across an elevation gradient
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Sean Gallen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 03/31/2022
* USD 49,990.00

The 2020 Cameron Peak wildfire in northern Colorado is the third largest
wildfire in Colorado history, and it covers 19% of the Cache la Poudre basin,
which supplies water for multiple cities and irrigation districts. Fires pose
risks to water supplies and infrastructure due to post-fire floods, erosion, and
debris flows. After prior large fires in Colorado, these risks have been
greatest during summer thunderstorms, with minimal hazards during winter and
spring snowmelt seasons. However, the Cameron Peak fire is unique in that it has
burned at much higher elevations than these previous large fires. Compared to
all wildfires across the western U.S. since 1984, the Cameron Peak fire has
burned the largest area recorded in the persistent snow zone, the high mountain
zone where snow stays on the ground from winter through spring. Because the
snowpack is so much greater in this zone than at lower elevations, snowmelt
could cause more dramatic slope and channel changes than have been documented
for other fires. This project will focus on collecting critical post-fire data
for understanding how the fire impacts the snowpack, streamflow, slope failures,
stream channels, and water supply reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
collection will include drone flights, a sensor network, and field surveys
conducted both across the full burn area and at focus areas at the higher and
lower elevations of the fire. Snowpack changes will be documented using fine
resolution topography for snow-free and snow-on conditions collected from LiDAR
and drone imagery. At focus areas in burned and unburned conditions, weather
stations will document snow depth and radiation budget, and field surveys will
document spatial patterns of snow water equivalent. Streamflow changes will be
documented using a network of stream stage sensors distributed by elevation,
burn severity, and drainage area. Erosion, slope failures, and channel changes
will be identified by comparing drone imagery from before snow accumulation,
after snowmelt, and after summer thunderstorms. Field surveys of channels will
also document channel geomorphic changes and distributions of large wood and
sediment. Finally, sedimentation rates to water supply reservoirs will be
quantified using sediment cores. These datasets will be released as soon as
possible after collection and will facilitate post-fire research coordination
among an interdisciplinary team of scientists with expertise in atmospheric
science, hydrology, and geomorphology. This project is co-funded by the
Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics and the Hydrological Sciences
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.