* 2101615
* Fostering Computational Thinking Through Neural Engineering Activities in High School Biology Classes
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* John Settlage, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2025
* USD 735,119.00

Computational thinking (CT) is a set of processes to identify and solve problems
using algorithms or steps, and can be applied not only in computer science but
in other disciplines. This project will develop and study a curriculum and app
that support CT in a high school biology unit. Through a month-long neural
engineering unit, approximately 500 students in 18 classes will measure their
own muscle and brain activity with a low-cost, portable, wearable technology.
Students will then analyze the data and design a brain-computer interface to
turn neural signals into real-world output (e.g., a mechanical claw controlled
by brain activity). The curriculum will be supported by: (1) a web-based
instructional application that will guide students through the neural
engineering design process; (2) neuroscience and engineering Ph.D. students and
postdocs acting as STEM mentors; and (3) a professional development program for
teachers and mentors. The goal is to increase the students’ knowledge and
interest regarding neurobiology, engineering, and computational thinking. This
can contribute to their long-term capacity to pursue STEM careers. By
integrating CT education into high school science, this expands the
accessibility of the engineering and computing experiences beyond other efforts
that focus primarily on programming and computer science
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage students in rich data
practices by gathering, manipulating, analyzing, simulating, and visualizing
data of bioelectrical signals from neural sensors, and in so doing give the
students opportunities to apply computational thinking principles. The project
will produce curriculum materials for the neural sensors and associated data
practices. It will develop an app to help students design and construct a brain-
computer interface, including computational elements like coding blocks, sensor
and data simulation, and connecting to external devices. The five proposed
research questions of the study are: How does students’ CT change throughout
their participation in the neural engineering design process? What is the cross-
cultural validity of two CT scales in a sample of high school students in the
US? How does the process of collecting and analyzing real-world data relate to
students’ experience of he engineering design process? How do students’
attitudes toward STEM change over the course of their participation in a neural
engineering design process? How does teachers’ self-efficacy for fostering CT in
their students via engineering design change through their participation in
professional development and in implementation of the proposed
curriculum?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.