* 2101885
* RAPID: The impact of headwater wildfire burns on the export of materials to the coast
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Margaret Zimmer, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 11/30/2022
* USD 28,139.00

Wildfire suppression is a common forest management practice in the western
world. However, land management practices for fire are shifting, and many
communities and agencies are planning to prescribe more wildfire in fire-prone
landscapes. At the same time, global climate change has increased extreme fire
weather days in places like the western United States. From both a global
climate change and a more regional land management perspective, fires will
become a more commonplace land disturbance, and this expected increase in
wildfire extent places even greater importance on bringing science up to speed
with the effects of wildfire on watershed processes. Understanding of
interacting hydrological and biogeochemical components in pre- and post-fire
watersheds at-large remains limited and virtually nonexistent for coastal
draining systems. This project will help fill this gap by: (1) leveraging gauged
coastal watersheds with existing data that facilitates temporal comparisons of
pre- and post-fire water quality and water yields, and (2) using multiple
tracers to delineate source contributions from burned and unburned areas of each
coastal watershed. Four of the five proposed study watersheds provide drinking
water to ~90,000 citizens in Santa Cruz County. This project would build on city
and county efforts to better understand the impacts of wildfire on municipal
drinking water supply, and results will be shared with existing collaborators
and contacts at the City of Santa Cruz, County of Santa Cruz, Bureau of Land
Management, and California State Parks. This work will support two early-career
female researchers and two students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small watersheds
(&lt;1000 km2) comprise nearly 1/5 of all watersheds on Earth and the majority
of watersheds along the California coastline. While these systems are globally
ubiquitous, comprehensive hydrological and biogeochemical data for these small
systems is limited, and even less is known about how these coastal systems
respond to wildfires. To fill this knowledge gap, investigators propose to
examine near-term wildfire impacts on coastal stream water material exports to
better understand how fire can alter material sourcing, composition, and
concentrations across dynamic flow regimes. They will focus on stream water
particulate and dissolved carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) compounds as they are
fundamentally important to local food webs and drinking water quality.
Specifically, they propose to: (1) leverage paired watersheds with varying
biophysical watershed characteristics to better understand differences in water
quality responses post-fire, and (2) use multiple lines of evidence (stable
isotopes, optical properties, C and N ratios, and direct quantification of
pyrogenic C to differentiate contributions from burn affected and unburned
regions of each watershed. This study will provide new insight into how coastal
stream C and N sources, composition, and exports vary across flows in response
to wildfire. This insight is critical to better understanding how wildfire can
alter C and N sources, transport, and fate in coastal draining
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.