* 2101393
* Investigating the Role of Collaboration on the Development of Student Ideas using a Learning Progression for the Function Concept
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Edith Graf, Educational Testing Service
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 06/30/2025
* USD 2,454,621.00

Collaborative problem solving is a valued 21st century skill that can enhance
learning outcomes. Learning progressions, which are models of how student
thinking develops within a domain, have potential to provide actionable
information to teachers to guide instruction. Facilitation may support
collaborative problem solving and make visible student thinking with respect to
learning progressions. In this project, the team will address questions about
how collaborative problem solving, learning progressions, and facilitation
interact in the development of studentsâ€™ mathematical learning. The work affords
an opportunity to advance equitable access to high-quality education for all
students by enhancing the quality of instruction for students lacking
opportunities to learn key concepts of mathematics because of the inequitable
structures of education in the country. The project team anticipates that their
work will generate resources and findings for future work, such as a version of
the learning progression that can be used by teachers to interpret student work
and information about how students and facilitators can use online collaborative
technology in support of mathematics learning and
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will integrate learning
progression assessment tasks into an online collaborative learning and
assessment platform. The tasks focus on the concept of function, a foundational
area of mathematics, and are designed for students in Grades 9 through 12.
Students will engage with the tasks in four phases: first, they will solve a
task individually. Second, they will revisit that task as part of a 3- or 4-
person team in a collaborative environment. Some team discussions will be
facilitated by near-peer mentors. Third, the teams will present their results to
the class. Students will engage in a whole class discussion with facilitation
and wrap up by the teacher. Finally, students will respond individually to a
conceptually similar task. Discourse will be coded using both domain-specific
and domain-general coding schemes that identify cognitive, social, and
facilitation practices during team collaboration and class discussion; results
will attend to the both the focus and the development of ideas over the course
of discussion. The project will also feature a professional development
component for teachers and youth facilitators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.