* 2101745
* Collaborative Research: Mechanics of Knots and Tangles of Elastic Rods
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Bashir Khoda, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2024
* USD 141,905.00

In settings from shipping to sailing to surgery, thousands of different types of
knots are used every day, each requiring a specific amount of force to tighten.
This force depends on the material properties, friction, and the topology of the
knot. A knot typically also has a load-bearing capacity; force beyond this level
causes the knot to be undone, and excessive force may result in material failure
in the knot. Moreover, some knots hold tight without any external force while
others easily get untangled. In other words, the knots can store energy in the
material. This concept is called a topological battery with implications in
nanometer-sized knots in DNA to macroscopic knots in structural engineering.
This award supports research to understand the fundamental science of knots. The
work will develop modeling and computational methods for the analysis of the
mechanics of knots and tangles. In parallel, it will formulate experimental
techniques to systematically study this mechanics. The research will be
complemented by developing teaching tools (videos, notes, and demonstrations)
for undergraduate and graduate courses. The computational software will also be
made publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
project is to quantify the mechanical response of knots tied in elastic rods.
The project will employ (1) fast numerical simulations inspired by computer
graphics, (2) innovative materials with customizable friction, and (3)
autonomous robotic experiments to untangle the mechanics of knots. Even in the
case of the most basic type of knots (overhand knots), the force required to tie
the knot depends on an intricate interplay of (1) elasticity, (2) friction, and
(3) topology. Interestingly, the overhand knot may undergo a snap-through
buckling instability beyond a critical amount of pull. Such instability in a
basic knot points to the richness of the mechanical behavior of knots. After
developing simulation and experimental tools, the mechanical response and
instabilities of a few common knots, e.g. overhand and shoelace knots, will be
investigated. Exploiting the computational speed of the simulation tool and
autonomy of robotic experiments, the mechanical response of several types of
knots will be quantified to build a library of their mechanics. This data will
be used to rationalize the variation of a knotâ€™s mechanical response as a
function of the topological, material, and frictional parameters. Similar to the
periodic table of elements, a mechanics-based classification scheme of knots
will be formulated, where the knots will be grouped into various classes, such
as, friction-dominated knots, bending-dominated knots, and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.