* 2101783
* Graphical and Categorical Methods in Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jonathan Brundan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2024
* USD 260,633.00

This project is in the general area of representation theory, which in broad
terms is the idea of understanding symmetries of some naturally occurring
structure such as a crystal by studying the different ways in which those
symmetries can be realized in terms of matrices. By looking for the common
features shared by all such matrix realizations at once, mathematicians have
discovered some higher structures that encode all possible symmetries between
symmetries. These new structures, "monoidal categories," can often be realized
in purely graphical terms. In the last few years, this point of view has
revealed some quite unexpected connections between very different parts of
mathematics and physics. One example that plays a role in this project is the
so-called Heisenberg category, which arose originally in algebra from thinking
about symmetries between representations of the finite symmetric groups, but
which is also connected to the infinite-dimensional Heisenberg Lie algebra,
which has its origins in quantum mechanics. The funding of this project will
lead to new understanding of classical problems in representation theory by
taking advantage of this graphical approach, with potential applications both
inside and outside of mathematics, including to finite group theory,
combinatorics, Lie theory, knot theory, and theoretical physics. This project
provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the project will study the
representation theory of algebraic groups, quantum groups and Lie superalgebras
by exploiting some remarkable new pivotal monoidal categories which are defined
by generators and relations. These include various Heisenberg categories whose
definition is of a graphical nature. These monoidal categories act on many of
the classically important categories in representation theory, leading to a
unified general framework which reveals unexpected connections between different
theories. The project will focus on five specific projects: Okounkov-Vershik
approach to representations of the partition category; quasi-hereditary
coalgebras and blocks of Deligne categories; the rational web category and
thickened Heisenberg categorification; odd Heisenberg and super Kac-Moody
2-categories; Modular shifted Yangians and flag
algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.