* 2101104
* Supporting Instructional Decision Making: The Potential of An Automatically Scored Three-dimensional Assessment System
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Sheng Li, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 08/31/2025
* USD 455,273.00

This project will study the utility of a machine learning-based assessment
system for supporting middle school science teachers in making instructional
decisions based on automatically generated student reports (AutoRs). The
assessments target three-dimensional (3D) science learning by requiring students
to integrate scientific practices, crosscutting concepts, and disciplinary core
ideas to make sense of phenomena or solve complex problems. Led by collaborators
from University of Georgia, Michigan State University, University of Illinois at
Chicago, and WestEd, the project team will develop computer scoring algorithms,
a suite of AutoRs, and an array of pedagogical content knowledge supports
(PCKSs). These products will assist middle school science teachers in the use of
3D assessments, making informative instructional changes, and improve students’
3D learning. The project will generate knowledge about teachers’ uses of 3D
assessments and examine the potential of automatically scored 3D assessments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will achieve the research goals using a mixed-
methods design in three phases. Phase I: Develop AutoRs. Machine scoring models
for the 3D assessment tasks will be developed using existing data. To support
teachers’ interpretation and use of automatic scores, the project team will
develop AutoRs and examine how teachers make use of these initial reports. Based
on observations and feedback from teachers, AutoRs will be refined using an
iterative procedure so that teachers can use them with more efficiency and
productivity. Phase II: Develop and test PCKSs. Findings from Phase I, the
literature, and interviews with experienced teachers will be employed to develop
PCKSs. The project will provide professional learning with teachers on how to
use the AutoRs and PCKSs. The project will research how teachers use AutoRs and
PCKSs to make instructional decisions. The findings will be used to refine the
PCKSs. Phase III: Classroom implementation. In this phase a study will be
conducted with a new group of teachers to explore the effectiveness and
usability of AutoRs and PCKSs in terms of supporting teachers’ instructional
decisions and students’ 3D learning. This project will create knowledge about
and formulate a theory of how teachers interpret and attend to students’
performance on 3D assessments, providing critical information on how to support
teachers’ responsive instructional decision making. The collaborative team will
widely disseminate various products, such as 3D assessment scoring algorithms,
AutoRs, PCKSs, and the corresponding professional development programs, and
publications to facilitate 3D instruction and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.