* 2101881
* CNS Core: Small: Fast or Dynamic Websites? Eliminating the Need to Choose
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2021
* Ravi Netravali, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 10/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

To support evolving Internet services such as social networking, healthcare, and
education, web pages increasingly embed large amounts of dynamic and
personalized content. However, doing so renders previously routine
recommendations for ensuring low-latency page loads insufficient, e.g., content
delivery networks and caches that focus on static content. As a result,
developers today face a challenging trade-off between serving rich, dynamic
content and ensuring the fast page loads that their users expect, both of which
greatly affect user experience. The goal of the proposed work is to holistically
rethink how page loads are executed in order to address this tension, without
sacrificing page correctness or end-to-end security.

The key insight underlying the proposed work is to eschew optimizations for
dynamic content that are siloed at either the client- or server-end of page
loads, and instead pursue optimizations that synergize operations at both
locations. The project involves three applications of this approach that
collectively address the delays associated with dynamic content throughout the
page load process. First, it develops novel page template strategies to mask the
blocking delays for dynamic content fetches at the start of page loads (e.g.,
HTML). Second, it introduces a suite of new techniques for accelerating the
execution of JavaScript code -- the primary source of intra-load dynamism -- via
efficient and state-preserving parallelism and computation reuse. Third, it
develops new page serving architectures that efficiently generate dynamic
content close to clients and maximize utility of the client’s browser cache.

The proposed research aims to democratize the ability to serve state-of-the-art
web pages with high performance, thereby targeting a wide slice of the developer
ecosystem. In particular, small content providers today lack the expensive
infrastructure that their larger counterparts leverage to serve dynamic content
with low latency; the result is a sacrifice of either performance or
functionality, both of which present an uphill battle in user acquisition and
retention. The proposed systems can enable performant (but affordable) dynamic
content using existing web infrastructure. The project also involves outreach
efforts to attract students from populations currently under-represented in
Computer Science. Key to these efforts is the relatability of the web, which
eliminates the terminology barrier and lets students develop services similar to
those that they use daily, increasing interest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.