* 2101909
* Collaborative Research: Digitization PEN: BatPEN!—A Partnership to Facilitate Scientific Inquiry into the Vast Functional Trait Diversity of Phyllostomid Bats
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Richard Stevens, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

Through the process of diversification, more organisms exist today than at any
other time during the history of life. However, this biodiversity is not evenly
distributed through space, time, or across the tree of life. Understanding
phenotypic trait variability across taxa provides information that is valuable
for answering some of the most fundamental questions in biology such as, what
determines the relationship between form and function, how do different
phenotypes facilitate coexistence across communities, or how has the evolution
of phenotypic characteristics influenced the levels of biodiversity exhibited
today? Variation in phenotypic traits forms the bedrock of understanding in much
of ecology, evolution, and systematics. In partnership with the oVert TCN, the
BatPEN! project will mobilize high-resolution phenotypic functional-trait data
from the Neotropical bat family Phyllostomidae. The aim of BatPEN! is to
increase the abundance of available functional trait data, create scientific
infrastructure, and facilitate scientific inquiry into the most diverse family-
level clade of mammals. Moreover, the project will fuel novel STEM training
opportunities and enable major research avenues in ecology and evolutionary
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BatPEN! will generate about 1000 high-resolution
computerized tomography (CT) scans of entire museum specimens to fill in
representation of the 214 phyllostomid species with the aim to substantially
compliment the one species per genus taxonomic coverage of oVert. This will also
add additional novel coverage to oVert in two ways, first by including deeper
intraspecific coverage of 5 taxa that phylogenetically span the higher-level
monophyletic subclades of Phyllostomidae based on 10 individuals from each of 10
different sites distributed across the Neotropics, and second, by scanning
ontogenetic series from three species exhibiting three different degrees of
sexual dimorphism. Immediate educational and research impacts will occur by
adherence to core data management protocols of the oVert-TCN, including hosting
open phenotypic data on MorphoSource (morphosource.org) and seamlessly linking
these data back to original specimens and other specimen-derived resources via
iDigBio (idigbio.org). BatPEN! will facilitate museum-based scientific
infrastructure through not just making digitized data streams available but by
training the next generation of museum scientists. BatPEN! will be based at a
Hispanic serving institution and will ensure direct involvement of under-
represented groups in STEM. The project will draw undergraduates from Texas
Tech’s ethnically diverse population to assist with research related to BatPEN!
through the Center for the Integration of Stem Education and Research (CISER).
In cooperation with the Museum Science and Heritage Graduate Program at Texas
Tech, museum science students will be trained in curational/collections
activities to contribute to the next generation of collection-based researchers
and educators. In addition, a formal course will be offered entitled “Vertebrate
Curational Techniques,” which will provide a hands-on approach to curation and
collection activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.