* 2101925
* RUI: Arboreal Galois Groups and Nonarchimedean Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert Benedetto, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2024
* USD 208,666.00

This project concerns certain open questions in arithmetic dynamics, a field
bridging number theory and dynamical systems. While the number-theoretic study
of rational numbers and polynomial equations lies far from the chaos and
fractals that arise in the study of dynamics, the two are tied together in this
setting by p-adic dynamics. In addition, the PI will supervise undergraduate
students in an REU summer research project to bolster their mathematical
training. Any computational data produced in the REU will be published or posted
on the web, for the benefit of the larger research community. Results from the
project will also be disseminated via websites such as arXiv and via publication
in mathematical journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific questions to be
studied arise in two areas within arithmetic dynamics: first, the action of
Galois groups on dynamical orbits, and second, moduli spaces of nonarchimedean
dynamical systems. On the Galois side, certain p-adic dynamical features are
essential to exhibiting enough Galois automorphisms to generate the complicated
Galois groups in question. On the moduli space side, nonarchimedean dynamics has
evolved into an established field of research, but relatively little is
currently known about one-parameter families of nonarchimedean dynamical
systems. The project will focus on dynamics on the Berkovich projective line,
the appropriate space on which one-variable nonarchimedean systems act. The
problems to be explored are new areas that are continuations of rich theories
with long histories in dynamics, Galois theory, and nonarchimedean analysis. In
particular, the first topic promises to provide new dynamical tools for
addressing the study of absolute Galois groups, while the second promises new
approaches to moduli problems in arithmetic dynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.