* 2101679
* SBIR Phase I:  Accuracy and Performance Testing of Color Changing Chromophore for Sun Protection Indicator Stamp
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Michael Croix, SUNFLY BRANDS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2022
* USD 255,037.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to address sunscreen effectiveness. The
proposed technology will enable application of sufficient sunscreen in a timely
manner, thereby helping to minimize the incidence of ultraviolet-related skin
damage including sunburn, age-related photodamage and skin cancer—the most
commonly diagnosed cancer in the United States with an annual estimated
treatment cost of $8.1 billion. For consumer end-users, this technology will
provide an affordable, convenient, and accurate sunscreen effectiveness
indicator to help keep them sun-safe. For retailers, this technology will
provide an innovative means to increase sales and grow the Suncare category as a
whole without any cannibalization of existing sunscreen products (highly desired
by retailers). For sunscreen manufacturers/licensees, this technology has the
potential to drive sunscreen consumption and sales by as much as 2-4x, grow
brand recognition and increase unit profit margins.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will validate the
safety and accuracy of an ultraviolet/light-sensitive cosmetic dye (chromophore)
intended to monitor sunscreen protection in real-time. Sunscreen can prevent
skin cancer, sunburns and photo-aging; however, users chronically underapply
sunscreen and do not reapply often enough. Though numerous attempts have been
made to create indicators to measure sunscreen effectiveness, they are
inaccurate, expensive and inconvenient, which accounts for their limited use and
adoption by the industry and consumers. Sunscreen Sun Protection Factor (SPF)
ratings are the only global standard of protection and based on a sunscreen’s
ability to protect users from sunburn. Therefore, the first aim of this project
is to determine the photoaction spectrum of the chromophore by
spectrofluorometry and compare it to the Erythemal Response Curve—the relative
type and intensities of ultraviolet radiation that cause sunburns. The second
aim will be to validate the chromophore will accurately change color when SPF
levels drop below SPF 10-15 across a range of sunscreens of variable broadband
(UVA/UVB) protection. Finally, since the chromophore is applied directly to skin
via a carrier ink, industry standard cosmetic safety tests will be conducted to
ensure the chromophore is safe for skin application.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.