* 2101126
* Research Initiation Awards: Tailored Carbon Nanotubes-Supported Nickel Nanoparticles for Carbon-Carbon Bond Forming Reactions in Batch and Continuous Flow
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Ali Siamaki, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 293,066.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Fayetteville State University supports research in nanochemistry. More
specifically, it supports research that investigates novel synthesis of
heterogeneous catalysts where nickel is supported on carbon nanotubes.
Furthermore, the project engages undergraduate engineering students in the
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to develop
a straightforward, simple, and cost-effective method for preparation of nickel
nanoparticles supported on carbon nanotubes (Ni/MWCNTs) to serve as an efficient
heterogeneous nanocatalyst for carbon-carbon cross coupling reactions. The
method involves a dry mixing of the corresponding nickel salt with carbon
nanotubes at ambient temperature without the necessity of any reducing agent or
solvent under mechanical shaking of a ball-mill. Notably, both the transition
metal and solid support used for making these nanocomposites are inexpensive and
highly abundant. The as-prepared Ni/MWCNTs nanoparticles will be used for cross
coupling reactions under batch and continuous flow process conditions. In this
regard, the use of microwave energy will be investigated as an alternative,
convenient, green, and efficient heating source to develop the necessary
conditions for the catalytic reactions. The proposed research will not only
address fundamental aspects of carbon-carbon bond formation reactions but will
also aid in exploring the continuous flow technology (e.g., FlowLab) for
translation to large-scale production of useful organic molecules. This section
of the project will bring together the best techniques to develop a technology
with direct industrial applicability and will expedite broader application of
continuous throughput manufacture technologies for the synthesis of active
pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) through the major bond formation utilizing the
cross-coupling catalysis in flow. This project is potentially beneficial to
industrially relevant commercial applications and pharmaceutical industries, and
thus expand the opportunities for future collaborations and partnerships with
pharmaceutical companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.