* 2101163
* Education and Experience: Do Teacher Qualifications in Career-Focused STEM Courses Make a Difference?
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Gottfried, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2024
* USD 699,669.00

When high school students take “STEM-CTE” (i.e., career and technical education
courses in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields), they have
much stronger outcomes across the school-to-college/career pipeline, including
lower dropout rates and better attendance in high school, stronger math
achievement in 12th grade, and higher odds of pursuing advanced STEM courses in
high school and college. Growing teacher research shows that teachers matter for
students’ success, particularly in STEM. In particular, research has established
that teacher education and credentials in STEM fields, as well as years of
classroom teaching experiences are key teacher factors in supporting student
outcomes. However, there has been limited prior research regarding (a) who
teaches STEM-CTE courses and (b) whether the benefits of these courses and
pathways are driven or influenced by specific characteristics of STEM-CTE
teachers. This project will aim to explore these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using high school statewide longitudinal data
from Maryland from 2012-2022, this study will first document who has taught
STEM-CTE courses over this period. The dataset includes approximately 5,000
unique teacher observations and approximately 500,000 unique student
observations. After exploring the teaching landscape, the study will then
explore whether qualifications (i.e., education, credentials, teaching
experience) of teachers in STEM-CTE high school courses were associated with
their students’ success. Indicators of success in the dataset include end-of-
course grades, STEM-CTE concentration/industry-recognized credentialing,
advanced STEM coursetaking (e.g., honors, AP, IB, dual-enrollment), STEM
standardized test scores, math SAT/ACT scores, attendance/suspension rates, on-
time graduation, and reduced dropout. Data analysis includes multivariate
regression analyses, supplemented with tests for nonrandom sorting of teachers
to students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.