* 2101171
* Research Initiation Award: Polymerization in Metalloporphyrin Metal Organic Frameworks
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yalan Ning, Huston-Tillotson University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 298,869.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Huston-Tillotson University proposes a new synthetic scheme using metal
compounds. The synthesis and characterization of these compounds will provide an
opportunity for undergraduate students to obtain basic training in chemical
synthesis, characterization, and polymerization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the proposed study is to develop a recyclable metalloporphyrin MOFs (metal-
organic frameworks) catalyst by means of a synthesis flow utilizing inexpensive
starting materials for controlled selective polymerization. The work has the
potential to yield a deeper understanding about the coordination environment of
porphyrin with different metal centers. The MOFs formation as a function of
groups on the porphyrin and polymerization inside the MOFs will be studied. The
kinetics and mechanism will be compared with those in homogenous polymerization.
The work has the potential to discover ideal conditions for polymerization and
MOFs recovery. The work could uncover a heterogenous system of MOFs catalyst of
multiple-site polymerization which would be an improvement over traditional
homogenous catalysts of single-site polymerization. The proposed
metalloporphyrin MOFs could have the benefits of increased catalyst stability
and recyclability in contrast to traditional homogeneous ones. Additional
advances could come from utilizing the high internal surface area of MOFs,
enabling advances in the efficiency of catalytic
polymerization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.