* 2101671
* Local Cohomology, Differential Operators, and Determinantal Rings
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Anurag Singh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

The award is concerned with several questions in commutative algebra: this is a
field that studies solution sets of polynomial equations, and the questions that
will be investigated eventually yield information about the nature of the
solution sets. Polynomial equations arise in a number of situations; indeed
commutative algebra continues to develop a fascinating interaction with several
fields, becoming an increasingly valuable tool in science and engineering. The
focus here is on questions relating to differential operators, particularly in
the context of rings of invariants; the differential operators may be thought of
as extensions of the rules of calculus to solutions sets of polynomials, while
the rings of invariants are collections of polynomials that remain unchanged
under various transformations. A key part of the awarded work is the training of
graduate students in topics connected with the research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Levasseur and Stafford described the rings of
differential operators on various classical invariant rings of characteristic
zero; one of the projects, related to the PI's recent joint work with Jeffries,
is studying the rings of differential operators on classical invariant rings in
the positive characteristic case, and another is the behavior of differential
operators under base change. Key tools for these come from local cohomology
theory, and the study of integer torsion in local cohomology modules. Other
projects involve Hankel determinantal rings, close cousins of the determinantal
rings of classical invariant theory. The F-regularity of Hankel determinantal
rings of positive prime characteristic will be investigated; this has an
entirely equivalent formulation in terms of differential operators. The question
arises naturally from the PI's joint work with Conca, Mostafazadehfard, and
Varbaro, where it was proved that these rings have rational
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.