* 2101198
* Precipitating Change in Alaskan and Hawaiian Schools: Modeling Mitigation of Coastal Erosion
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Noelani Puniwai, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,852,670.00

Alaska and Hawaii face similar challenges with threats caused by coastal
erosion. This project will engage middle school students in place-based coastal
erosion investigations that interweave Indigenous knowledge and Western STEM
perspectives. Indigenous perspectives will emphasize learning from place and
community. Western STEM perspectives will focus on systems and computational
thinking. The project will design and implement a series of classroom
investigations using universal design for learning (UDL) principles, creating a
glossary, translations for Indigenous languages, and ways to assist students in
understanding of Indigenous and Western science terms. The coastal erosion
content will be collaboratively piloted, refined, and implemented with middle
school teachers and students in Alaska and Hawaii. Project research will build
on and refine a learning progression framework that describes how students
develop an understanding of coastal erosion that occurs over time. Research will
also examine how students make sense of and develop increasingly complex and
integrated knowledge and practice in Earth science and computational thinking.
Areas of knowledge and practice will include explaining and predicting events
and processes in systems and developing solutions to problems. The project’s
curriculum and findings will be widely disseminated to researchers and the
broader body of Alaskan and Hawaiian schools and teachers, as well as the
Indigenous education and science education communities, to share understanding
about the project’s model and lessons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
position middle school students in a culturally congruent epistemological stance
(student-as-anthropologist), allowing them to build Earth science learning from
both Indigenous knowledge as well as Western-style inquiry and promote their
ability to apply integrated Earth science, mathematics, and computational
thinking skills in the context of coastal erosion. The project will recruit 20
teachers, and the intervention is expected to be integrated into approximately
24 classrooms. Project research and evaluation will investigate how the
culturally congruent and scientifically and technologically ambitious
instruction prepares students to bring multiple perspectives, including
Indigenous and Western science, to study and address socioscientific issues.
This project will adopt a design-based implementation research approach to
answer three main research questions. The research questions are: 1: What are
different ways students make sense of coastal erosion? How do students’ ways of
making sense reflect personal and cultural (including Indigenous) funds of
knowledge and Western STEM perspectives reflective of Next Generation Science
Standards-aligned three-dimensional science knowledge and practice? 2: How do
culturally congruent, multi-perspective learning experiences that value both
students’ home culture and Western science perspectives relate to changes in
students’ science knowledge and practices integrating coastal erosion and
computational thinking? 3: How do multi-perspective learning experiences
influence the approaches to learning students describe when they encounter a new
socioscientific issue? Data will be analyzed using a mixed methods
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.