* 2101308
* Building a Flexible and Comprehensive Approach to Supporting Student Development of Whole Number Understanding
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Hank Fien, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2025
* USD 2,291,067.00

A critical goal for the nation is ensuring all students have a successful start
in learning mathematics. While strides have been made in supporting at-risk
students in mathematics, significant challenges still exist. These challenges
include enabling access to and learning of advanced mathematics content,
ensuring that learning gains don’t fade over time, and providing greater support
to students with the most severe learning needs. One way to address these
challenges is through the use of mathematics programs designed to span multiple
grades. The purpose of this project is to develop and conduct initial studies of
a multi-grade program targeting critical early math concepts. The project is
designed to address equitable access to mathematics and STEM learning for all
students, including those with or at-risk for learning disabilities and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three aims of the project are
to: (1) develop a set of 10 Bridging Lessons designed to link existing
kindergarten and first grade intervention programs (2) develop a second grade
intervention program that in combination with the kindergarten and first grade
programs will promote a coherent sequence of whole number concepts, skills, and
operations across kindergarten to second grade; and (3) conduct a pilot study of
the second grade program examining initial promise to improve student
mathematics achievement. To accomplish these goals multiple methods will be used
including iterative design and development process and the use of a randomized
control trial to study potential impact on student math learning. Study
participants include approximately 220 kindergarten through second grade
students from 8 schools across three districts. Study measures include teacher
surveys, direct observations, and student math outcome measures. The project
addresses the need for research developed intervention programs focused on
advanced whole number content. The work is intended to support schools in
designing and deploying math interventions to provide support to students both
within and across the early elementary grades as they encounter and engage with
critical mathematics content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.