* 2101889
* Modular Symbols in Arithmetic
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Romyar Sharifi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2024
* USD 248,201.00

The focus of this research project is in number theory, an ancient subject that
grew out of the study of arithmetic properties of the integers. Today,
connections between arithmetic objects of different mathematical natures
(algebraic, geometric, and analytic) form a hallmark of this field. The research
in this award fits into this theme while exploring deep connections that were
perhaps unexpected until recently. The general principle of the research is that
certain algebraic problems can be reinterpreted as geometric problems in a
higher dimension: for example, paths on a certain curve determine certain
“products” of arithmetically interesting numbers. The research of the PI aims to
uncover intricate but explicit relationships of this sort with the broad aim of
providing a window through which well-known conjectures and statements of
arithmetic may be seen in a new light. Graduate students supported by the award
will receive training to contribute towards the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award concerns
analogues of a partly conjectural relationship between modular symbols and
Steinberg symbols of cyclotomic units. This says roughly that class groups of
cyclotomic fields are explicitly determined by and determine homology groups of
modular curves reduced modulo Eisenstein ideals: an explicit map on symbols is
expected to be inverse to a map constructed from the Galois action on the
cohomology of a modular curve. The primary focus of the award is the extension
of the framework and known results to higher-dimensional algebraic groups and
other global fields. In particular, the PI plans to significantly generalize a
motivic construction of the explicit map in the original conjecture and to
analyze Galois representations that should give the inverse maps in cases of
arithmetic interest. The overall expectation is that the geometry of locally
symmetric spaces should explicitly determine the arithmetic of lattices in
Galois representations, which is to say the structure of Selmer
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.