* 2101138
* Research Initiation Award: Multi-locus Genome-Wide Association Study and Gene Expression Analysis of Anticancer Peptide Lunasin in Soybean (Glycine max  L. Merr.) Seeds
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jiazheng Yuan, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 293,150.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Fayetteville State University provides an opportunity to enhance
genetic and genomic capabilities at the institution. Bioactive molecules in
soybeans will be studied. Students will be trained to gain experience in field
research, bioinformatics, computer programming, genomics, and proteomics and
receive training in the use of state-of-the art
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.] seeds contain a
variety of phytochemicals that have potential health benefits. As one of the
bioactive molecules in soybean seeds, lunasin has shown remarkable
cancerâ€“preventive properties, antioxidant, and hypocholesterolemic effects in
animal and in vitro trials. However, the genetic bases of lunasin inheritance
and candidate genes for lunasin production in soybean have not been investigated
genetically to the best of our knowledge. This research is aimed at: (1)
identify genetic variants including quantitative trait nucleotides (QTNs) and
their associated single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers for lunasin
contents in the soybean germplasm collection using multi-locus genome-wide
association study (GWAS) approach, (2) select elite lines from the mapping panel
with high and stable lunasin contents for soybean trait improvement, (3) analyze
candidate gene expression to validate QTNs for lunasin productions in soybean
plants. The information of QTNs and SNP markers associated with lunasin contents
will be used in molecular breeding programs to produce elite soybean cultivars
with better seed quality and cancer prevention. The findings of the proposed
studies will seal the gap between advanced clinical therapeutic success and lack
of genetic information for lunasin inheritance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.