* 2101988
* Understanding and Controlling Reaction Mechanisms Under Vibrational Strong Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Wei Xiong, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 513,307.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Wei Xiong and his group at the University
of California-San Diego aim to understand the mechanisms of a specific set of
chemical reactions in optical cavities. When reactants and/or products are in a
cavity composed of two partial-reflective mirrors, and are highly concentrated
to reach the so-called strong coupling regime, the activity and selectivity of
reactions in the cavity can differ from the same reaction outside cavities. Such
a phenomenon opens a new way to control chemical reactions and can profoundly
impact reaction engineering through a simple optical method. However, there has
been debate about the experimental observations that support the claim of
cavity-modified reactions, and the molecular-level mechanisms of how the
cavities modify reactions remain unclear. Dr. Xiong and his group aim to
quantify the reaction in cavities and understand the underlying mechanisms
through optical spectroscopy. A proper characterization of the cavity reactions
and understanding of the mechanisms will lay a solid foundation for rationally
designing cavities to modify chemistry. To enhance the general public's interest
in chemistry, Dr. Xiong is setting up a food and chemistry YouTube channel to
discuss the basic chemistry of food and cooking. Videos will feature scientists
cooking food based on their own backgrounds to embrace the diverse culture in
our society. While one of the purposes of this activity is to broadcast
chemistry through food, something everyone can enjoy, another purpose is to show
scientists in real-life settings. Observing scientists in more familiar settings
can help motivate young learners to pursue STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) careers and encourage their families to support
such aspirations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study
chemical reactions modified by molecular polaritons to gain new insight into the
roles that dark modes and cooperativity play in the reactions. Vibrational
strong coupling (VSC) of light and matter occurs when molecular vibrational and
photon cavity modes exchange energy faster than the lifetime of both modes.
Under VSC, cavity photons and molecular vibrational excitations hybridize to
form molecular vibrational polaritons. Recent reports have shown several
fascinating examples of how molecular potential energy landscapes and
concomitant reaction pathways can be modified under VSC conditions, including
modifying reaction branching ratios and enhancing or suppressing chemical
reaction rates, making VSC a promising new tool to manipulate chemical
reactions. However, there are several challenges in this emerging field. This
project focuses on addressing three outstanding challenges by developing an
alternative and more direct analytical method to quantify chemistry under VSC;
quantifying the reaction performance and polariton/dark mode dynamics to
understand the interplay between dark modes and polaritons and how it influences
chemistry under VSC; and aiming to understand the role of energy transfer in
chemistry under VSC. The main research tools include ultrafast spectroscopy and
analytical instruments such as GC-MS (gas chromatography/mass spectrometry). The
outcomes of this project include the development of an alternative way to
quantify chemistry under VSC and better understanding of the mechanisms of
chemistry under VSC. The broader impacts include new design principles for the
rational design of VSC conditions to control reactions and influence the field
of catalysis, pharmaceutical molecule synthesis, green chemistry, and
photochemistry. The team also hosts undergraduate research students from groups
that are underrepresented in science, in order to help them become familiar with
graduate life and introduce them to cutting-edge research programs in an effort
to broaden participation in graduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.