* 2101021
* SHF CORE: Small: Hybrid NLP and Formal Techniques for Synthesizing Assertions and Identifying Ambiguities from English
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Michael Hsiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,821.00

Complex, high-performance computing systems are being developed at a rapid rate,
but it is becoming increasingly difficult to verify these designs against their
specifications. The specifications are generally written in natural language,
which are inherently imprecise, ambiguous and potentially inconsistent. Although
attempts at processing natural-language specification documents have been made
with templates and machine learning, they do not adequately deal with
imprecision and ambiguity in the text. This project combines natural-language
processing (NLP) and formal analysis to tackle this difficult problem. Making
strides in in this domain will open doors to new design strategies that leverage
natural language. Because this project involves the processing and analysis of
natural language, the results are also applicable to engaging K-12 teachers and
students in understanding computational concepts in plain
English.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a hybrid framework
for automatic translation of natural-language specifications into formal logic
by combining NLP and formal analysis of the text in specification documents.
Unlike existing methods, the hybrid model is intended to produce reasons for
failing to properly translate the text (due to imprecision or ambiguity), so
that the user can clarify the original text. Suggestions on how to fix such
imprecise, ambiguous, or inconsistent sentences are also being produced. This
requires the understanding of the intent of the sentence(s) and potential ways
that they could be corrected to become precise and unambiguous. Specific tasks
include the construction of flexible dependency grammars, robust semantic frame
parsers, rigorous formal analyses, meaningful feedback generation, and run-time
suggestions. The coherent set of tasks is offering insight on best strategies
for synergizing NLP and formal analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.