* 2101135
* I-Corps: An offline surgical telementoring platform that guides the surgeon via an augmented reality headset
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Cagri Savran, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is the development of a software and
hardware platform that aims to address the gap in lack of surgical care
expertise in rural and austere environments. Usually, most surgeries are
delegated to large urban medical centers. When evacuation is not possible and
immediate treatment is imperative, surgeons and medics rely on written guides or
video teleconferencing seeking for assistance. Lack of expert surgeons and a
stable internet connection make the current mentoring practices ineffective. The
platform is lightweight, portable, interactive, and standalone, enabling
effective health care in rural areas. The proposed technology also may be
helpful in training surgeons in using new tools, techniques, and surgical
procedures without expensive and bulky simulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of software applications and
hardware for telementoring with augmented reality and artificial intelligence
(AI). The proposed infrastructure includes a hardware platform that relies on
cameras, see-through displays and depth sensors to increase the quality of
collaboration between mentor and trainee. The platform is designed to enhance
the mentor and trainee sense of co-presence through an augmented visual channel,
which has been shown to lead to measurable improvements in the traineeâ€™s
surgical performance. The goal is to develop a technology to complement or
substitute the expert mentors when needed. The platform uses a suite of
applications and hardware that includes an AI module that allows telementoring
of generalist surgeons to perform surgeries through an augmented reality
headset. The AI agent monitors the surgery state and predicts the next
instruction, which is conveyed verbally to the mentee. The system is a portable,
standalone design that may be used in rural and austere environments, where
there is no expert supervision and a lack of a stable internet
connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.