* 2101259
* RUI:CAS: Metal Phosphides on Nanostructured Indium Oxide - New Photocatalysts for CO2 Hydrogenation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Mark Bussell, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 366,514.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Mark Bussell and Robert Berger of Western Washington University will study the
photothermal catalytic conversion of carbon dioxide. A particularly attractive
but scientifically imposing challenge is the photocatalytic conversion of carbon
dioxide to fuels such as methanol using sunlight. In this project, a new class
of catalytic materials that consists of a visible light-absorbing metal
phosphide dispersed on nanostructured indium oxide supports will be developed
for the photothermal conversion of carbon dioxide. The catalyst design strategy
employs a relatively new area of study within the heterogeneous catalysis
community, namely photothermal catalysis, in which light absorption is optimized
for the catalytic reaction, and localized heating within catalyst particles
optimized for efficient conversion of reactants to products. The experimental
investigation will be led by PI Bussell while the computational studies will be
led by co-PI Berger. The project will involve undergraduate and M.S. students,
and a course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) investigating the
photocatalytic properties of metal oxides will be developed for implementation
at a nearby community college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mark Bussell and Robert
Berger of Western Washington University will investigate the photothermal
catalytic conversion of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide via the reverse water-
gas shift reaction over metal phosphide-oxide hybrid materials. The
photocatalysts to be developed will comprise visible light-absorbing metal
phosphides (NixPy, In(x)Ga(1-x)P) dispersed on nanostructured indium oxide
supports. The metal phosphides will have distinct and tunable electronic and
structural properties, and the two kinds of indium oxide materials to be
employed (nanocubes and nanorods) will enable the effects of support morphology
to be probed. A range of structural and spectroscopic methods including in situ
Raman spectroscopy will be used to characterize the photocatalysts, and the
experimental studies will be complemented by density functional theory (DFT)
investigations of the electronic and interfacial properties of the metal
phosphide-oxide materials. The outcomes of this research will include the
development of a new class of earth-abundant photothermal catalysts and an
improved fundamental understanding of the roles of the metal phosphide and oxide
components in CO2 hydrogenation and related processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.