* 2101413
* DataX: Exploring Justice-Oriented Data Science with Secondary School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2023
* David DeLiema, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 538,863.00

Understanding data is critical for informed citizens. Data science is a growing
and emerging field that can incorporate statistics, mathematics, and computer
science to develop disciplinary knowledge and address societal challenges. This
project will develop an integrated, justice-oriented curriculum and a digital
platform for teaching secondary students about data science in science and
social studies classrooms. The platform will help students learn about data
science using real-world data sets and problems. This project includes science
and social studies teachers in the design of the resources and in testing them
in secondary school classrooms. Research and development in data science
education is needed to understand how students can learn more about the use of
data in meaningful and authentic ways. This interdisciplinary project will also
help students meaningfully analyze real-world data sets, interpret social
phenomena, and engage in social change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During a two-year
project period, we aim to iteratively advance three design components of the
DataX program: (a) a justice-oriented data science curriculum integrated in
secondary science and social studies; (b) a web-based learning platform that
extends the Common Online Data Analysis Platform (CODAP) to support
collaboration and sophisticated data practices; and (c) pedagogical practices
that involve learners to work collectively as community. The guiding research
question is: What scaffolds and resources are necessary to support the co-
development of data, disciplinary, and critical literacies in secondary
classrooms? To address this, the project will use participatory design research
with science and social studies teachers to develop and test the curriculum, the
learning platform, and the pedagogical practices. The data collected will
include qualitative sources gathered from participatory design workshops and
classrooms, as well as quantitative data from questionnaires and system logs.
Using the data, we examine students' data science skills, data dispositions, and
social participation in collaborative data
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.