* 2101083
* Learning about Viral Epidemics through Engagement with Different Types of Models
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Troy Sadler, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 08/31/2025
* USD 925,556.00

The project will develop new curriculum and use it to research how high school
students learn about viral epidemics while developing competencies for
scientific modeling. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for
supporting student learning about viral outbreaks and other complex societal
issues. Given the complexity of issues like viral outbreaks, engaging learners
with different types of models (e.g., mechanistic, computational and system
models) is critical. However, there is little research available regarding how
learners coordinate sense making across different models. This project will
address the gap by studying student learning with different types of models and
will use these findings to develop and study new curriculum materials that
incorporate multiple models for teaching about viral epidemics in high school
biology classes. COVID-19 caused devasting impacts, and marginalized groups
including the Latinx community suffered disproportionately negative outcomes.
The project will directly recruit Latinx students to ensure that design products
are culturally responsive and account for Latinx learner needs. The project will
create new pathways for engaging Latinx students in innovative, model-based
curriculum about critically important issues. Project research and resources
will be widely shared via publications, conference presentations, and
professional development opportunities for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will research three aspects of student learning: a) conceptual
understandings about viral epidemics, b) epistemic understandings associated
with modeling, and c) model-informed reasoning about viral epidemics and
potential solutions. The research will be conducted in three phases. Phase 1
will explore how students make sense of viral epidemics through different types
of models. This research will be conducted with small groups of students as they
work through learning activities and discourse opportunities associated with
viral epidemic models. Phase 2 will research how opportunities to engage in
modeling across different types of models should be supported and sequenced for
learning about viral epidemics. These findings will make it possible to revise
the learning performance which will be used to develop a curricular module for
high school biology classes. Phase 3 will study the extent to which students
learn about viral epidemics through engagement in modeling practices across
different models. For this final phase, teachers will participate in
professional development about viral epidemics and modeling and then implement
the viral epidemic module in their biology classes. A pre- and post-test
research design will be used to explore student conceptual understandings,
model-informed reasoning, and epistemic understandings. The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.