* 2101816
* Digitization PEN: Small and Hungry: Enhancing LepNet TCN with microlepidoptera and 50 years of host plant data from the Essig Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Peter Oboyski, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 127,645.00

Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) is the most diverse order of insect
herbivores. Rich in ecological data they are often models for co-evolution,
population dynamics, and environmental change. Because of their dependence on
particular plant species and climate zones, many species are used as
environmental indicators of habitat quality and climatic shifts. However,
digitization of insect collections, particularly Lepidoptera, lag far behind
most other groups due to the large size of collections, the small and delicate
nature of specimens, and the tiny, difficult to read specimen labels. The
Lepidoptera of North America Network (LepNet) TCN is addressing this paucity of
data by digitizing occurrence records of butterflies and moths from over 28
institutions across the United States, along with high resolution images of over
95,000 species. The Essig Museum is contributing to this effort by adding over
100 years of specimen records and ecological data from western North America.
All data and images are freely and immediately available online through
aggregators, including iDigBio, GBIF, SCAN, and the Essig Museum Database, to
researchers, educators, land managers, conservation planners, and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Essig Museum is a leading collection of
Lepidoptera in the western US with extensive taxonomic breadth and occurrence
density, particularly for microlepidoptera in northern California and Mexico.
Past and ongoing projects of the Essig Museum focus on specialized habitats such
dunes, coastal scrub, and offshore islands, as well as recovery from wildfires
and long-term sampling of regional preserves. Moreover, a long tradition of
rearing specimens from host plants, including fruit and stem borers, gall-
formers, and leaf-miners, has resulted in many decades of detailed records of
interaction data including host plants and parasitoids. This project will
disseminate georeferenced digital data for 125,000 butterfly and moth specimens,
along with high resolution images of 2000 species, including 608 holotypes.
These data will fill many gaps for western North America to improve niche
modelling efforts and investigate population dynamics for the past 100 years.
High resolution images are used to train automated identification services to
address bottlenecks in ecological and conservation research and rapid
identification of pests. Much of the digitization work will be carried out by
undergraduate students who will also receive training in biodiversity
informatics and insect biology. Data and analyses derived from this effort will
be used in online and public exhibits related to insect evolution, global change
biology, and natural history of western North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.