* 2101256
* CAS: New Strategies for Electrocatalytic Reactions with Transition-Metal Hydrides
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Robert Waymouth, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2025
* USD 704,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Robert Waymouth of the Department of Chemistry at Stanford University
is studying new catalysts and patterns of reactivity for electrochemically
driven processes. This class of reactions is being targeted both to develop new,
more environmentally-friendly synthetic routes for commodity chemicals and to
advance scientific understanding of chemical reactions relevant to energy
storage. This second application is becoming especially important with the
increasing adoption of intermittent, renewable energy sources. The primary goal
is the development of catalysts that are more efficient, longer-lasting, and
less wasteful through the application of novel electrochemical techniques. While
performance is a significant consideration, understanding the fundamental
reactivity is of paramount importance. The illumination of chemical reactivity
patterns that are currently poorly understood creates opportunity for further
improvement by the broader scientific community well beyond the scope of the
currently proposed work, an example of broader impacts. The research to be
conducted under this grant will engage young researchers in the translation of
basic science to practical, application-focused technologies. The urgent
challenge of transitioning toward a sustainable energy economy highlights the
critical role that these research and educational experiences will play in the
training of the next generation of scientists to address these challenges. The
PI and his students will be involved in several education and outreach
activities including involvement with local K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Robert Waymouth of the
Department of Chemistry at Stanford University is studying new catalysts and
patterns of reactivity for electrochemically driven processes. This research is
focused on improving fundamental understanding of how to mediate reversible
electrocatalytic oxidation/reduction reactions. The primary goal of this
research is to exploit the advantages of molecular catalysis to illuminate key
mechanistic principles of the molecular processes that enable fast,
chemoselective, and energy-efficient electrocatalytic transformations of
alcohols and ketones as representative reduced and oxidized liquid fuels or
substrates. While considerable effort has been devoted to heterogeneous or
enzymatic electrocatalysts to achieve these goals, limitations in current
understanding of how to meet these challenges requires new approaches. In this
vein, the proposed research is directed at the development of new classes of
electrocatalysts, electrocatalytic mediators and tandem electrocatalytic
reactions. While the focus is the development of homogeneous electrocatalysts,
the fundamental insights and mechanistic concepts derived from the studies of
these homogeneous systems should be generalizable to more robust heterogeneous
electrode catalysts, highlighting the potential for broad scientific impact from
these studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.