* 2101081
* Research Initiation Award: Synthetic Turf for Advanced Engineering Landfill Closure System
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Md Jobair Bin Alam, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,267.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Prairie View A&amp;M University will support research in Civil and
Environmental Engineering. The project will explore a preliminary design model
that would serve as a framework to evaluate the use of synthetic turf as a
landfill top cover, and will engage undergraduate students from the institution
who pursue degrees and careers in Civil and Environmental
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sustainable and cost-effective design of
final cover depends on the design methodology, appropriate materials selection,
effective construction, and operation of the cover. Typical final cover systems
employed for waste containment still have issues with construction difficulties,
cost, local climatic factors, and most importantly, performance degradation over
time. The fundamental objective of the proposed project is to utilize a
relatively new material “Synthetic Turf” as landfill top cover and investigate
if the engineered (synthetic) turf cover can improve the environmental and
economical sustainability compared to the typical cover methods. The technical
scope of the project includes the estimation of cover soil moisture and pore
water pressure, analyzing the critical depth of soil moisture variation,
investigating the field soil water characteristic curve (SWCC), examining of the
effect of climatic factors on cover hydrology, and numerical modeling to
simulate the field behavior of the cover systems. To determine the feasibility
of the engineered turf cover and pursue the technical tasks of the project, a
field pilot study will be conducted that includes side-by-side construction of
three types of cover (Engineered Turf Cover, Traditional Clay Cover, and ET
Cover). The field installation includes high-performance moisture and
temperature sensors, tensiometers, and a weather station. The project also
involves the pre-construction laboratory characterization of the cover soil to
model efficient cover construction and standardize the numerical simulation.
Comparison of the technical performance among different covers evaluated in this
project will increase the understanding of critical factors that can impact
cover hydrology and lead decision makers to choose the sustainable cover
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.