* 2101277
* Culturally Responsive, Affective-Focused Teaching of Science and Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Catherine Paolucci, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 06/30/2024
* USD 917,755.00

Students and professionals who identify as Black, Indigenous, or people of color
(BIPOC) continue to be underrepresented in STEM fields. Broadening participation
in STEM requires a change in how K-12 STEM teachers engage and educate students
who identify as BIPOC. Research has demonstrated that cultural and social
justice connections can lead to positive academic outcomes for students who
identify as BIPOC in science and mathematics. This project will provide a field-
based science and mathematics teacher education program that supports teaching
focused on students’ affective development through culturally responsive
practices. In this project, affective development is defined by students’
abilities to incorporate their science and mathematics learning into their own
unique personal value systems. The project's field-based teacher education
program takes place over a two-year period and models how culturally responsive
and affective instruction can occur in the STEM classroom to engage students.
The project participants include 48 secondary science and mathematics teachers
who work with about 5300 students in a district with some of the most persistent
and pronounced educational equity issues in the state of Florida. The associated
research will have implications for theory and practice that can be extended to
improve STEM educator development in schools and districts throughout the
country. This aligns with NSF’s commitment to advancing K-12 student and teacher
learning in the STEM disciplines through research-based design and development
of innovative models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using design-based implementation
research, this project will accomplish the following objectives: (1) transform
the practices of a district-wide set of 48 secondary science and mathematics
teachers by equipping them with culturally responsive, affective-focused
practices and leadership skills; (2) construct tools and resources that will
serve as open-access professional development materials shared widely via
learning management tools; and (3) develop an evidence-based and adaptable
theory of change to share widely with the STEM education community. The research
plan draws on both qualitative and quantitative research methods to study the
experiences and changes of science and mathematics teachers and their students
as they experience continuously refined versions of the teacher education model.
In particular, this project focuses on studying teacher and student outcomes,
including teachers’ culturally responsive, affective-focused practices and self-
efficacy, their understanding of student values and cultural backgrounds, and
their attitudes toward cultural diversity; growth in students’ affective
development and STEM achievement, their interest in STEM careers, and STEM
identity development. Answers to the research questions will provide
empirically-driven means for developing both the practical tools and the
theoretical models of change toward STEM teacher transformation and positive
impacts for students who identify as BIPOC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.