* 2101383
* Developing the Pedagogical Skills and Science Expertise of Teachers in Underserved Rural Settings
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Joshua Stowers, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,318,227.00

Rural science teachers are often isolated and have few opportunities for
meaningful collaboration with fellow teachers, an important source of
professional learning. The project will develop and research an innovative model
for rural science teacher professional development via technology-mediated
lesson study (TMLS). This approach supports translating professional learning
into classroom practice by developing a technology-based, social support system
among rural teachers. The project will host summer workshops for high school
biology and chemistry teachers from four rural Utah regions to learn about 3D
science teaching. (3D science teaching incorporates core ideas science
disciplines, science research practices, and concepts cutting across disciplines
to help students meet performance expectations by engaging with authentic
science phenomena.) In the workshops, participants will collaborate with the
project team and teachers of the same subject from the same region of the state
to co-design 3D science lessons that align with state and national education
standards. Building on relationships developed during the workshops, the
regional teacher teams will engage in a novel form of professional learning:
technology-mediated lesson study. (Lesson study is an instructional inquiry
model where teachers work face-to-face in small collaborative groups to craft,
deliver, observe, and refine teaching practice.) This project will develop
capacity for science teaching for 88 rural science teachers in four regions of
the state, who will reach approximately 10,000 rural Utah students each year.
Many of the students are members of the sovereign Ute, Paiute, Goshute, Navajo
(Diné), and Shoshone Nations. The science lesson plans participants design will
be made available to all Utah teachers, and shared with a national audience
through a website that shares peer-reviewed science lesson plans. Project
research and resources will be further disseminated through conference
presentations and publications in peer-reviewed and practitioner
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research how TMLS supports
teachers in the process of translating professional learning into practice and
investigate the impact of changing teachers’ social support network to include
teachers of the same subject from other rural schools. The project will study
the effects of co-design activities and TMLS cycles on teachers’ changing
capacity, practice, and social support system using mixed-methods research.
Changes in capacity and practice will be examined qualitatively through
interviews, video observations of classroom teaching, and TMLS meetings. The
effects of TMLS on teachers’ social support system will be analyzed
quantitatively using social network analysis to identify individuals who act as
information hubs for 3D science teaching. These teachers will be interviewed to
better understand their social interactions. Using design-based implementation
research, the project will iteratively improve the professional learning
experience collaboratively with the science teacher leaders who participate in
the project. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.