* 2101320
* I-Corps: Using waste heat generated by spent nuclear fuel (SNF) to dry wastewater sludge
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Todd Allen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a system that uses waste heat generated by spent nuclear fuel
(SNF) to dry biosolids, a byproduct of wastewater treatment. The technology may
create a virtuous cycle whereby two currently existing sources of waste – spent
nuclear fuel and biosolids – are associated to create a valuable product – a
sustainable biomass. An estimated $180,000 and 4,000 metric tons of carbon
dioxide may be saved yearly per nuclear fuel/biosolids dryer compared to the
alternative drying system which uses natural gas. The United States market,
which has a total of 90 spent nuclear fuel (SNF) storage sites and 14,748
wastewater plants is a potential market since current SNF is not recycled. An
initial analysis revealed 26 SNF storage sites situated within 10 miles of
wastewater treatment plants. The proximity of the SNF storage sites and
wastewater treatment plants will significantly reduce the transportation costs
of the biosolids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a system that uses waste heat generated by spent nuclear fuel
(SNF) to dry biosolids, a byproduct of wastewater treatment. The system collects
decay heat from nuclear fuel stored in concrete dry casks and connects existing
nuclear waste storage technology with existing wastewater sludge drying
technology. In existing dry casks, the nuclear fuel is sealed within steel
canisters, which are then placed in a concrete overpack. The canisters are
cooled by natural convection. Air enters the casks from the bottom, pulls heat
from the canister, and exits from the top of the cask. The heated air is
collected by the system and directed into a biosolid dryer. This approach avoids
two main problems associated with the storage of nuclear waste: designing,
licensing, and constructing completely new nuclear waste storage solutions, and
transporting nuclear waste. This approach also provides a much-needed, year-
round biosolid disposal service to wastewater treatment plants and creates a
sustainable biomass from the biosolids. Additionally, this system is flexible
and could be used in other applications requiring low-grade heating, such as
landfill leachate treatment, carbon capture systems, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.