* 2101975
* Regulation of the early steps of wound-activated jasmonate biosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Marcelle Siegel, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 846,276.00

To meet the growing needs of global food production, crop losses due to pests
must be minimized. Many of pest resistance responses in plants are mediated by
the hormonal signal, jasmonate (JA). The broader aim of this project is to
understand plant’s built-in defense mechanisms mediated by JA as an important
step toward developing sustainable pest mitigation measures. More specifically
this project will elucidate the very first step(s) of JA biosynthesis and how it
is linked to the perception of pest attacks by the plant cells. Available
evidence points toward involvement of enzymes called lipases that hydrolyze
membrane lipids as primary regulatory point. Uncovering biochemical regulation
of lipases has potential applications in the food, cosmetics, detergent, and
pharmaceutical industries. Additionally, membrane ion channels analogous to
those involved in animal neurotransmission are involved in pest activated
defense responses in plants. Learning how these elements are organized and
engaged to carry out analogous functions across kingdoms is fascinating and will
lead to more fundamental understanding about cell signaling. This project will
contribute to STEM education and public science literacy in several ways. First,
undergraduate participation in research will be promoted directly and indirectly
through the PI’s core and institutional programs. Second, public science
literacy will be enhanced through Sci-LiFT (Science Literacy for Future
Teachers) program aimed at including future secondary school science teachers in
authentic research. Training of future teachers and undergraduates will have far
reaching impacts on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissue injury such as that
caused by insect herbivory triggers numerous defense responses in plants. The
synthesis of the plant hormone jasmonate (JA) that begins within few minutes of
tissue damage is key to these defense responses, but how such rapid synthesis of
JA is achieved is still a mystery. The major goal of this project is to
investigate the initial steps of JA biosynthesis to understand how these steps
are regulated. The PI hypothesizes that the relevant lipases such as DEFECTIVE
IN ANTHER DEHISCENCE1 (DAD1) and GLYCEROL LIPASE A1 (GLA1) are subject to
distinct transcriptional and post-transcriptional modes of regulation: the
latter being responsible for the initial bust of JA, while the former primes the
plant for defense against future attacks. They further hypothesize that the
post-transcriptional mode of activation occurs after signaling from GLUTAMATE
RECEPTOR LIKE (GLR) ion channels that propagate wound response plant-wide. A
diverse range of molecular, genetic, and analytical tools developed in the PI’s
lab will be used in the well-established model systems of Arabidopsis and
Nicotiana to address following specific aims: i) determine biochemical
regulation of DAD1 and GLA1 lipases for wound-elicited JA biosynthesis, ii)
identify and characterize novel proteins regulating lipase activity, and iii)
determine the spatial and structural features that facilitate systemic GLR
signaling to the JA pathway. Both lipases and membrane ion channels are
fundamental to cell function across kingdoms and thus, understanding how these
pathways have evolved in plants will contribute to understanding their general
roles in life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.