* 2101255
* SEE DATA: Spaces of Empowerment for Equity and Diversity: Advancement Through Access
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Idowu Ajibade, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The Spaces of Empowerment for Equity and Diversity: Advancement Through Access
(SEE-DATA) project at Portland State University (PSU) aims to identify,
understand, and improve the workplace experiences and retention of faculty in
STEM fields who have been traditionally minoritized and marginalized based on
gender, race/ethnicity, and other intersectional identities (e.g., sexual
orientation, disability, socioeconomic status, national origin, immigrant
status). The project will collect, analyze, and map data about faculty’s
experiences at PSU to inform programs and policies that seek to foster the
retention and flourishing of a faculty that more closely resembles the diverse
student body at PSU. It is anticipated that the SEE-DATA project will
significantly contribute to improving institutional
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEE-DATA will take an intersectional approach to
data collection, management, analysis, visualization, and dissemination by
combining qualitative, quantitative, and socio-spatial data, techniques, and
mapping tools with the goal of conveying more nuanced understandings of the
equity landscape and “ecosystem” for diverse faculty members than has been
established to date elsewhere. The scope of the methodology that the project
will develop will be applicable to STEM departments across the university and to
other institutions. The project’s strengths-based self-assessment methodologies
will contribute to a toolkit for capturing and visualizing the dynamic interplay
between the multiple lived identities of STEM faculty as they are manifested in
the institutional landscape, thus supporting ADVANCE goals for expanding
intersectional equity strategies and interventions. This project addresses
limits in extant sources of data (e.g., numerical counts, climate surveys) on
the intersectional factors affecting academic STEM recruitment, workplace
experiences, retention, and promotion. Outcomes will be expected to advance a
clearer and deeper understanding of individual empowerment pathways and
institutional systemic change levers in advancing faculty equity in STEM.
Knowledge generated will be disseminated via avenues such as a project webpage,
public seminars, and conferences geared to professional and general audiences,
as well as through networks within PSU, at other colleges/universities, with
professional organizations nationally, and via the ADVANCE Resource Coordination
Network (ARC) and StratEGIC website. The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.