* 2101395
* Collaborative Research: Understanding STEM Teaching through Integrated Contexts in Everyday Life
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Augusto Macalalag, Arcadia University
* Continuing Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,594,017.00

Increased focus on school accountability and teacher performance measures have
resulted in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instruction
that emphasizes content and procedural knowledge over critical thinking and
real-world applications. Yet, critical thinking and application are essential in
developing functional scientific literacy skills among students. This need is
perhaps most pressing in economically depressed urban settings. One strategy to
promote STEM engagement and learning is to make clear and meaningful connections
between STEM concepts, principles, and STEM-related issues relevant to the
learner. Socioscientific issues (SSI) can provide a powerful avenue for
promoting the desired kinds of engagement. SSI are debatable and ill-defined
problems that have a basis in science but necessarily include moral and ethical
choices. SSI for economically disadvantaged, culturally diverse students in
urban settings might include, for example, lead paint contamination, poor water
or air quality, or the existence of “food deserts.” By integrating locally
relevant SSI with the goals of social justice, the Social Justice STEM
Pedagogies (SJSP) framework the project uses is intended to support students to
use their scientific expertise to be agents of change. SJSP can be potentially
transformative for teachers, students, schools, and the communities in which
students live. For SJSP to effectively promote STEM learning, however, teachers
must learn how to integrate STEM-concepts and practices into the various real-
world SSI present in their students’ environment. This collaborative project is
designed to implement and evaluate a comprehensive professional development plan
for grades 7 –12 STEM teachers from economically disadvantaged school districts
in Philadelphia and surrounding areas. Teachers will develop ways to incorporate
SSI into their instruction that are grounded in standards to foster students’
STEM engagement. The instructional practices enacted by teachers will enhance
students’ STEM literacy while utilizing their own knowledge and culture in
solving complex and ethically challenging STEM issues, thus promoting students’
abilities to be change agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research
project involves Arcadia University, Mercyhurst University, LaSalle University,
Villanova University, and St. Joseph’s University. It is designed to investigate
the effectiveness of a professional development (PD) program for STEM teachers
to develop their pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) in teaching SSI and SJSP.
Over four years, three cohorts of 25 grades 7-12 teachers will participate in
about 200 hours of PD. The SSI and SJSP encompass authentic, complex real-world,
STEM-based issues that are directly related to the inequities experienced by
students and their communities that students can engage with in the classroom
through the use of inquiry-based learning strategies. By promoting students’
engagement in and awareness of the relevance of STEM in everyday life, teacher
participants in this PD will foster STEM learning, especially among students who
have been historically marginalized from STEM disciplines, and who are from
economically disadvantaged backgrounds. The research plan is designed to reveal
elements of the PD program that are most effective in supporting teachers’
increased capacity to design and implement units of study that incorporate
scientific, social, and discursive elements of SSI. Using predominantly
qualitative methods, other outcomes include how teachers’ PCK change towards
teaching with SSI/SJSP; what factors support and inhibit teacher’s abilities to
promote SSI/SJSP; and how justice-centered STEM lessons help students to develop
moral and ethical reasoning, scientific skepticism, STEM inquiry/modeling, and
SSI discourse/argumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of STEM subjects by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.