* 2101012
* Research Initiation Award: Theoretical and Computational Methods for Robust Retrieval of Effective Electromagnetic Properties of Random Composite Materials
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Su Yan, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,948.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. Howard
Universityâ€™s award supports research that seeks to optimize the engineering of
random composite materials that have electromagnetic (EM) capabilities. Such
capabilities include EM interference shielding and EM observability enhancing,
and/or EM sensing capabilities. This opens a wide range of applications in
commercial and defense technologies, such as electrical/electronic devices,
communication systems, oil and gas industries, and military and law enforcement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The macroscopic properties of composite materials depend
on the geometry, distribution, volume fraction, and property of each
constituent. While the numerical extraction techniques for the effective EM
properties of periodically distributed composite materials are relatively well
established and straightforward to implement, those for the randomly distributed
composite materials have not been fully explored. The objective of this proposed
research is to develop a rigorous theory and accurate and efficient numerical
methods to provide the scale-dependent bounds of the effective EM properties of
random composites in both static and dynamic cases. The proposed EM
homogenization theory will be incorporated in the construction of an all-
frequency stable formulation, which will be solved in Monte-Carlo simulations
using finite element and domain decomposition methods. A stochastic simulation
method will also be developed to characterize the material randomness and
geometrical uncertainty and achieve an improved efficiency in the EM property
retrieval. The proposed theories and methods will lead to the development of
state-of-the-art homogenization tools for the characterization and analysis of
random composite materials. This in turn would enable new design methodologies
in random composites based on the theoretical guidance and computational
support. The project includes an extensive education and outreach activities,
including the involvement of students historically underrepresented in this
field of research, and the development of video clips and demonstrations to
disseminate the results to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.