* 2101244
* Collaborative Excellence in Research: Skill Acquisition, Technical Change and Differential Employment and Income Trajectories
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* William Spriggs, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 484,679.00

This research project will construct a unique historical data set to test how
technological change interacts with group identity to affect employment and
earning trajectories of groups differently. Testing economic models of
differential labor market effects is difficult because of lack of appropriate
data; a situation compounded by technological innovations. The researchers have
access to historical data on post-military careers and wage trajectories between
1910 and 1940 of two groups of men who were trained and worked in the same unit
performing the same military tasks during World War I. This data will be merged
with individual level data from decennial census to create a unique historical
data set. The researchers will use this data set to identify whether the
observed differential employment and wage trajectories of these groups is due to
technical change or discrimination. At the heart of this research is the careful
merging of historical data from personal records, census records, and military
records to answer this important question. Apart from the policy implication of
this research, the project will involve undergraduate researchers from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, hence contribute to broadening
participation in STEM education. The results of this research will shed light on
differential labor market outcomes as well as provide inputs into policies to
reduce earnings inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research project
will merge personal, employment, earnings trajectories, and census data to test
how technological innovation interacts with discrimination to determine
differential labor outcomes of different groups. The PIs will merge the post-
military employment, earnings, and census records of two groups of people who
received the same training and did the same jobs in signals during World War I.
The data are for the period 1910 to 1940 and the project will use difference-in-
difference estimation strategy to establish causal identification of how the
interaction of technical change and group differences affect the dynamics and
trajectories of employment and incomes of otherwise comparable workers. The
major focus and importance of this project is the unique historical data set the
PIs will create for this project that will also allow other researchers to study
differential labor market dynamics in the presence of technical change. Besides
policy implication of this research, the project will involve undergraduate
researchers from Historically Black Colleges and Universities, hence contribute
to broadening participation in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.