* 2101002
* CAS: Development of Multidentate Ligands that Incorporate Metal-Ligand Cooperativity into Catalytic Hydrofunctionalization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Christine Thomas, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 559,559.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Christine Thomas at Ohio State University is studying the fundamental
design of new, more sustainable, catalysts for hydrofunctionalization reactions.
Catalytic hydrofunctionalization reactions provide an environmentally friendly
method to convert widely available chemical feedstocks into synthetic
intermediates that can easily be converted into value-added products with uses
in pharmaceuticals, consumer products, and the commodity chemical industry. The
project aims to uncover new catalysts that are easily produced from naturally
abundant and inexpensive precursors, particularly taking advantage of Earth-
abundant metals such as manganese, iron, and cobalt. This project is directly
contributing to the rigorous training of both graduate students and
undergraduate researchers in preparation for their careers as scientific
researchers. In efforts to increase the participation of underrepresented groups
in chemistry, Professor Thomas serves as the faculty advisor to the student
organization for women in chemistry at Ohio State (Females of Chemistry Uniting
Scientists, FOCUS), is an active member of the NOBCChE (National Organization
for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers)
Collaborative, and will be launching a new summer undergraduate program in the
Ohio State Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry specifically focused on
providing research opportunities for underrepresented minority students
(CoNQUER, Collaborative NOBCChE Quintessential Undergraduate Experience in
Research). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Christine Thomas at Ohio State
University is studying the design of new multidentate ligand frameworks in an
effort to promote metal-ligand cooperativity with Earth-abundant first row
transition metals (e.g., iron, cobalt, manganese). The project aims to uncover
more sustainable catalytic methods by using metal-ligand cooperative processes
as a strategy to make and break chemical bonds without relying on two-electron
redox cycles that are often inaccessible to first row metals. Ligand design is
at the heart of this project, and the Thomas group is evaluating several
different approaches in this regard. A tridentate PPP-based pincer ligand
featuring an N-heterocyclic phosphide fragment has been shown to actively
participate in metal-ligand cooperative reactions in which sigma bonds are
cleaved across the metal-phosphide linkage, and ongoing studies focus on the
expansion of established stoichiometric reactions and their incorporation into
catalytic cycles for the hydroboration, hydrogenation, and hydrosilylation of
unsaturated substrates. In addition, Thomasâ€™s research team is exploring a new
tetradentate PNNP-based ligand that contains two amide donors as potential sites
for metal-ligand cooperativity. The coordination of this ligand to Fe, Co, and
Mn and the stoichiometric reactivity of the resulting (PNNP)M compounds towards
the activation of substrates such as hydrogen, silanes, and boranes across the
two metal-amide bonds is under investigation, with the ultimate goal of
incorporating these fundamental reaction steps into catalytic
hydrofunctionalization reactions. Lastly, a newly discovered metal-templated
procedure for the elimination and substitution of phosphine substituents will be
leveraged to synthesize an expanded family of ligands, including tetradentate
ligand derivatives that feature both phosphide and amide donors as potential
reactive sites, PPP- and PNNP-based ligands with more electron-rich alkyl
substituents, and tridentate and tetradentate ligands with P-chiral
functionalities for use in asymmetric catalysis. The new synthetic method will
provide researchers in the field with a new economical and straightforward
method to synthesize large families of multidentate ligand derivatives including
P-chiral variants without the need for expensive
precursors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.