* 2101552
* Supporting Teachers to Teach Mathematics Through Problem Posing
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* FAITH MUIRHEAD, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,897,651.00

This project aims to support teachers to engage their students in mathematical
problem posing (problem-posing-based learning, or P-PBL). P-PBL is a powerful
approach to the teaching and learning of mathematics, and provides students with
opportunities to engage in authentic mathematical practices. For example,
conjecturing in mathematics, a form of problem posing, often plays an important
role in solving complex problems, and problem posing is an important component
of mathematical modeling. Yet despite its importance, widely used curriculum
materials fail to incorporate P-PBL in substantial and consistent ways, leaving
teachers with few resources to enact this process. This project will develop
problem-posing lessons and illustrative cases of teachers implementing P-PBL
that will not only support teachers to develop a vision of what P-PBL looks like
and how to implement it in their own classrooms, but will also serve as rich
resources for professional development (PD) providers. This project will
generate valuable findings about teaching using problem posing for district
administrators, mathematics teachers, educators, and researchers as well as
curriculum developers and policy makers. The team will develop and pilot a set
of 20−30 research-based P-PBL cases that provide critical details for the
implementation of P-PBL and reveal “lessons learned” from the development
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project promises broader impact on the field
of mathematics education as the first goal is to support teachers to teach
mathematics through engaging their students in mathematical problem posing. By
guiding students to construct and investigate their own problems, P-PBL both
helps to create mathematical learning opportunities and develops students’
mathematical agency and positive mathematical identities. A networked
improvement community of teachers and researchers will integrate problem posing
into daily mathematics instruction and continuously improve the quality of P-PBL
through iterative task and lesson design. The intellectual merit of this project
is its contribution of new and important insights about teaching mathematics
through problem posing. This will be realized through the second project goal
which is to longitudinally investigate the promise of supporting teachers to
teach with P-PBL for enhancing teachers’ instructional practice and students’
learning. A quasi-experimental design coupled with design-based research
methodology and improvement science will be used to understand how, when, and
why P-PBL works in practice. Specifically, we plan to follow a sample of 36
teachers and their approximately 3,600 students from six middle schools for
multiple years to longitudinally explore the promise of P-PBL for developing
teachers’ beliefs about problem posing, their beliefs about P-PBL, and their
actual instructional practice. We will also investigate students’ learning as
measured by problem-posing performance, problem-solving performance, and
mathematics disposition. The findings of the project will add not only to the
field’s understanding of the promise of supporting teachers to integrate P-PBL
into their mathematics instruction, but also to its understanding of the
challenges that teachers face when engaging in a networked improvement community
that is focused on improving tasks and lessons by integrating P-PBL.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.