* 2101928
* Collective Interaction of Photons with Rare Earth Ions on a Photonic Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mahdi Hosseini, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 369,461.00

Title: Study of coherent interaction of light with arrays of rare-earth ions in
crystalline micro photonic structures&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Light particles or
photons are ideal carriers of information that have transformed the way we
communicate. The advent of quantum information has given these trusted
messengers more light to shine. By encoding peculiar quantum properties such as
superposition and entanglement on light, the security of communication can be
fundamentally guaranteed. Such quantum optical information is however very
fragile and its control and routing possess challenges for the community
implementing quantum communication technologies. Mapping optical information to
and from atoms is one way to control and synchronize delicate quantum
information. The choice of atoms, techniques for engineering atomsâ€™ environment,
and suitable mapping protocols are all important aspects of research pursued to
develop effective systems for controlling quantum optical information. This
project aims to explore new materials and protocols to develop an efficient
quantum interface for optical information storage and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To control quantum optical information, light
needs to efficiently and coherently interact with atoms. As the light wavelength
is much larger than the size of a typical atom, the interaction between the two
is intrinsically weak in free space. Apart from the interaction strength,
scalability and miniaturization of devices are important engineering aspects of
quantum optical devices. Rare-earth ions such as Erbium ions in solid-state
crystals provide a unique interface for optical information at the telecom
wavelength. This project is studying the role of atomic geometry and environment
engineering of Erbium ions in solids to develop atomic memories to store and
synchronize optical information. By designing periodic ion arrays and micro-and
nano-photonic devices on rare-earth crystals, the project aims to explore new
regimes of collective light-atom interactions for the generation and storage of
quantum optical information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.