* 2102525
* Collaborative Research:  Tuning Hydrogen Mobility on Au/Spinel Catalysts to Develop the Isotopic Kinetic Resolution of H2 and D2
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bert Chandler, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,001.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Chandler at Penn State University and Professor Grabow at the
University of Houston will collaborate to build the scientific foundations for a
new H-D separation technique termed “isotopic kinetic resolution” (IKR). Due to
the added mass of the neutron, deuterium tends to react more slowly in H-atom
transfer reactions. The research team will conduct an experimental and
computational study of hydrogen mobility and diffusion across aluminum oxide
surfaces to understand the important factors in controlling the speed of H- and
D- atom transport. This will include developing methods to control the spacing
between catalytic H2/D2 activation sites and H/D reaction sites on the oxide
surface. The team will then screen spinel oxides, a class of transition doped
aluminum oxide materials with wide ranging electronic properties, for their
H/D-atom transport properties using several computational and machine-learning
techniques. Promising candidate oxides will be synthesized and their H-mobility
fully evaluated and compared to predictions to begin developing the IKR. Both
principal investigators will recruit graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented minority (URM) groups. The principal investigators are also
accomplished undergraduate mentors and will continue to involve UG students in
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project will be
focused on experimental and computational studies of hydrogen mobility and
diffusion across tunable spinel oxide surfaces, with the aim of developing the
novel concept of isotopic kinetic resolution (IKR). IKR is a kinetic tool
capable of separating H/D isotopes by leveraging the large kinetic isotope
effect for H/D transport on metal oxides. Further development of this technique
may also lead to new design strategies for selective hydrogenation catalysts. To
establish this new tool, the team will use density functional theory
calculations combined with machine-learning techniques to screen for spinel
oxides with suitable electronic structures. Promising candidates will be
synthesized and their H-mobility evaluated through careful kinetic measurements
and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. Significant effort will be dedicated to the
development of synthetic methods that will allow the research team to direct the
spacing between primary reaction centers, where H2 is activated, and secondary
reaction centers, where hydrogenation occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.