* 2102034
* Development of Stable Carbocations for Lewis Acid-Assisted Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Thomas Gianetti, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Thomas Gianetti of the University of Arizona and his research group are
developing ways to make stable carbocations – organic molecules that have a
positive charge on a carbon atom – that are attached to electron-rich groups and
can serve as catalysts, or ligands for transition metal centers, with dual
functionalities. These compounds are being studied to determine if they provide
greater tunability and tolerance than more traditional systems that use
electron-deficient boron centers instead of carbocations. In addition, Dr.
Gianetti and his research team are testing these ambiphilic carbocations as
ligands for transition metal complexes to work synergistically with the metal
center to activate small molecules toward new modalities for bond formation.
These studies will also provide new ways for organic chemists to make value-
added compounds and are expected to provide fundamental insight into how these
new carbocationic compounds can be used to access new chemical space to support
of synthetic chemistry. Dr. Gianetti is also committed to improving
communication between scientists and policymakers and is developing a joint
course with the College of Law to build a cohort of undergraduate students that
can discuss environmental policy across disciplinary
barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the physical organic properties of
carbocations have been carefully studied, little is known about the use of these
compounds as catalysts and ligands for transition metal catalysts in synthetic
chemistry. Thomas Gianetti and his research team are developing carbocationic
frustrated Lewis pairs and testing their reactivity for nucleophilic additions
to paraformaldehyde and alkenes. In addition, helically chiral analogues of
these catalysts will be prepared and investigated for catalytic asymmetric
transformations. Incorporation of these ambiphilic carbocations into ligand
scaffolds is to be further explored to support the cooperative activation of
small molecules such as allylic alcohols and NO2. These activities will
synergistically provide important training in synthetic chemistry and
organometallic concepts for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students at the University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.