* 2102601
* Ultrafast Coherent Spectroscopy of TiO2 Photocatalytic Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hrvoje Petek, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 620,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Hrvoje Petek of the University of
Pittsburgh is performing time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy studies of
electron dynamics in titanium dioxide (TiO2) semiconductor on the femtosecond
(10^-15 s) time scale. TiO2 is a material with well-known photocatalytic
properties that can convert the solar to electrical or chemical energy, as well
as induce decomposition of harmful chemicals, by light promoted transfer of
electrons across the molecule/TiO2 interface. It is well documented that such
light-induced processes occur in TiO2, but the dynamics of how light energy is
used to perform useful chemical transformations, in competition with relaxation
and degradation into heat, is poorly known. Such understanding exists for
electronic semiconductors and metals, but is poorly understood for a large body
of chemical materials that can be classified as metal oxides, such as TiO2. The
characterization of electronic and chemical processes in TiO2 can advance the
use of metal oxides in light-activated applications. The project supports the
formal training of graduate students and post-doctoral associates. Informal
education and outreach is being done via the virtual International Ultrafast
Knowledge Coffee House ("IUNCH") that Professor Petek initiated during the
COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoinduced electron dynamics
at single crystal TiO2 surfaces are being examined by ultrafast time-resolved
photoelectron spectroscopy. Detailed interpretation of photoexcitation dynamics
in the stoichiometric TiO2 is difficult, because the measurements probe
electrons that are inhomogeneously distributed in space and momentum. Titanium
dioxide has many atomic defect states, which give sharp photoelectron spectra,
that enable the study of electron phase and energy relaxation. Ultrafast
femtosecond (10-15 s) time scale measurements will be performed on such defect
features to establish intrinsic energy and momentum relaxation processes,
broadly, in metal oxide materials. Titanium dioxide also has well-documented
plasmonically enhanced photocatalytic activity. Studies will be performed on how
light excitation in a plasmonic metal activates ultrafast electronic processes
at TiO2 surfaces. The students and post-doctoral associates involved in this
project will gain experience in ultrafast laser techniques and computational
modeling of ultrafast coherent dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.