* 2102376
* Design and Control of Fe and Co Spin Crossover Dynamics Using Tabletop Femtosecond M-edge XANES
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gregory Girolami, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 685,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Drs. Josh Vura-Weis and Greg Girolami at
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign are studying light-induced
processes in iron- and cobalt-containing molecules. Light-absorbing molecules or
chromophores are key components in certain solar cells and in the synthesis of
some pharmaceuticals, but usually contain expensive ruthenium or iridium metal
atoms. While the ruthenium and iridium-containing molecules store the energy
they absorb from light for a long enough time to induce a chemical reaction,
molecules with cheap and earth-abundant iron and cobalt atoms rapidly dissipate
that energy as heat. This project will use insight gained from extreme
ultraviolet absorption spectroscopy to better understand the processes leading
to very fast energy loss in order to design new chromophores with long-lived
excited states. Such molecules would reduce dependence on expensive precious
metals in a wide range of solar energy conversion processes. This project will
broaden participation in physical chemistry by hosting St. Elmo Brady Summer
Scholars from historically black colleges and universities, as well as
undergraduate research students from primarily undergraduate
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay between electron transfer and
spin dynamics is a key factor in the photophysics and reactivity of complexes
containing open-shell transition metals. Photoexcitation of such systems
initiates a cascade of relaxation steps with competing rates of vibrational
relaxation, intersystem crossing, and intramolecular electron transfer. In this
tabletop work, femtosecond M-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy is used to
measure the relaxation dynamics in Fe(II) and Co(III) photosensitizers. The
metal 3p-3d transitions in the extreme ultraviolet energy range are element,
oxidation state, spin state, and ligand-field specific, and the laser-based
source provides 30-femtosecond time resolution. Insights about the excited-state
potential energy surfaces gained from this technique are used to design new
Fe(II) chromophores with tailored vibrational modes that kinetically trap long-
lived excited states. New ligands for Co(III) chromophores are being designed to
provide metal-to-ligand charge transfer transitions in the visible region, and
the excited-state dynamics of these chromophores are studied using transient
absorption spectroscopy and quantum dynamics calculations. The new spectroscopic
methods demonstrated in this proposal are expected to apply to a wide range of
problems in physical and inorganic chemistry, from photocatalysis to solar cell
design. The project also will provide advanced training in synthesis and
spectroscopy for graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.