* 2102038
* Machine Learning Tools for Biofuel Creation and Purification using Ionic Fluids
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Orlando Acevedo, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Orlando Acevedo of the University of Miami is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop artificial intelligence tools that will aid in the design
of biomass-derived fuels. Biomass has significant potential as a renewable
source of energy. For example, it has been estimated that by 2030, 20% of
transportation fuel and 25% of chemicals will be produced from biomass. Despite
an annual production of around 170 billion metric tons, no more than 5% of this
produced biomass is used for diverse purposes. The potential market for value-
added chemicals and high-quality fuel products produced from plant materials is
immense. However, at present it is more cost-effective to drill and refine
mineral diesel oil than grow, extract, and purify biodiesel. Environmentally
friendly solvents known as ionic liquids (ILs) and deep eutectic solvents (DESs)
have the potential to serve as a significant part of the solution in the
creation of economically viable biofuels. Dr. Acevedo will develop and apply
artificial intelligence-based software (i.e., machine learning) to design new
ILs and DESs that efficiently convert biomass-derived building blocks into
liquid fuel and extract impurities from diesel and biodiesel fuels. This project
will help accelerate the transition from fossil fuels to biomass-derived energy
by emphasizing the use of cost-effective and recyclable ionic fluids. The
computational tools developed by Dr. Acevedo will be freely available to the
scientific community. In addition, multiple community outreach events will
highlight the use of artificial intelligence in chemistry through demonstrations
at science museums located in Ft. Lauderdale and Miami, Florida, research
networking social gatherings, and an illustrated science poem contest for K-12
grades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first major research thrust, Dr. Acevedo
will study the conversion of the highly versatile biomass-derived
5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) compound into (a) 5,5â€™-di(hydroxymethyl)furoin
(DHMF) using N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) catalysis, and (b)
2,5-bis(hydroxymethyl)furan (BHMF) via a Cannizzaro reaction. Both methods are
efficient, mild, and eco-friendly. To predict solvent-derived rate and
selectivity enhancements upon these HMF transformations, a new mixed machine
learning, quantum mechanics, and molecular mechanics (ML/QM/MM) methodology will
be developed here that provides the accuracy of ab initio QM calculations with
dramatically increased calculation speeds. In the second major research thrust,
Dr. Acevedo will explore the use of ILs and DESs to extract (a) dibenzothiophene
and other aromatic sulfur-compounds from diesel, and (b) glycerol from
biodiesel, a waste product developed during the transesterification of plant
triglyceride oil to biofuel. Both ILs and DESs have properties ideally suited
for impurity extraction from transportation fuel: insoluble in oil, non-toxic,
and environmentally benign. To study the origin of the favorable intermolecular
interactions between these fuel-based impurities and ILs/DESs, our alternative
method will train artificial neural networks (ANNs) using representative ab
initio molecular dynamics data and couple the newly optimized ANN potentials to
Monte Carlo simulations. Machine learning based methodology developed will be
broadly applicable to other areas of chemical research and all software/products
generated as part of this project will be readily available to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.