* 2102474
* CSD&amp;E: Expanding Efficient Conformer Sampling to Diverse Charged and Neutral Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Geoffrey Hutchison, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Drs. Geoffrey Hutchison and David Koes at the
University of Pittsburgh are developing data-driven techniques to study the
fundamental geometries and flexibility of neutral and charged molecules. This
research seeks to advance the predictive ability of molecular computational
chemistry in the areas of polymers, molecular materials, and drug discovery via
an inverse property-driven design approach. Most molecules, ranging from
proteins to pharmaceuticals and plastics, are flexible and at room temperature
can exist in multiple geometries called conformers. As a molecule increases in
size, complexity, and flexibility, the number of possible stable conformers
increases exponentially. Moreover, while rules for common geometric motifs exist
for neutral molecules, charged states, whether positively or negatively charged,
may have very different structures. The project draws on expertise in data
science, machine learning, and optimization theory to build both experimental
and computational data resources to predict likely conformers. Techniques will
be validated across multiple experimental and computational benchmarks and
applied to key areas of chemistry, including finding new targets for drug design
and plastic electronic materials. The project will provide opportunities for the
education and active training of high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students in data science, machine learning, and
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws on a connection between
statistical thermodynamics and Bayesian statistics. Using experimental and
computational data, one can estimate distributions of dihedral angles for most
molecules. From such probabilities, Bayesian optimization can accurately explore
and sample Boltzmann-weighted ensembles of the potential energy surface. By
building data repositories of neutral and charged species, one can efficiently
train new recurrent machine learning methods, as well as design new “few-shot”
geometry optimization methods. In turn, these methods will draw on improvements
in accurate quantum chemical methods to predict thermochemistry and free
energies for a large selection of neutral and charged organic species. Through
generating these large data repositories, Hutchinson and Koes and their co-
workers will create a new curriculum for data science lessons, machine learning
workshops, and classes in chemistry. The project will also provide substantial
educational training to high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in the
interdisciplinary combination of data science, statistics, machine learning, and
computational chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.