* 2102077
* Metal Catalyzed Methods for the Preparation of Organosilanes and Related Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Donald Watson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Donald A. Watson of the University of Delaware is studying the new
catalytic methods to prepare organic molecules that contain silicon atoms. Such
molecules, commonly called organosilanes, are important building blocks for the
complex organic chemical compounds that are used as pharmaceuticals, as
agrochemicals, and for the study of biology. This research aims to develop new
reactions that allow for these important silicon containing compounds to be
prepared in new, straightforward ways using inexpensive starting materials and
catalytic amounts of reaction promoters. Not only will this research expand
access to organosilanes, but it will also increase fundamental understanding of
the reactions silicon containing molecules and their interactions with
transition metal catalysts. The program will also train undergraduate student,
graduate student and post-doctoral researchers, and will build outreach programs
to both early childhood education and undergraduate-only higher educations
institutions that lack advanced research technology. In so doing, the research
program will seek to train the next generation of chemical scientist who will
tackle the challenges of tomorrow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
research program is the development of new cross-coupling reactions of
electrophilic silanes. Using transition metal catalysts, Dr. Donald Watson and
his students seek to develop new methods for C-Si bond construction to prepare a
variety of both saturated and unsaturated organosilanes via cross-coupling with
simple organic nucleophiles. To achieve this result, the Watson group has
designed a new type of silyl-Heck reaction with analogy to the robust and highly
studied parent Heck reaction of alkenes. This newer silyl variant of the Heck
coupling is expected to permit access to otherwise challenging vinylic and
allylic silane targets. The Watson team then seeks to develop related multi-
component transformations to access even more complex and highly substituted
alkylsilanes. In parallel to the development of these new synthetic methods, Dr.
Watson and his students will seek to elucidate the underlying mechanism(s) of
the transformations under study. Therefore, this project will provide exposure
to synthetic, mechanistic and physical organic chemistry for the student and
postdoctoral co-workers on the team, and in this way prepare them well for
future careers in industry or academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.