* 2102318
* Spectroscopy and Molecular Aggregation in Helium Droplets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Andrey Vilesov, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 539,527.00

With support from the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Andrey Vilesov of the University of
Southern California, will study the structure of molecular cations (molecules
with an electron removed) using infrared lasers. Cations are important active
participants in a multitude of chemical reactions. However, the molecular
structure of many cations remains unknown because their high reactivity makes it
difficult to prepare sufficient amounts for study. These experimental challenges
are to be overcome by isolating the cations in tiny droplets of liquid helium at
temperatures close to absolute zero (-460 F), at which the cations have clean
spectra. This line of research is expected to provide insights into how the
outcome of a chemical reaction in different settings from outer space to
industry is influenced by the structure of the cationic intermediates in the
reaction. This project also will examine how molecules rotate and combine at
very low temperature. The students engaged in this research project will gain
valuable experience in both modern physical chemical experimentation and in data
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the study of the
structure and quantum solvation of carbocations at an ultra-low temperature of
0.4 K in helium droplets. The droplets are produced in a cryogenic nozzle beam
expansion, doped with molecular precursors, such as methane, ethene, and others
and ionized by electron impact. The resulting cations encapsulated within the
droplets will be irradiated in pulsed fashion from a tunable infrared laser. The
resonance absorption of the radiation leads to release of the cations from the
droplets followed by detection by the quadrupole mass spectrometer. The
resulting infrared spectra in the range of C-H stretches are compared with the
results of quantum chemical calculations to determine the structure of the
cations. Solvation of the cations and small molecules in superfluid 4He and
normal fluid 3He droplets will be studied by observation of the rotational
structure in the spectra. The structure of the molecular aggregates will be
obtained from the analysis of the x-ray diffraction using a free electron laser.
The broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits from
exploring the structure and solvation of molecular cations which act as
important chemical intermediates in condensed and gas phases. This project will
provide opportunities for training of undergraduate and graduate students in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) through the development
and execution of cutting-edge physical chemical experiments and the preparation
of ensuing publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.