* 2102294
* Investigating Alaska Native Successful Aging through Elder-Centered, Community-Based Participatory Research
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jordan Lewis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,040,432.00

This research explores the concept of successful aging among Alaska Native
Elders in four communities in the Interior and Southeast regions of the state.
Building upon previous successful research, the PI will employ a community-based
participatory approach to define and document what aging successfully means to
Elders and to evaluate the impacts of care facilities on Eldersâ€™ experiences.
This research will advance understanding of aging in the fields of gerontology
and community health; produce recommendations to promote successful aging in
local communities; and present alternatives to perceptions that equate aging
with poor health and immobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working collaboratively
with local tribal councils in Fairbanks, Galena, and Juneau, the PI will
establish an Elder Advisory Council to oversee all phases of the project. Data
will be collected using survey instruments and in-depth qualitative interviews
with Elders from the Interior and Southeast Alaska. The PI will present findings
and receive feedback from communities at several stages in the research process.
Broader impacts include opportunities for student research and training;
increased participation of Alaska Native communities in setting research
agendas; development of partnerships among communities, care facilities, and
researchers; and advancing understanding of successful aging in different
cultural and geographic contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.