* 2102856
* A one-million record of orbital-scale changes in temperature and precipitation from the Indo-Pacific Warm Pool
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* James Russell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 399,747.00

Tropical climate is changing rapidly – rainfall events are becoming more
intense, and droughts more severe. These changes affect the affect the lives of
billions of people who rely on rainfall for their livelihoods, and have
important implications for the world due to connections between tropical and
global climates. Predicting how rainfall and temperature will change in the
future requires long records to test climate models and theory. Such records are
generally scarce in the tropics, and particularly in the tropical western
Pacific, where existing records disagree substantially on the pattern and
magnitude of past changes in climate. The goal of this project is to develop new
records of temperature, rainfall, and vegetation from the tropical western
Pacific, a region that is especially important to global climate processes, and
to investigate their causes. This research will enable us to test theories of
tropical and global climate change, and thereby to improve the prediction of
future climates in this region. The project will provide for many opportunities
for US graduate and undergraduate students to conduct research and will develop
new classroom modules on climate change to be used in the Providence Public
School System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate
orbital-scale variations in rainfall, temperature, and vegetation during the
past 1.1 million years in the Indo-Pacific Warm Pool (IPWP) through analysis of
recently-recovered sediment drill cores from Lake Towuti, located on Sulawesi
Island in central Indonesia. Through organic geochemical analyses of these
sediments, the project will evaluate the impacts of changes in tropical seasonal
insolation, high-latitude ice volume, temperature, and atmospheric greenhouse
gas concentrations, and sea level on IPWP climate across critical transitions in
global climate boundary conditions. The research will focus on global climate
transitions during the Mid-Pleistocene, 800,000 years ago, when glacial-
interglacial variability transitioned from predominantly 41-kyr to 100-kyr ice-
age cycles, and 430,000, when the 100-kyr cycles intensified. The results are
expected to contribute to understanding how tropical climates change in response
to climate boundary conditions that differ from the present
day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.