* 2102339
* High-Valent Non-Oxo-Metal Complexes of Late Transition Metals For sp3 C–H Bond Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Dong Wang, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 474,978.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Dong Wang of the University of Montana is studying new methodologies to
generate transition metal complexes that are capable of converting inert
hydrocarbons to their functionalized derivatives. This transformation is a key
step in several processes involved in the production of fuels, chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, clinical reagents, and agrochemicals, however, the underlying
chemistry of this important transformation is still being developed. In this
project, Dr. Wang and his group plan to develop new complexes based on late
first-row transition metals and a novel tridentate ligand platform discovered
only recently. These metal complexes are expected to be strong oxidants to
activate inert carbon-hydrogen bonds in hydrocarbon substrates and install
desired functional groups on them. Based on preliminary results, it is expected
that this project will establish key relationships between the structures,
spectroscopic properties and oxidative reactivities of these complexes, and will
shed light on further developing this system to a catalytic hydrocarbon
functionalization method. Further, this project will provide a solid training
ground to educate Montana high school and Native American tribal college
students and teachers in the field of bioinorganic chemistry by establishing a
“Partnership in Bioinorganic Chemistry (PIBC)” program. This program includes
three interactive training and outreach components with scientific evaluation
and assessment protocols, and is expected to advance science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education within the local and Native
American communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Dong Wang of the University
of Montana is studying high-valent non-oxo-metal complexes of first-row late
transition metals for the activation and functionalization of inert aliphatic
carbon-hydrogen bonds. This transformation is a key step in many biological and
synthetic processes, and studies that utilize earth-abundant first-row
transition metal reagents are highly desirable. In this project, Dr. Wang and
his group propose to develop novel high-valent late transition metal complexes
having unusual, formal +4 oxidation states and capable of activating strong
saturated C–H bonds using a rigid, tridentate, dianionic N3 ligand platform.
This research builds on their recently published work on generating and
characterizing a bona fide Co(IV)-dinitrate complex that is both stable enough
for characterization by X-ray crystallography and reactive enough to cleave
strong C–H bonds. In collaboration with the Jackson group at the University of
Kansas, the Wang group aims to develop more reactive high-valent late transition
metal complexes and systematically investigate their structure-reactivity
relationship through computationally guided, rational modifications of the N3
ligand, coordinating anions, and the identity of the metal center. This research
is expected to produce results that advance fundamental knowledge in high-valent
chemistry for first-row late transition metal complexes, and shed light on
future development of this system to a catalytic C–H bond functionalization
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.