* 2102712
* Collaborative Research: Hydrogen Atom Transfer Lewis Base Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Junha Jeon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Junha Jeon at the Department of Chemistry at the University of Texas at
Arlington and Gyu Leem at the Department of Chemistry of the SUNY College of
Environmental Science and Forestry are developing new methods to use inexpensive
and environmentally benign silicon-based reagents to produce high-value
chemicals and materials. A number of chemical processes involve the transfer of
both a hydrogen and an electron (the process is abbreviated HAT). This study
utilizes silicon complexes in the presence of potassium to provide access to
both hydrogen atom (hydrogen and one electron) and hydride (hydrogen and two
electrons) transfer. If successful, these studies could provide low-cost,
operationally simple, environmentally sustainable HAT and open up new avenues to
the synthesis of key intermediates and useful polymeric materials. The broader
impacts of this research include the recruitment and training of the next
generation of scientists, with a particular emphasis on encouraging
participation from women and underrepresented minority groups in the chemical
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-disciplinary project involves Dr.
Junha Jeon [synthetic silicon chemistry, University of Texas at Arlington] and
Dr. Gyu Leem [polymer chemistry, SUNY College of Environmental Science and
Forestry] as the primary investigators. In addition, there are two additional
collaborations involving Drs. Jiali Gao [computational, University of Minnesota]
and Brad Pierce [EPR spectroscopy, University of Alabama]. Through theoretical
and experimental methods, the mechanistic origin of 'hydrogen-hydride transfer
duality' associated with a potassiated hypercoordinate hydridosilicon species is
determined. The of 'hydrogen-hydride transfer duality' refers to a mode of
competing single or two-electron transfer reactions of hypercoordinative
hydrosilicon systems and is termed alkali metal Lewis base-catalyzed
complexation-induced hydrogen atom transfer. In addition to the mechanistic
investigations, (1) enantioselective redox-neutral, branch-selective olefin
hydrosilylation via LBCI-HAT and (2) the extension of the process to alkali
metal-Lewis base-catalyzed, hydrogen atom transfer radical polymerization
(HATRP) and chain extension of HATRP for the synthesis of of multiblock
copolymers are developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.