* 2102983
* P2C2: A Speleothem and Cave Monitoring Research Program to Reconstruct the Paleoclimatology of the Yucatan Peninsula--Testing Modes and Causes of Variability in the North American
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Stephen Burns, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 496,081.00

Despite the observed intensification of the hydrological cycle including the
increased incidence of drought, flooding and extreme events such as tropical
cyclones, the historical record is insufficiently long and uncertain to enable
the firm attribution of specific observed extreme hydrological events to an
anthropogenic cause and/or to internal modes of climate variability. This
project aims at producing precipitation records from stalagmites located in the
Yucatan Peninsula (Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico regions), and at examining
underlying causal mechanisms of tropical hydroclimate change by integration of
these records with climate model simulations. The researchers will analyze
multiple tracers including Oxygen and Carbon isotopes and trace elements to
reconstruct precipitation variability in the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico
regions during key climate periods: the Holocene, the last glacial and during
marine isotope stages 8-9. In addition, they will expand an environmental and
geochemical monitoring system of surface and cave conditions that started in the
year 2014, to investigate the relationship between local precipitation amount,
and the Oxygen isotopes of precipitation and stalagmite isotopic and elemental
composition. The new monitoring system will include fieldwork to understand the
role of vegetation shifts and prior calcite precipitation on the carbon isotopic
composition of stalagmites. The monitoring, in conjunction, with the new
stalagmite paleoclimate records from the Yucatan Peninsula would help test
various hypotheses concerning the environmental controls of the stable isotopic
and elemental composition of stalagmites, the role of drought in the development
of the Maya civilization, and potential links between Heinrich events (cold
intervals) and precipitation declines in the northern Caribbean and Gulf of
Mexico region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include a
characterization and better understanding of hydroclimate variability and
tropical cyclones beyond the instrumental record in a densely and vulnerable
geographic area (Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico). Other Broader Impacts include
the scientific training, mentorship and professional development of two Ph.D
students including one female Native American student at UMASS and a second
student that the researchers will recruit through the AGU-Bridge program. The
project will also support two early and mid-career researchers. Additionally,
the researchers and students will engage in public outreach activities including
scientific lectures for the Rio Secreto Cave (Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico) staff.
Previous cave monitoring work and paleoclimate studies from this cave have been
successfully incorporated in the cave conservation efforts, and in the
information shared by tour-guides with thousands of visitors per year. This
paleoclimate research program will foster international collaborations and
engagement with local researchers and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.