* 2102292
* CAS: Pincer Ligand Base Metal Chromophores for Selective Free Radical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jake Soper, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 465,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Jake Soper of the School of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the Georgia Institute of Technology is developing new transition
metal catalysts capable of using visible light to convert aryl carbon–hydrogen
bonds into carbon–(trifluoro)alkyl bonds, which are important components of many
agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals. The goals of this research are to design new
earth-abundant metal complexes that can replace photocatalysts based on precious
metals and to elaborate new ways to selectively target individual
carbon–hydrogen bonds for radical activation and functionalization. By replacing
rare and toxic metal catalysts and stoichiometric, often halogen-containing,
oxidants with naturally abundant alternatives, the project forms the basis for
new "green" routes to pharmaceutical and materials that protect human health and
the environment. In pursuit of these goals, the project also affords
opportunities for high school STEM educator development, as well as outreach
activities that increase public engagement and science literacy among groups
that are traditionally underrepresented in chemistry.

Efforts to elaborate photoredox-active chromophores based on first row
transition metals are challenged by short charge-transfer excited-state
lifetimes that preclude bimetallic reactivity. Research in this project proposes
to circumvent this issue by combining the chromophore and organometallic
reaction center in single coordination complex, opening new avenues to impart
selectivity in photoredox catalysis cycles that occur via kinetically facile
radical steps. Central to this strategy is the capacity of new pincer complexes
to support photolytic cobalt bond activation leading to extrusion of carbon
based radicals, which are active for alkylation, fluoroalkylation, and arylation
of (hetero)arenes. Substrate directing groups are proposed to shepherd these
radicals to specific aryl carbon hydrogen bonds, giving atypical
regioselectivity in photochemical Minisci-type homolytic aromatic substitution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.