* 2102266
* (Radio)Fluorination and Other Nucleophilic Functionalizations Enabled by Photocatalytic Radical-Polar Crossover
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Abigail Doyle, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Abigail Doyle of University of California, Los Angeles is
developing new chemical reactions that will enable the synthesis of
organofluorine compounds; namely those that contain a C-F bond. Such bond
constructions are in high demand as C-F bonds are found in next-generation
medicines, agrochemicals, and biomedical imaging agents. The chemical reactions
under development here use a catalyst that can harness the energy in visible
light to generate a high-energy reactive intermediate, a carbocation, that is
most often only accessible under harsh (thermal or strongly acidic or Lewis-
acidic) conditions. Because the strategy being pursued by Professor Doyle and
her students accesses this intermediate under the mild conditions associated
with visible light irradiation, reactions are being developed that generate
chemical structures that were previously challenging to access, starting from
abundant and inexpensive reagents. The researchers will use a variety of tools
to help them understand how the reactions work at the molecular level such that
this knowledge can be used to discover new processes and design improved
reactions. Students conducting these research activities will have the
opportunity to develop a broad skill set, both scientific in nature and with
respect to communication, mentorship, leadership, and also with respect to
embracing and building diversity, equity, inclusion and belonging, that will
help them become leaders in their independent careers. Broader impacts of this
work also include the development of activities directed at recruitment and
retention of students from underrepresented groups to science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). For example, the program includes the
development of undergraduate teaching material to highlight scientific
contributions from researchers of diverse backgrounds, experiences and
perspectives and the design of workshops for entering graduate students on
topics such as citation bias, conflict management, and micro-
aggression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbocations are reactive intermediates in a
broad range of synthetic transformations because they undergo reaction with
abundant and stable nucleophiles like water, alcohols, halides, amines, and
olefins. Nevertheless, the generation of carbocation intermediates typically
requires harsh reaction conditions and requires use of pre-oxidized precursors
such as alkyl halides. These limitations preclude applications in more complex
settings, such as in the synthesis of bioactive compounds or radiolabelling, and
access to desirable products. This program seeks to address these challenges by
using a photocatalyst and light to convert abundant and stable C(sp3)–OH, –NH2
and –H precursors to radicals and then to carbocations (a so-called radical-
polar crossover). A focus of these efforts will be to use fluoride to trap the
carbocation intermediates in order to generate organofluorine products that are
useful in the pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries. Mechanistic studies
will accompany these synthetic efforts and the most efficient strategies will
also be adapted for the synthesis of 18-fluorine-radiolabelled small molecules
for use in positron emission tomography (PET), an important diagnostic tool for
detecting disease. This research will provide a rigorous and multi-disciplinary
training environment for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students
and postdoctoral fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.