* 2102526
* Enabling Kinetics and Structural Control of Polymer-Grafted Nanoparticle Superstructures via Solvent Vapor Annealing
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Xingchen Ye, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2024
* USD 449,919.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid materials are enabling new
applications and technologies in nanophotonics, nanofabrication, fuel cells,
photovoltaics, nanomembranes, batteries, and more. Rationally designed polymer-
nanoparticle composites can synergize the attributes of polymeric and inorganic
materials, generating new synthesis and processing possibilities and physical
properties that are unattainable with a single homogeneous material. With this
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, Professor Xingchen Ye and his research group at
Indiana University are developing multifunctional nanocomposite materials
through self-assembly. This research is expanding the synthetic and processing
toolbox in order to achieve nanocomposites by design. This project provides
training in nanomaterial synthesis and characterization to both graduate and
undergraduate students. In addition, summer research opportunities are provided
to members of underrepresented groups through partnerships with North Carolina
A&amp;T State University and the Groups Scholars Program at Indiana
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of next-generation polymer nanocomposites requires simultaneous
advances in the synthesis of nanoparticles and polymer matrices, precise
engineering of the organic-inorganic interface, and three-dimensional structural
control. Self-assembly promises scalability, provides molecular-level design of
building blocks and produces three-dimensional materials. The key challenge in
achieving sophisticated control over the spatial distribution of individual
nanoparticles through self-assembly lies in the lack of ability to probe and
manipulate the pathways of nanocomposite formation. This project, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, is addressing this challenge by using polymer-grafted nanoparticle
(PGNP) building blocks to understand and control the kinetic pathways and phase
behaviors of PGNP superstructures using solvent vapor annealing. Specifically,
this project will (i) establish the versatility of solvent annealing for the
synthesis of multicomponent PGNP superstructures, (ii) demonstrate pathway
control and polymorph selection by changing solvent annealing parameters, and
(iii) assemble shape-anisotropic PGNP into close-packed and low-density
superstructures and elucidate assembly pathways. This research will provide
fundamental and quantitative insight into the interplay between thermodynamic
and kinetic factors that dictate PGNP assembly outcome, and will lay the
groundwork for predictive synthesis of ordered PGNP superstructures with kinetic
pathway control, unprecedented compositional and structural diversity as well as
reconfigurability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.