* 2102291
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Interactive Synthesis and Repair For Robot Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Arjun Guha, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2024
* USD 193,821.00

Over the past few years, robots have started to be deployed in unstructured
human environments. There are hundreds of robots deployed in hospitals, hotels,
and supermarkets. Unfortunately, the software that runs on robots is programmed
using low-level abstractions and languages, and is hard to transfer across
robots and environments. In addition robotic software requires complex control
logic to ensure that robots are safe and well-behaved in all situations. Thus,
robot software is extraordinarily hard to write and maintain. This research
project develops tools and techniques to make robot software safer, easier to
write, and easier to maintain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of
the project are the development of (1) techniques for fixing bugs in robot
software, based on advances to automatic program repair and program synthesis;
(2) abstractions for writing robot software that can automatically handle
certain kinds of failures, based on new programming-language design; (3) methods
for checking the correctness of robot software, based on new program-
verification techniques. The project's broader significance and importance are
that it helps make robot software easier to write and maintain, and cheaper,
safer, and more reliable. The project encourages further research at the
intersection of programming languages and robotics by publishing research
results and releasing open-source software. The project also involves high-
school outreach workshops to broaden participation in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.