* 2102185
* Mapping Dark Matter with Light: Stellar Bar Driven Substructure in the Milky Way Dark Matter Halo
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Angela Collier, Collier, Angela C
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Angela Collier is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at the University of
Colorado. Collier will perform theoretical calculations to predict the structure
and flux of dark matter in the bar and near the center of the Milky Way. Results
from this project will allow astronomers to understand how dark matter
influences baryonic matter in barred galaxies. For the education component of
this project, Collier will develop a planetarium show to improve the science
outcomes and social-emotional development of pre-kindergarten and kindergarten
students, and she will provide research experiences to undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the role of stellar
bar-driven substructure in dark matter and its consequences for the detection of
dark matter in the Galaxy. Analytical calculations and numerical simulations
undertaken in this project will predict the impact of dark matter trapped in the
stellar bar on dark matter in the Galactic halo. The resultant insight into
halo-bar coupling and dynamics will permit accurate predictions of indirect
signatures to aid future astronomical searches for dark matter near the Galactic
Center. More generally, it will advance our understanding of how dark matter
bars are formed in galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.