* 2102116
* Lewis Base Directed Intermolecular Hydrogen Atom Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Thomas Lectka, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Thomas Lectka of Johns Hopkins University is studying new ways to
selectively modify one carbon-hydrogen bond in a complex molecule that features
many carbon-hydrogen bonds. These types of reactions are important for
systematically altering biologically active molecules to study their reactivity
without having to build each individual molecule from scratch. Professor Lectka
and his research team are determining how loci in a complex molecule interact
with a carbon-hydrogen bond-activating agent and using this information to
predict and improve the ability to choose a single carbon-hydrogen bond for
activation. The carbon-hydrogen bonds in these studies are being converted to
carbon-fluorine, carbon-bromine, carbon-oxygen, and carbon-nitrogen bonds,
valuable C-H activation transformations in organic synthesis. Professor Lectka
is also partnering with the JHU Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program
and the JHU-NSF STEM Achievement in Baltimore Elementary Schools (SABES) program
to provide research experiences for local high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Site-selective C-H functionalization in complex
molecular settings is a current grand challenge motivated by the desire to be
able to study and modify natural products and pharmaceutical targets without
having to individually prepare each analogue from basic building blocks.
Professor Lectka and his research group are investigating a new approach to this
problem through the development of hydrogen-atom transfer reagents that can
specifically coordinate to a substrate and selectively activate a single carbon-
hydrogen bond for C-X bond formation. Simultaneously, this team is also
exploring the types of functional groups beyond ketones and enones that can
influence the selectivity of the hydrogen-atom transfer reagents and determining
the effect of substrate coordination to metal additives. These activities are
providing a strong training platform for the professional development of
graduate students and research experiences for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.