* 2102102
* Ladder Oligomers and Polymers: Self-Assemblies and Opto-Electric Properties.
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Luping Yu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 04/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Luping Yu of the University of Chicago
is developing novel luminescent building blocks for the construction of
conjugated ladder polymers. Conjugated polymers are a unique class of non-
metallic polymers with semiconducting properties resembling that of the chemical
element silicon. They are extensively used in solar cells, LED screens and other
applications that utilize the conversion of electricity to light. Ladder
polymers, on the other hand, are a type of double stranded polymers with the
connectivity of a ladder. They are prepared by interconnecting repeating units
along the main polymer chain by four chemical bonds, instead of the two bonds
typically seen in conventional plastics. In this research, structural features
of luminescent building blocks will first be optimized using a combination of
synthetic and computational techniques. Ladder polymers will then be
constructed, and their physical properties systematically studied using a
variety of analytical techniques. A strong emphasis will be placed on
development of materials that can more efficiently interconvert electricity and
light. This work has the potential to lead to expansion of knowledge in organic
semiconducting molecules, syntheses and polymers. Materials prepared in this
work are also expected to impact development of more efficient digital displays
and optical interconnectors. Students involved in this work will receive a broad
training in synthetic polymer chemistry, photophysical characterization
techniques and device fabrications. The outreach activities will focus on The
Neighborhood School Program, which is one of the University of Chicago’s
longest-standing community programs. In this program, students will play roles
as tutors, teaching assistants, pre-school specialists, and technology
coordinators with 50 sites on Chicago’s south side and with 4,000 local students
each year. Strong emphasis will be placed on activities that encourage and
motivate students from underrepresented groups to pursue education and careers
in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on rational
development of novel synthetic approaches towards ladder oligomers and polymers,
with a strong focus on optimization of charge transfer and light emission.
Monomers will first be synthesized, and their design guided using DFT
calculations . Synthetic chemistry will involve two different approaches. The
first two-step approach will focus on cyclization in which the Heck coupling
reaction is used to obtain the ladder structures. The second single-step
approach will consist of “ladderization” to simultaneously form the fused ring
structures and will be accomplished by utilizing Friedlander condensation
reaction. Polymerization of these monomers and oligomers will yield conjugated
polymers with well-defined structures and optimized properties. Detailed
characterization of the prepared polymers will also be performed using a variety
of analytical techniques and will provide the necessary information for the
structure-property correlation and shade light into the aggregation state of
these luminescent polymers. The foldable semi-ladder conjugated polymers that
will be synthesized as a result of this work can potentially address the big
challenge confronted in the OLET (organic light-emitting transistors), by
facilitating the fast charge transport while avoiding tight intermolecular
H-aggregation that quenches luminescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.