* 2102324
* New Reactivity Pathways Using Pincer Ligands with Central Lewis Acidic Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Oleg Ozerov, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Oleg Ozerov at the Department of Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University
(TAMU) will selectively modify chemical bonds in nitrogen-containing organic
molecules, called nitrogen-containing heterocycles. The efficient preparation
and further modification of the nitrogen-containing heterocycles frequently is
necessary in the industrial production of many pharmaceuticals and
agrochemicals. However, the processes that are presently used for these
transformations are often inefficient and do not exactly target the chemical
bonds that must be manipulated. To rectify this problem, frameworks containing
metal atoms bonded to boron or aluminum atoms are constructed. The boron or
aluminum atoms can capture a nitrogen atom and hold the nitrogen-containing
heterocycle in a very controlled geometry that allows the metal atom to activate
specific chemical bonds. This permits precise control of the nitrogen-containing
heterocycle. The project involves a network of collaborators, including
Professor Anna Larsen at Ithaca College and Assistant Professor Miles Johnson at
the University of Richmond, both faculty at primarily undergraduate
institutions. The project also aims to increase the participation of students
from underrepresented groups through graduate student recruitment efforts and
outreach with the local secondary schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of
this project involves the synergistic use of the Lewis acidity of boryl or
aluminyl sites bonded to transition metals and incorporated into pincer type
ligands. It exploits the ability of boryl or an aluminyl units to capture the
nitrogenous group in an azine substrate. This positions the transition metal to
activate a specific C-H bond, which is topologically distinct from traditional
C-H activation approaches. To develop a library of new ligands, 1,2-pyrrolediyl
will be utilized as a key building block in the synthesis of pincer type ligands
that contain the boryl or aluminyl moieties. Using these ligands, rhodium,
iridium, and ruthenium complexes will be prepared and their ability to activate
C-H bonds will be investigated. The mechanistic roles of B or Al in shuttling
organic fragments to and from the transition metal and their involvement in the
C-H activation process will be probed. Finally, the catalytic functionalization
of azines and related substrates will be developed. The proposed research
involves interactions with two PUI collaborators, Dr. Larsen (Ithaca College)
and Dr. Johnson (U. of Richmond), and will proceed via close connections between
TAMU graduate student mentors and Ithaca College and University of Richmond
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.