* 2102099
* Harnessing the Blinking Heterogeneity of Fluorescent Probes: A New Take on Single-Molecule Research
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Kristin Wustholz, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2024
* USD 330,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism B
Program and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Chemistry
Division, Kristin L. Wustholz of the Department of Chemistry at College of
William and Mary will examine how light is emitted from molecules in order to
enhance the ability to visualize structures at the nanoscale. When molecules are
continuously illuminated, they respond by emitting random bursts of light, a
phenomenon called blinking. This blinking behavior can be harnessed for many
applications such as imaging biological structures and nanomaterials down to
10-nm length scales – a feat that is not possible with conventional optical
microscopy. However, lack of understanding and control over the variations in
blinking behavior from molecule to molecule across a sample fundamentally limit
the image quality that can be achieved. The focus of this project is to examine
and engineer blinking to produce high-quality and super-resolution images of
materials that are relevant to medicine and technology. At the same time, this
project provides training for undergraduate and master’s research students who
learn physical, analytical, and computational techniques as well as build
communication skills. Dr. Wustholz will continue her commitment to diversity and
inclusion through mentoring with the Chemistry Women Mentorship Network and her
use of teaching practices that benefit all students, but especially those who
are low-income, first-generation, and underrepresented. This project also
involves a new collaborative exchange with Temple University to further enhance
scientific training and professional development of students at both
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and development of improved
single-molecule probes is currently limited by several factors including: 1)
unwanted heterogeneity in blinking dynamics due to contributions from multiple
dark states, 2) uncontrolled environment-induced changes to blinking, and 3)
reliance on spectrally-distinct dyes for multicolor imaging. The first aim of
this project is to untangle the role of different dark states and their
dependence on molecular structure so that blinking heterogeneity can be
minimized when it is detrimental and exploited when it is useful. The initial
target is a series of well-characterized xanthenes as a model system to unravel
and control heterogeneity using a dark-state competition strategy. Next, the
influence of molecular structure and environmental conditions will be used to
control the different dark states and blinking heterogeneity of BODIPYs,
promising probes whose blinking mechanisms are currently not well understood.
These investigations will inform molecular design strategies for tailored
emission dynamics as well as unlock new opportunities in probe design through
the development of a new approach to multicolor super-resolved
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.