* 2102729
* Modeling the physics of gas removal and star formation quenching in Local Group satellite galaxies with next-generation simulations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jenna Samuel, Samuel, Jenna
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Jenna Samuel is awarded an NSF Astronomy and
Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct a program of research and
education at the University of Texas. Samuel will perform detailed computer
simulations of the Milky Way (MW) and Andromeda galaxies. Results from this
study will allow astronomers to understand how gas is removed and star formation
quenched in galaxies. For the education component of this project, Samuel will
develop a seminar series and conduct research mentorship activities to increase
the retention of students of color in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will conduct and benchmark exceedingly high-resolution cosmological
simulations of MW-like halo environments. It will produce the first numerically
converged models of stellar feedback and ram pressure stripping in satellite
dwarf galaxies, and it will provide a comprehensive theoretical basis for
determining (1) what caused the MW satellite galaxies to quench so completely,
(2) whether the MW halo environment is typical of nearby analogs, and (3)
whether MW satellites are unique in their formation
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.