* 2102550
* CAS: Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies of Nickel-Catalyzed 1,2-Dicarbofunctionalization of Alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Peng Liu, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis and Chemical Catalysis Programs in
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Keary Engle of The Scripps Research
Institute and Professor Peng Liu of the University of Pittsburgh are studying
the development of new chemical reactions to streamline the production of
valuable compounds, including medicinally relevant compounds, agrochemicals, and
functional materials. The reactions that are being studied simultaneously
connect three widely available feedstock chemicals using earth abundant nickel
catalysts. This collaborative project is combining insights from experiment,
computation, and machine learning to identify optimal nickel catalysts that
attach alkenes (feedstock molecules that contain a carbonâ€“carbon double bond
(C=C) bond) to two additional building blocks to rapidly build molecular
complexity. Professor Engle, Professor Liu and their research teams are also
leading synergistic outreach activities to promote engagement with STEM
disciplines among diverse populations. These efforts include developing virtual
reality technology to teach chemical concepts in the classroom and in the local
community, creating open-access online databases and short courses to share
know-how in computational organic chemistry, and involving undergraduate and
high school interns from historically underrepresented groups in collaborative
research experiences. These activities that bridge the Chemical Synthesis and
Chemical Catalysis programs are helping to improve the sustainability and
innovation of the chemical industry while advancing the technical workforce of
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multicomponent reactions promoted by
base metal catalysts are important processes that combine the advantages of
efficiency and sustainability. Professor Engle and Professor Liu are developing
nickel-catalyzed, three-component, cross-coupling reactions to unite alkenes,
organohalides, and organometallic reagents. The products of these
transformations are structurally complex, contain one or more stereocenters, and
naturally map onto to chemical substructures that are useful in academia and
industry. This collaborative research project leverages the combined expertise
of the Engle lab in experimental organometallic chemistry and the Liu lab in
computational organic chemistry to study reaction mechanisms, design chiral
ligands for asymmetric induction, and predict catalyst physical properties from
in silico descriptors. These activities are providing cutting-edge
interdisciplinary training for a diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students who are learning from two PIs and engaging with two
research groups at two institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.