* 2102672
* CAS: Near-Infrared Light Control of Metal Catalyzed Reactions and Polymerizations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Tomislav Rovis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Tomislav Rovis of Columbia University is studying the use of near-
infrared (NIR) light to control catalysts that mediate a number of fundamental
chemical reactions. Catalysis is a technology of prime importance and has deep
implications in many fields, ranging from synthetic chemistry to the production
and manufacturing of pharmaceuticals, fine and commodity materials, as well as
new well-defined materials. Indeed, it is estimated that 85% of all products
made involve catalysis at some point in their production. Most work on the
development of new catalytic systems focus on aspects related to efficiency and
selectivity. The notion of spatial and temporal control has been largely under-
studied and remains elusive. Of all possible stimuli to achieve control, light
is the most attractive since it is noninvasive, it can be easily manipulated
thanks to modern optics techniques. NIR light is particularly suitable as it can
penetrate materials and induce reactions through barriers. This can be
attractive to the plastics industry, as it allows the shaping of highly
controllable yet robust materials through molds. The project will establish the
use of NIR light to control polymerizations through material barriers with an
eye towards achieving new technological breakthroughs to enable, enhance, and
drive plastics and material science. The project will also create the
opportunity to synthesize a set of industrially recyclable, environmentally
benign polymers from which the monomer can be regenerated and reused.
Additionally, educational opportunities will be provided for underrepresented
students, from elementary school students to undergraduates, to broaden interest
and educate them in photochemistry and polymerization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Tomislav Rovis of Columbia University is
studying the use of near-infrared (NIR) light to activate various catalysts to
effect catalyzed polymerizations through barriers. The project will establish
NIR control of ruthenium-catalyzed olefin metathesis reactions for the
spatiotemporal controlled synthesis of polyolefin-like structures. Inherent to
the approach is the propensity of low-energy NIR light to penetrate material
barriers such as silicone, paper, plastic and even tissue. The project aims to
take maximum advantage of the energy of NIR light to induce chemical change at
the catalyst of interest. This research has he potential to greatly enhance
fundamental understanding of the mechanism of NIR-initiated olefin metathesis.
Extensions of this work will include orthogonal light and heat polymerization
and depolymerization along with in situ studies for bioimaging. With this
approach, the project will also extend into other NIR-controlled
polymerizations, including N-heterocyclic carbene activation to induce
polymerization en route to polyurethanes and polyesters, two crucial families of
organic materials. Finally, the project will establish a visible demonstration
of NIR-enabled polymerizations that will be used to teach catalysis, central to
so many facets of everyday life, to broaden awareness of fundamental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.