* 2102905
* RAPID: Partisanship, Trust, and Vaccine Hesitancy: Impacts of the 2020 Election on COVID-19 Risk Management
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Katherine Dickinson, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2022
* USD 198,846.00

The United States is on the verge of two potentially watershed moments in the
fight against COVID-19. First, COVID-19 vaccines are being tested in clinical
trials, suggesting widespread distribution as early as spring 2021. Vaccination
is widely considered one of the most critical public health interventions for
curbing the spread of COVID-19, which has already claimed more than 220,000
American lives. At the same time, the 2020 U.S. presidential election is likely
to have a significant impact on vaccine uptake given the hyper-politicization of
both the pandemic and vaccines broadly. All of this is occurring against the
backdrop of heightened attention to structural racism, which has identified
significant disparities in COVID-19 impacts across racial groups. The confluence
of these events will have profound implications for the long-term trajectory of
the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S., as well as for the public’s perceptions of
vaccine risk and government trustworthiness. Based on data collected through a
multi-wave national survey of U.S. residents, this project explores the impact
of factors such as partisanship, risk perceptions related to vaccines, and other
exogenous—and often unpredictable—events on intended uptake of the COVID-19
vaccine. The results of this study advances key theories of risk management,
information seeking, and the policy process in the context of novel risks. The
research also provides timely and usable information to public health officials
about the design of equitable policies and practices for bridging the gap
between vaccine availability and uptake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the context of
COVID-19, the period between the 2020 U.S. election and the expected approval of
a COVID-19 vaccine provides an opportunity to assess how exogenous events in the
political and information environment shape individuals’ vaccine-related
perceptions and behaviors. Using a three-wave panel survey distributed to a
demographically-representative national sample of U.S. residents, this study
captures changes in risk perceptions and behavioral intentions, as well as in
factors such as partisanship, trust in institutions, and structural racism that
may influence vaccine uptake. The first wave of data collection (T1) is
immediately following the announcement of 2020 election results. Because
presidential elections tend to magnify polarization while garnering enormous
media attention, this timing represents a critical moment to capture initial
data for the project. Subsequent survey waves are approximately February 2021
(T2) and April 2021 (T3) as vaccine development advances. This research produces
findings that promote a more robust understanding of the process through which
individual risk perceptions evolve across time and interact with social and
political factors to influence behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.