* 2102381
* Collaborative Research RUI: CAS: Development of Tripodal Ligands for Next-Generation Rare Earth Element Separations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Werner, University of Tampa
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 177,980.00

In this collaborative project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B (CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Shannon Biros of the
Department of Chemistry at Grand Valley State University and Eric Werner of the
Departments of Chemistry, Biochemistry and Physics at the University of Tampa
are developing a series of metal chelating agents for binding to f-elements,
including the valuable rare earth metals. Applications in modern technologies
including those associated with the development of automobile batteries, medical
diagnostic agents, and advanced optical materials have increased the need for
more efficient acquisition of rare earth elements from both raw material sources
and recycled metal sources from consumer products. This project seeks to develop
improved metal separations and extraction methods while adding to fundamental
knowledge of f-element chemistry and extraction agent design. In this
collaborative effort, a cadre of undergraduate students, including three
community college students, will be trained in a broad range of areas including
organic synthesis, inorganic coordination chemistry, luminescence, and
analytical chemistry. The principal investigators will also work to develop
student communication skills through internal and external conference
presentations and will continue their commitment to supporting students in their
labs who are from underserved populations in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The f-block elements, including the rare earth
metals, are critical in modern society, finding materials applications in common
devices including smart phones, hybrid car batteries, and LED (light-emitting
diode) lighting. Unfortunately, their purification from recycled materials and
isolation from ground ores remains a significant challenge. In this
collaborative project, new tripodal ligands that contain the
carbamoylmethylphosphine oxide chelating group will be synthesized. These
represent the next generation of compounds to be developed by the team to serve
as selective lanthanide (Ln) and actinide (An) metal extraction agents for
improved f-element separations. Metal-binding ability will be characterized by
NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) and IR (infra-red) spectroscopy, MS (mass
spectrometry), X-ray diffraction and luminescence, and the extraction ability of
each new ligand for Ln ions-- out of aqueous nitric acid solutions and into an
organic solvent--will be determined. The overarching goal of the project is to
enhance metal binding and selective extraction for this ligand system by making
systematic changes to the ligand structure and to the extraction protocol
conditions. These studies are designed to further understanding of the
parameters that enable rational design of effective Ln/An extraction agents
while also expanding knowledge of general f-element coordination
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.