* 2102188
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical Description of Electron-driven Chemical Processes and Related Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Viatcheslav Kokoouline, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

WIth support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Chris Greene of Purdue University and
Viatcheslav Kokoouline of the University of Central Florida (UCF) will
collaboratively work to solve a class of quantum mechanical problems related to
electron collisions with molecules having physical or biochemical relevance.
When a low energy electron strikes a molecule, several possible outcomes can
occur, including bond breakage leading to fragmentation into smaller molecules
and atoms. This class of physico-chemical processes has proven to be extremely
challenging for current theoretical methods to describe. To overcome current
limitations of theory, Greene and Kokoouline will apply a mathematical and
computational set of tools to determine the rate at which such bond-breaking
reactions occur. The need to understand these electron-initiated chemical
processes resonates across several disparate fields, including chemical
astrophysics, plasma chemistry, and radiation biochemistry. A deeper
understanding of the sequence of events that is triggered when a slow electron
impacts DNA (2'-deoxyribonucleic acid) will help to understand how single or
double strand breaks occur. While the principles of quantum mechanics are
understood generally, applications of those principles to treat theoretical
problems of this complexity and to compute collision outcomes accurately are
extremely difficult and the field will benefit from the improvements to be
developed by this project. An educational broader impact derives from the
training of students, both graduate and undergraduate, as well as postdoctoral
scholars, engendering them with the computational and theoretical tools needed
to tackle difficult problems in this subfield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research effort by Drs. Chris Greene and Viatcheslav Kokoouline of
Purdue University and UCF, respectively, will concentrate on a select set of
target molecular systems, selected to serve as prototypes of these non-
perturbative chemical processes in which energy is converted from electronic
into dissociative degrees of freedom. The research proposed here aims to improve
theoretical capabilities for treating problems in physical chemistry that go
beyond the usual paradigm of the field, which is the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation. The normal rubric of the field treats any reactive process
initially by computing one electronic potential surface, or in some cases a few
such surfaces with couplings, as a function of the nuclear coordinates, followed
by solution of coupled differential or partial differential equations relating
to motion on those surfaces in either time-dependent or time-independent quantum
mechanics. While this rubric has yielded many successes in treating reactive
chemical and photochemical processes, electron-driven chemical transformations
continue to pose severe challenges to existing theory. Therefore the
Greene/Kokoouline team will endeavor to advance current theoretical approaches
in two largely separate directions. Firstly, the electronic calculation will be
developed with explorations of three-dimensional finite-element calculations
with effective electron-molecule interaction potentials modeled with
correlations approximately included through the introduction of static
potentials that incorporate density-functional theory potentials. Secondly, the
computational methods will be significantly improved to enable calculations of
the bond-breaking that occurs in large molecules, especially those having
biological relevance. In an outreach activity supported by the UCF team,
Viatcheslav Kokoouline will also develop a web-based platform and a related
methodology to teach quantum mechanics in studio-mode like classes that will
then be made available to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.