* 2102684
* Molecular Simulations of Biological Active Matter
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Garegin Papoian, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Garegin Papoian from the University of Maryland-College Park is
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry to advance theoretical understanding and
computational modeling of active matter. The latter is fundamentally different
from traditional states of matter, such as solids, liquids, and gases. In active
matter systems, the individual particles consume energy, propelling them along
directional motions, where the mutual interactions of these motorized particles
lead to a wide variety of far-from-equilibrium phases with exotic behaviors. The
cell is by far the most important example of active matter, where chemistry and
mechanics are strongly coupled, for example, allowing the cell to crawl around
and actively sense the extracellular environment. Prof. Papoian’s group has been
developing a novel research platform, called MEDYAN, which enables computer
simulations of complex active matter systems. Prof. Papoian’s laboratory will
work on a new representation of cytoskeletal filaments within MEDYAN,
anticipating great increase in the sophistication of modeling of various
nonlinear deformations of cytoskeletal networks. His group will develop
algorithms that take into account chemistry dynamics on deformable membranes,
which, in turn, will enable simulations of many interesting cellular processes,
such as receptor clustering and cellular signaling. Longer-term, the development
of MEDYAN will pave the way for in silico modeling of the whole cell at a single
molecule resolution. The PI is also continuing his various educational and
outreach activities, in particular, serving as physical chemistry lecturer for
the US National Chemistry Olympiad Team of high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Papoian’s approach is based on a novel
simulation framework developed in his group, called MEDYAN (the Mechanochemical
Dynamics of Active Networks). It is a highly intricate reactive force field,
targeted at micrometer scale complex molecular systems, such as deformable
vesicles containing a mixture of various chemical species and polymers. MEDYAN
interleaves chemical dynamics with mechanical equilibration, comprehensively
covering in particular many important components of the cellular cytoskeleton.
Prof. Papoian’s group will rely on a sophisticated nonlinear elasticity theory
to describe cytoskeletal filaments in MEDYAN, enabling, for the first-time,
structure-based studies of torsional and chiral effects in large cytoskeletal
networks. In particular, Prof. Papoian’s laboratory will investigate how the
chirality of actin filaments at the nanometer scale may propagate to the
micrometer scale, which may lead to rotational symmetry breaking. In a different
project, they are developing algorithms for simulating reaction-diffusion
processes on the membrane manifold, achieving a careful distinction between
surface and interior chemistries. This capability enables studies of a wide
variety of exciting biological phenomena, from the aggregation of curvature
inducing proteins causing formation of tubular protrusions to signaling receptor
clustering in immune cells. MEDYAN has been fruitfully used by many research
groups to model a variety of active matter phenomena, from soft matter to cell
biology. The ongoing developments will further broaden its appeal, from various
new researches to high school demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.