* 2102763
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: LTREB: Long-term ecological and evolutionary dynamics of secondary contact
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* John Garza, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2026
* USD 207,072.00

Populations of animals and plants are regularly isolated by natural processes
and human activities. In isolation, populations adapt to local environments, and
traits and genes may diverge. This adaptive divergence can create ecologically
important variation that changes the role of species within ecosystems. Natural
processes and human activities can also allow or force populations that have
diverged in isolation to come back into contact - a process called secondary
contact. The outcome of secondary contact is important for understanding how
populations evolve and ecosystems function. This LTREB takes advantage of a
whole-lake restoration project to study the decade-scale ecological and
evolutionary dynamics of secondary contact between recently diverged lineages of
alewife. Alewife are a well-studied and ecologically important fish found in
lakes and in the coastal ocean of eastern North America. There are two divergent
alewife life-history forms: the ancestral anadromous form that moves between
lakes and the coastal ocean and a landlocked form that is resident in lakes.
Many landlocked populations were formed by the construction of dams by colonial
Americans. The recent removal of dams and construction of fishways create
opportunities for secondary contact between landlocked and anadromous alewife
populations. Findings will address questions fundamental to the generation and
maintenance of biodiversity, the ecological impact of variation within species,
and the impacts of human accelerated environmental changes including population
fragmentation, restoration of habitat connectivity, and climate change. This
project will inform the conservation and management of anadromous alewife, a
critical resource in coastal freshwater and marine habitats, a species of
conservation concern, and the focus of intensive restoration and conservation
efforts. The genomic tools developed by this project will help resource managers
address important questions, such as the impact of bycatch on anadromous alewife
populations. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students,
including students from underrepresented backgrounds, in a unique combination of
advanced genomics techniques and whole-lake sampling. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project asks how climate change, anadromous alewife population
recovery, and periodic major hybridization events (2-3 per decade), interact to
determine the magnitude of hybridization and direction of gene flow, phenotypic
differentiation among alewife forms, and whole-lake impacts. It focuses on the
restoration of Rogers Lake, Connecticut and regional reference lakes. This
project utilizes highly informative microhaplotype genetic markers to measure
hybridization and gene flow; measures trophic morphology, individual growth
rates, diets, and habitat use to assess phenotypic and ecological
differentiation among forms; and samples inorganic nutrients, phytoplankton, and
zooplankton to evaluate whole-lake impacts. This research provides a rare
opportunity to track the ecological and evolutionary dynamics from the
initiation of secondary contact, and the long-term research plan facilitates the
detection of rare events and interactions between ecological and evolutionary
process at the whole ecosystem scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.