* 2102193
* NCSE Drawdown 2021: Research to Action: Science and  Solutions for a Planet Under Pressure
* GEO,RISE
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Pam Mendelson, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 11/30/2021
* USD 59,947.00

The National Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE) Drawdown 2021
Conference on Research to Action: Science and Solutions for a Planet Under
Pressure positions itself to have broader impact through framing, design,
implementation, and post-conference engagement and collaboration. In particular,
the partnership with Project Drawdown ensures weaving together of two networks
focused on enhancing science and solutions that otherwise may not have
connected. NCSE has deep expertise in both the theory and practice of evidence-
use in decision making and knowledge on how to design interactions to promote
effective “boundary spanning,” the process that ensures that the knowledge that
is produced is actually useful to decision-makers, and accessible at the right
time and in the right format. As with other NCSE conferences, this event is
designed to optimize strategic dialogue among communities with the goal of
generating solution-based outcomes. NCSE is working to design a conference that
exemplifies “convergence-in-action,” tapping into the transformational potential
of one of NSF’s 10 Big Ideas. Through the partnership with Project Drawdown,
emergent research questions will help catalyze the solutions-driven focus in the
second half of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests
support for the 2021 NCSE Annual Conference which plans to emphasize a systems-
approach to the effects of heat, water, and the COVID-19 pandemic as a threat
multiplier -examining both impacts and solutions. NCSE 2021, Research to Action:
Science and Solutions for a Planet Under Pressure, will explore the links
between the changes in Earth’s physical systems and its social institutions. The
primary objectives of the conference are to convene, connect, and engage diverse
participants to make connections, build partnerships, and work collaboratively
toward solutions. The conference will be held from January 5–9, 2021 in
partnership with Project Drawdown and will encourage cross-disciplinary and
innovative discussions about the changing conditions and interactions of
intensifying heat, water scarcity, and impaired water quality on a host of
integrated systems, including food provisioning, food system security, and the
global supply chain. The partnership with Project Drawdown enables the NCSE
conference to mobilize science to explore: (a) the physical effects of climate
change and how these are linked to social institutions; and (b) how implementing
climate solutions produces positive co-benefits to society, the economy, and the
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.