* 2102833
* RAPID: Do wildfire effects on roots and rhizosphere activity control both short- and long- term soil C stabilization?
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Kate Lajtha, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2023
* USD 151,959.00

This RAPID proposal is to examine soil carbon dynamics in forest stands affected
by a large and catastrophic wildfire that burned three watersheds and
surrounding forest in the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest, OR. Old-growth
forests in the USA hold significant amounts of carbon (C) in both tree biomass
and in soils. Because of this, disturbances such as forest harvest or fire that
might release C into the air from vegetation or soil have the potential to
impact the atmosphere. Both the number and the sizes of wildfires in the Pacific
Northwest have been increasing in the last several decades, and increases in
temperature are projected to lengthen fire seasons. Because so many Western U.S.
ecosystems are expected to experience increasingly large and severe fires in the
near future, understanding how wildfire impacts ecosystem C cycling is
increasingly critical to future projections of global temperatures. While fire
effects on the C budgets of above ground vegetation are relatively easy to
observe and measure, fire effects on soil organic matter C below the surface is
less easy to measure or predict. Given that the soil C pool is over 3 times
greater than the atmospheric C pool, it is critical to understand the mechanisms
of soil response to extreme fire disturbance in order to have accurate models of
global C concentrations under different scenarios of environmental change.
Results from this research will not only inform global earth system science
models, but will also help inform ecosystem managers about potential benefits
and costs of different fire management scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will test novel hypotheses about the influences of root/rhizosphere
activity and above and belowground detrital inputs on soil C stabilization and
destabilization after catastrophic disturbance. Hypotheses are based on a new
model of soil C dynamics that starts with the argument that soil C in
undisturbed ecosystems is a balance between rhizosphere-derived priming losses
and root-derived soil C gains. Priming of soil C occurs when inputs of labile C
sources, usually from live root exudation, fuels increased respiration (= C
loss) of stable soil organic matter (SOM) pools such as mineral-associated
organic matter (MAOM); however, efficient microbial use of high-quality detrital
inputs such as fine root litter are retained (= C gain) in soil as MAOM. These
two competing processes keep MAOM levels both stable and below true mineral
saturation. However, when tree-mortality disturbance occurs, not only is there a
significant influx of dead fine root material (aiding soil C stabilization
through microbial use and microbial turnover), but rhizosphere priming ceases as
root exudation of labile dissolved organic carbon ceases (removing soil C
destabilization). This model predicts that change to soil C pools and C dynamics
after significant disruption to detrital inputs is remarkably rapid due to
immediate reduction in rhizosphere activity coupled with continued influx of
detrital root materials. This is contrary to current models of soil C after
harvest or fire in which the most stable pools of soil C could increase until
the forest regenerates. A sampling grid will be established based on tree
mortality, burn severity, pre-fire aboveground biomass and LiDAR-derived
geophysical variables throughout the region burned in the Holiday Farm fire at
the Andrews Forest. Soil cores will be taken along transects within identified
sampling sites and density fractionated to separate out roots, particulate soil
carbon, and MAOM. SOM in whole soils and soil physical fractions will be
characterized using solid-state 13C nuclear magnetic resonance also allowing us
to examine any movement of pyrogenic C into either POM or MAOM
pools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.