* 2102931
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Coral Proxy and Climate Model Comparison to understand Climate Variability in the Intra-Americas Sea Region
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kristine DeLong, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 417,928.00

The inter-American Seas, which include the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico,
is identified as highly sensitive to global climate variability with direct
social and economic ramifications for this region of 120 million people. It is a
primary moisture source for precipitation in the Americas and contains the
Western Hemisphere Warm Pool that drives summer precipitation and hurricane
intensity and frequency. The comparison of General circulation models (GCM) and
Sea Surface Temperature data (SST) in this region, however, reveals large cold
SST and dry precipitation biases hampering predictions of future climate
variability in this region. This project aims to characterize and assess SST and
hydroclimate variability in the Inter-American Seas using model-data comparison
with the goal of pinpointing weaknesses in model skills to improve future
projections. Specifically, the researchers will produce reconstructions of
hydroclimate and SST using coral from seven locations back to 1850. These new
past climate records and their comparison to direct observations and models will
be used to investigate the mechanisms through which decadal SST variability in
this region impacts the hydroclimate in the region and North America. The
project will leverage existing SST reconstructions and produce new coral records
from existing samples to address discrepancies among GCM, observational SST
records, and paleoclimate SST reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential Broader Impacts include an expansion of the temporal and spatial data
coverage of past sea surface temperature and hydroclimate in the IAS region.
Other BI include a greater understanding of climate variability at decadal time
scales, its drivers and links to large scale atmospheric circulation.
Identifying time periods and geographic areas where climate models lose skill in
replicating hydroclimate variability in the IAS and understanding the causes for
such deficiencies is important for improving the scientific understanding of IAS
climate and how it impacts the surrounding land regions, including the United
States. Countries within and along the Inter-American Seas are vulnerable to
tropical cyclones, sea-level rise, and decreased water availability. Further, it
will improve model derived products for resource managers in the Americas and
Caribbean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop outreach activities
through an existing online course “managing for a changing climate” for which
the researchers will provide translation in Spanish, French and Creole than can
be used for climate education by various stakeholders. Additionally, the project
will support the scientific training and professional development of
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.