* 2102044
* CAS: Photocatalysis Without Metals: Design Rules for Organic Photoredox Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shaama Mallikarjun Sharada, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 306,214.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Shaama M. Sharada and her group at the
University of Southern California (USC) are using computational methods to study
organic photoredox catalysts. There is growing need for strategies to mitigate
the adverse impacts of climate change. Carbon capture and utilization offers
means to trap and transform anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) into useful fuels
and chemicals. Harnessing sunlight to carry out CO2 conversion is essential
because breaking the bonds in CO2 requires high energy input. Using organic
light-activated molecules, or chromophores, as catalysts to facilitate this
transformation lowers cost and toxicity concerns compared to traditional, heavy
metal thermal catalysts. Developing a fundamental mechanistic picture of the
photoredox catalytic cycle is an essential first step toward unlocking the
potential of these materials. Dr. Sharada and her research team aim to use
quantum chemistry methods and machine learning to generate mechanistic insights
and catalyst design rules for CO2 conversion. The design rules are expected to
have broader impact beyond carbon dioxide utilization as these catalysts find
applications in organic synthesis, water-splitting, drug delivery, and biocides.
Open-source modeling software used by the Sharada group for research can also
serve as powerful visual learning aids for high school students. Since lasting
impact can be achieved through partnership with teachers, summer externships are
planned for teachers at the Hawthorne Math and Science Academy, to train them in
the use of modeling methods and support the design of lesson plans for
environmental sciences, chemistry, and biology
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoredox catalytic cycles with organic
chromophores are difficult to study using experiments alone owing to the
generation of several radical intermediates, complex solvation effects, varied
product distributions, and low catalyst turnover numbers. Despite methodological
advances in the treatment of charge transfer processes, organic chromophore
studies largely focus on optoelectronic applications while mechanistic studies
of photoredox cycles remain limited. This work aims to pioneer the adaptation of
a foundational principle in heterogeneous catalysis – the Sabatier principle –
to photoredox systems and identify innate trade-offs that govern catalytic
activity and turnover number (or resistance to degradation). The goal is to
characterize exciplexes formed between the excited-state chromophore and
electron donor prior to quenching and determine factors that favor complete
quenching and charge separation vis-à-vis chromophore degradation via Birch
reduction. To this end, multiple quantum chemistry methods are to be employed,
including density functional theory (DFT), constrained DFT, time-dependent DFT,
and energy decomposition analysis for ground, excited-state, and solvated
systems. Factors that lower the likelihood of degradation will be juxtaposed
with those that also enhance the rates of electron transfer to CO2 to identify
trade-offs underlying these performance metrics. Characteristics of the
photoredox system – solvent, electron donor, and chromophore properties – that
lead to the desired balance between activity and degradation are expected to
emerge. The computational work will be supported by experimental transient
absorption spectroscopy studies by a collaborator at USC. Finally, these design
rules will feed into machine learning methods to accelerate discovery, by
rapidly searching the vast chemical space for chromophores that possess desired
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.