* 2102603
* A Coordination Chemistry Approach to the Synthesis of Single- Molecule Magnets
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2024
* USD 712,112.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jeffrey R. Long of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley, is developing new
classes of single-molecule magnets. These remarkable molecules behave as tiny,
nanoscopic bar magnets, and therefore offer the potential to revolutionize
technologies such as information storage and processing. The primary focus of
this project is to employ synthetic chemistry to tailor the local environment of
molecules with atomic-level precision to give rise to new single-molecule
magnets with optimized properties, with the ultimate goal of realizing single-
molecule magnets that operate at or near room temperature. This project lies at
the interface of inorganic, organic, and physical chemistry, and is therefore
well-suited to broadly educate and train young scientists. Finally, virtual
science lessons on topics such as states of matter and magnetism will be
produced in collaboration with a local community outreach program and taught to
elemental school students in the Bay Area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to develop novel synthetic approaches to enhance magnetic anisotropy,
strengthen magnetic coupling, and increase magnetic relaxation times in single-
molecule magnets, with the goal of realizing unprecedented operating
temperatures. In addition to the myriad technological applications envisioned
for single-molecule magnets, their size and electronic structure gives rise to
the coexistence of classical and quantum properties, such as magnetic hysteresis
and quantum tunneling of the magnetization, respectively. Therefore, single-
molecule magnets provide a platform that can be used to predictably engender and
fundamentally study novel magnetic behavior at the intersection of quantum and
classical physics. Further, the exotic transition metal, lanthanide, and
actinide coordination environments that will be targeted for generating designer
magnetism have the potential to engender novel chemical reactivity. Finally, it
is expected that the magnetic properties of the proposed molecules will afford
direct insight into the behavior of other exotic though distinct magnetic
species, such as surface adsorbed adatoms, single-chain magnets, and bulk
magnetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.