* 2102605
* Template Driven Access to Highly Congested Stereocenters: Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Mukund Sibi, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Mukund Sibi from North Dakota State University, is studying
new ways to synthesize crowded carbocyclic heterocyclic organic compounds
(cyclic organic compounds containing heavy atoms such as N,O and S in addition
to carbon) with control of stereochemistry. Heterocyclic building blocks with
defined stereochemistries are valuable building blocks for natural product
synthesis, chemical biology and medicinal chemistry. For example, a majority of
therapeutics used to treat human diseases contain heterocyclic substructures. On
the other end of the spectrum, heterocycles are also integral in the manufacture
of materials. The methods to be developed by Professor Sibi and his graduate
students are designed to be efficient, cost effective, and eco-friendly. The
funding from the National Science Foundation will also make a significant impact
on human capacity building by training graduate students to enter the 21st
century workforce. Outreach activities are also part of this award. In the
second year of the grant, ten faculty members from primarily undergraduate
institutions will receive training on Introduction of DOSY (Diffusion Ordered
Spectroscopy) a state-of-the-art method to study solution structure, enabling
these faculty to takes such knowledge back to their respective institutions to
teach students. Another outreach activity of significance is a graduate course
on heterocycles designed to engage students from multiple institutions where
such courses are not offered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Sibi and his
students are developing new methods for the installation of all carbon
quaternary centers with control over relative and absolute stereochemistry.
Reliable and catalytic methods for the construction of chiral quaternary centers
are sparse. Current protocols to surmount this barrier are generally limited to
a single reaction type. The development of a strategy that performs across a
broad class of reactions would deliver significant impact. In this work,
Professor Sibi and co-workers will use an achiral-template-driven strategy to
deliver reliable and effective solutions for the installation of hindered chiral
centers by utilizing several important synthetic transformations. The
intellectual merit of the work is focused on synthetic and mechanistic organic
chemistry. It will make fundamental advances in the preparation of small carbo-
and heterocycles and develop mechanistic tools to understand the structure of
the reactive intermediates involved in organic transformations. Broader impacts
of the work are the development of new synthetic methodology for accessing
carbo- and heterocycles as important tools for researchers in academia as well
as the chemical industry. The program offers a continuum of learning tools from
basic to advanced, which will enable educating scientists across all levels in
broad aspects of catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.