* 2102257
* Using Spacer Molecular Structure to Control Energetics, Stability, Charge-Carrier Transport, and Photovoltaic Performance in 2D Organic Metal Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kenneth Graham, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 365,077.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Organic metal halide perovskites (HPs) are
attractive materials for high-performing inexpensive optoelectronic devices,
such as photovoltaic cells and light emitting diodes, that can be fabricated
using high-throughput approaches such as solution-based printing methods.
Research scale photovoltaic cells based on HPs display record power conversion
efficiencies that are on par with the most widely used photovoltaic material,
silicon, but can be produced at a fraction of the cost of silicon photovoltaics.
Although HPs have similar efficiencies to silicon, there are two major barriers
to commercialization and wide scale deployment – inadequate stability and the
presence of lead (Pb), a well-known toxic element. Reduced dimensionality HPs,
which are a class of HPs where the three-dimensional (3D) perovskite structure
is broken into 2D sheets by bulky organic cations, are promising materials for
improving stability and enabling the replacement of Pb with tin (Sn), which is
much less toxic. At present, photovoltaic devices based on reduced
dimensionality HPs show significantly lower performance than their 3D
counterparts, while Sn-based HPs also underperform their Pb-based counterparts.
This project develops new reduced dimensionality HPs, with a stronger focus on
the less toxic Sn-based materials, and determines key relationships between
spacer structure and material properties, thus providing the understanding
necessary to accelerate material development for more stable and less toxic
photovoltaics and light emitting diodes. The research team promotes STEM
education and interest at the middle and high school levels while emphasizing
participation of traditionally underrepresented groups. This goal relies largely
on an annual workshop for middle and high-school teachers from around Kentucky,
where teachers conduct experiments in the organic electronics fabrication
laboratory at the University of Kentucky and leave with the materials required
to make dye sensitized solar cells with their middle and high school
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The performance of
reduced dimensionality HPs is limited by their high exciton binding energies and
poor electronic transport relative to their 3D counterparts, while the
development of Sn-based HPs in general is limited by defect states resulting
from Sn oxidation. Currently, it is hard to predict how molecular parameters of
the spacer molecule, such as electrostatics, polarizability, or size, influence
the optical and electronic properties of reduced dimensionality HPs. In part,
these predictions are difficult because fundamental relationships between the
molecular parameters of the spacer molecule and the ionization energy, electron
affinity, and exciton binding energy of the reduced dimensionality HPs are
largely unexplored. However, these parameters are critical to designing
materials and device structures for photovoltaics and light emitting diodes.
This research project systematically probes how the spacer molecule’s structure
impacts these important material properties as well as stability, charge-carrier
transport, and photovoltaic performance in both Pb- and Sn-based reduced
dimensionality HPs. The project uses low-energy ultraviolet and inverse
photoelectron spectroscopies to uncover critical relationships between spacer
structure, crystal structure, ionization energy, and electron affinity in
reduced dimensionality HPs. Next, the research focuses on how the spacer
structure influences exciton binding energies in reduced dimensionality HPs and
uses this knowledge to design materials with lower exciton binding energies.
Third, spacer molecules are designed to inhibit Sn(II) oxidation and thereby
provide a potential route for developing improved Sn-based HPs. Finally,
selected reduced dimensionality HPs are incorporated into photovoltaic devices
to determine how material properties such as exciton binding energies impact
photovoltaic performance. Charge-carrier mobility measurements are conducted to
establish more complete structure-property relationships that help to advance
both material and device design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.