* 2102578
* Temperature Dependence of Surface Energy of Ice and its Implications on Adhesion and Friction
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Ali Dhinojwala, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A Program
(CSDM-A) program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Ali Dhinojwala of The
University of Akron is investigating the temperature dependence of the surface
energy of ice and how it influences adhesion and friction. As the surfaces of
ice are covered with a water-like surface layer, this is expected to impact the
surface energy, adhesion, and friction. Professor Dhinojwala and his students
are using advanced spectroscopy techniques to study the contact interface
between ice and a soft elastomer and how the structure of this interface changes
with temperature. Their work will shed light on the transition temperature of
the liquid-like layer of water and its influence on the surface energy of ice.
Their discoveries could lead to the design of new materials or coatings for
higher traction on ice such as winter tires and shoe soles; for ice-resistant
surfaces and anti-icing coatings on aircraft, high voltage cables, and wind
turbine blades; and materials to improve food preservation. Dr. Dhinojwala is
promoting STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)-related
outreach activities as a Director of District Science Day and the co-director of
the Biomimicry Center, and he is designing an honors class on materials that
have influenced human civilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
reveal the molecular level details of an observation made by Professor
Dhinojwala and his students, namely an abrupt transition in adhesion energy
between a siloxane elastomer and an ice surface at 257 K (16 K below the bulk
melting temperature of ice). Dhinojwala and his team hypoethesize that this
change in adhesion energy is due to an abrupt transition of the bilayer of ice
and potentially a change in the surface energy of the ice. Because both adhesion
and friction will also be influenced by this transition, Dhinojwala’s research
team is using the Johnson–Kendall–Roberts geometry to measure the thermodynamic
work of adhesion and compare it to the temperature dependence of surface energy.
The team is using a new interface-sensitive sum frequency generation
spectroscopy (SFG) technique to study the contact interface between ice and soft
elastomers, a problem of fundamental importance in understanding adhesion and
friction of ice surfaces. Dhinojwala’s team is applying these measurements to
study the influence of roughness and correlate with Persson’s predictions on how
ice adhesion and friction are affected by roughness. The broader impacts of this
research in technological applications stem from new insights that relate
interfacial molecular structure to macroscopic friction
coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.