* 2102936
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Fingerprinting Forced and Unforced Variability in Holocene Paleoclimate Record
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Cristian Proistosescu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 304,546.00

Distinguishing between natural and forced climate variability has large
implications for both interpreting past variations and for making accurate
predictions of the future. Climate models and paleoclimate observations disagree
about the magnitude of variability at interdecadal-and-longer time scales. This
creates uncertainty in estimates of equilibrium climate sensitivity (temperature
increase that result from a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentration) and in model projections of long-term climate variability. The
key to reconciling this contradiction lies in understanding the relative
importance of forced and unforced variability in the paleoclimate records. If
the paleoclimate reconstructions are correct, then the missing physics must be
identified, whether it be a lack of sensitivity to external forcing (e.g.
volcanic eruption, solar variability, changing concentrations of greenhouse
gases and aerosols), or an underrepresentation of internal variability (internal
mechanisms within the climate system). This project proposes a framework for
fingerprinting forced and unforced climate variability in Holocene paleoclimate
records, based on their different spatial and temporal statistics. Specifically,
the researchers will develop spatio-temporal fingerprints for forced and
unforced climate variability, using a combination of Global Circulation Models
(GCMs) simulations and fundamental physical principles, and apply them to the
multiproxy paleoclimate record of Holocene climate variability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will build the fingerprints starting from
GCMs, which provide a complete representation of the climate system and have the
ability to disaggregate forced and unforced variability. The proxy-system models
(forward modelling of mechanistic processes either biological or chemical, by
which climate variability is recorded in a climate archive such as corals or ice
cores) will be used to evaluate how these fingerprints are expressed in proxy
records that are sparse, noisy, and can alter the statistics of climate signals.
Given well-documented deficiencies in the ability of GCMs to simulate low-
frequency variability in both observations and proxies, the GCM-based
fingerprints will be complemented with physical-statistical stochastic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include a greater
understanding of Holocene climate variability and modeled projections by (1)
building a single coherent picture of the factors controlling the response of
temperature, hydrology, and hydroclimate proxies in the climate system; and (2)
improving the physical interpretation of the low-frequency climate variability
recorded in paleoclimate records. This research will potentially illuminate both
the nature and sources of climate variability over the Holocene, and the
physical mechanisms responsible. This has large implications for interpreting
the recent observational record, and for inferences of climate projections. The
statistical frameworks, model simulations, and simple dynamical models developed
in this project will serve as a conceptual framework for climate-related
research across the Earth Sciences and over all geologic
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide scientific training
and professional development for two undergraduate and two graduate students.
The undergraduate students will be involved in the research and its publication
as demonstrated by the track record of the researchers. Output from the model
simulations, Code for setting up the simulations with the publicly available
Community Earth System Model (CESM), and Code for reproducing the diagnostics
using the publicly available data and model output will be all made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.