* 2102196
* RUI: Mechanistic Understanding of the Electrode-catalyst Interface in Plasmon-mediated  Oxygen Evolution Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Jingjing Qiu, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 12/31/2024
* USD 277,910.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Jingjing Qiu of San Francisco State University will conduct studies to
better understand how light sources can, in combination with specially
fabricated electrodes, enhance the activity of the water-splitting reaction to
generate its components hydrogen and oxygen (the oxidation half-reaction is also
known as the oxygen evolving reaction). Such photo-electrocatalytic reactions
are of relevance to many important energy-storage and industry processes. Dr.
Qiu’s laboratory will utilize gold nanoparticle (Au NP) electrodes to harvest
solar energy to influence the subsequent electrocatalysis. Dr. Qiu will probe
changes at the electrocatalyst surface structure that occur during these
reactions. This research has broader impact both scientifically and societally.
Scientifically, it is expected to advance the understanding of plasmon-mediated
electrocatalysis with the long-term goal to develop optical materials and
technologies that are expected to drive forward the progress for clean energy
production. Societally, this project will provide valuable instruction and
inspiration for the next generation of scientists to pursue renewable energy
research. The project will provide students, including those from
underrepresented groups, with technical skills to enter the workforce or
graduate school with the competencies that are required to address the
challenges associated with renewable energy production. Dr. Qiu and her students
will also develop short videos on electrochemistry topics in Spanish to help
disseminate research in this area to a broader
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis
program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Jingjing Qiu of San Francisco State
University will work to develop a fundamental understanding of the interface
between plasmonic Au NP electrodes and electrocatalysts in the plasmon-mediated
oxygen-evolving reaction (OER) with the long-term goal of developing new optical
methods to precisely tune the activity of electrocatalysts.
(Photo)electrochemical characterization, in operando electrochemical surface
enhanced Raman scattering (EC-SERS) measurements and density functional theory
(DFT) simulations will be applied to decouple the multi-effects of surface
plasmons in enhancing the activity of electrocatalysts using the OER as a
representative model reaction. The project involves the following specific
objectives: (i) to determine the impact of plasmon excitation of Au NP
electrodes interfaced with double layer hydroxide electrocatalysts on the OER,
(ii) to decouple the contributions of the photothermal and electronic effects
(“hot” holes) of Au NP electrodes on electrocatalysts in the OER, (iii) to
measure the dynamic surface morphology of the electrocatalysts at the Au NP
electrode interface and their surface chemical information, and (iv) to compute
the electronic structures of the transition metal hydroxide electrocatalysts at
the Au metal surfaces. This work has the potential to shed light on the
mechanisms of plasmon excitation in the OER process and to provide new insights
for other types of electrocatalytic oxidation reactions. A better understanding
of the mechanistic basis for plasmonic effects would provide an important
foundation for the development of new technologies increase the efficiency of
the OER process, a key step in the all-important water-splitting
reaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.