* 2102225
* RUI: Directed Evolution of Cytochrome P450 for Synthesis of Pyrrole Marine Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Takashi Suyama, The Waynesburg University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2024
* USD 233,003.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Takashi L. Suyama of Waynesburg University will work to develop a
hybrid chemo/biocatalytic entry into the synthesis of an interesting and
biologically active class of polybrominated aryl ethers. Most of the research
will be conducted with undergraduate students and there is an enzyme engineering
aspect of the project to be conducted in collaboration with Bradley Moore of the
University of California-San Diego. This hybrid route shows promise for
efficient synthesis of medicinally important compounds. The enzyme engineering
will be conducted via a directed evolution approach using random mutation caused
by chemical reagents, followed by selection of mutated enzymes based on their
desired chemical properties. A number of undergraduate students will be
financially supported by this award to devote more time to this research project
both during the academic year and summers and will gain invaluable experience
that will propel them into successful careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Graduates from this laboratory are
demographically diverse and have been placed in prestigious graduate schools.
High school students will also be hosted by the lab during the summer to
participate in the research as part of outreach. The proposed funds are the
first significant federal research grant received by the University in decades
and will drastically impact the research and education climate on campus and its
surrounding communities, which are located in a federally designated county of
Appalachia. NSF-supported students will have opportunities to publish findings
in peer-reviewed journals and present them at national scientific conferences
and compete well against graduates from economically privileged areas. These
students will lead and participate in scientific outreach to local communities
and K-12 students by leveraging the University’s American Chemical Society
program as well as the marine biology lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polybrominated
aromatics, such as polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and their derivatives
dibenzo-p-dioxins have attracted attention due to their toxicity. The origin of
such compounds in the marine environment has been somewhat ambiguous because
some PBDEs and their derivatives have been shown to be natural products while
the majority of PBDEs are produced industrially as flame retardants. Recently
isolated from marine Pseudoalteromonas found on nudibranchs, TBFP
(2,3,5,7-tetrabromobenzofuro[3,2-b]pyrrole) has shown anti-MRSA (methicillin
resistant Staphylococcus aureus) activities and possesses 3-phenoxypyrrole ether
linkage reminiscent of PBDEs. To elucidate TBFP’s biogenesis and to provide
facile access to this anti-MRSA compound, a biocatalytic synthesis of TBFP will
be pursued. To this end, the putative biosynthetic precursor for TBFP,
pentabromopsuedilin (PBP), will be subjected to an intramolecular Ullmann-type
reaction catalyzed by the cytochrome P450 enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of
PBP to cause the phenolic cyclization onto the pyrrole ring. The research team
will work to improve the yield of this reaction by directed evolution of the
enzyme through chemical mutagenesis and selection based on LCMS-analysis.
Traditional Ullmann-type reaction conditions are not compatible with labile
pyrroles and are ineffective in converting PBP to TBFP. The versatility of this
engineered enzyme in natural product synthesis will be examined for constructing
the scaffolds of other medicinally important metabolites, such as marinopyrrole
B, that possess a heteroatom-C bond at C3 of pyrrole similar to that in TBFP. If
successful, this project would lead to facile access to medicinally important
chemical scaffolds for wider adaptation of engineered biocatalysts in total
synthesis of natural products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.