* 2102645
* CDS&amp;E: First Principles Prediction of Thermal Radiative Properties of Dielectric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Xiulin Ruan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2024
* USD 430,000.00

This project is funded by the Condensed-Matter-and-Materials-Theory program in
the Division of Materials Research and by the programs in Computational and
Data-Enabled Science and Engineering and Thermal Transport Processes in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal radiation plays a key role in a broad set
of energy and thermal-management applications, including spacecraft, solar
cells, and passive radiative cooling. These applications often require distinct
selective radiative properties: high absorption of sunlight is needed for solar
cells, while low absorption of sunlight and high emission of infrared light in
the window of atmospheric transparency are desired for radiative cooling. By
reflecting sunlight while radiating infrared light to space, radiative-cooling
paints have been shown to cool surfaces to below the ambient temperature without
any energy expenditure. Screening and designing such materials call for an
understanding of how thermal radiative properties depend on the atomic
structures of materials. However, methods and software tools for this purpose
are generally lacking, and empirical trial-and-error approaches are still the
mainstream. Therefore, the objectives of this project are to enhance theoretical
and simulation methodologies that can predict thermal radiative properties of
materials from their atomic structures and subsequently to develop and deploy an
open-source code that will help other researchers model their own radiative
materials. Moreover, the PI will use these tools to understand the atomistic
origins of ultra-efficient radiative cooling in particle-matrix nanocomposites
and employ machine learning to pursue high-throughput screening of a large
number of materials including oxides, carbonates, and sulfates, aiming to
discover better radiative-cooling materials. The work will lead to energy
savings with significant promise for combating climate change. In parallel, this
project will incorporate education and outreach efforts. Besides expanding the
graduate and undergraduate curriculum on radiative materials, it will provide
technologically attractive topics to broaden the participation from women and
underrepresented groups in engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of this research are to develop first-principles methods for calculating thermal
radiative properties, deploy an open-source code, and enable high-throughput
screening of particle-matrix radiative cooling paints. Tailored thermal
radiative properties are demanded in a broad set of energy and thermal-
management applications. However, no open-source codes are available to predict
infrared radiative properties of dielectric materials from first principles,
hindering the understanding of radiative properties and the design of new
radiative materials from atomic structures. Meanwhile, although encouraging
progress has been made in first-principles prediction of radiative properties,
additional important phonon-scattering processes as well as phonon
renormalization need to be included. Such tools will be extremely beneficial for
applications such as selecting radiative-cooling materials, which are currently
studied on an empirical trial-and-error basis. In this project, the PI will
address these urgent research needs via computation and data-enabled approaches.
There are three specific research tasks: (1) enhancing the capabilities of
first-principles prediction of thermal radiative properties beyond four-phonon
scattering, by incorporating phonon renormalization, phonon-electron scattering,
and phonon scattering with defects, impurities, and boundaries; (2) developing
and deploying an open-source code for first-principles calculations of thermal
radiative properties; and (3) coupling first-principles predictions, Monte-Carlo
simulations, and machine learning to enable high-throughput screening of
dielectric particle-polymer-matrix radiative-cooling paints. The project is
expected to achieve unprecedented accuracy in predicting thermal radiative
properties of dielectric materials from first principles and enabling
researchers to screen or design thermal radiative materials via an open-source
code. It has the potential to change the current trial-and-error practice not
only for radiative-cooling nanocomposites but also for many other important
radiative materials such as thermal barrier coatings, thermophotovoltaic
emitters, and coatings for space missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.