* 2102460
* D3SC: Developing Data-Driven, Automated Methodology to Understand and Control Light-Driven Catalytic Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stefan Bernhard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Stefan Bernhard of Carnegie Mellon University will study catalytic
processes that are driven by light. Continued development of a sustainable
society requires advances in molecular sciences that will pave the way to the
solar-powered, efficient, safe and precise molecular engineering of new
functional molecules, materials, and fuels. One of the major obstacles on this
path stems from the inherent difficulty of extending current chemical theories
to accurately describe the interplay of matter and energy in light-driven
chemical transformations. The proposed work utilizes an investigative approach
that seeks to accelerate chemical discovery and enhance control of chemical
reactions by developing new tools integrating high-throughput experiments,
quantum chemistry, and data science. The Bernhard lab involves a diverse group
of researchers to accomplish these research tasks. Stefan Bernhard and his
research team will be involved in outreach activities for non-scientists to
educate the public on energy issues and instill excitement for science, in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Stefan Bernhard of Carnegie Mellon
University will study the complex interplay of reagents and catalysts in light-
driven chemical processes. The funded research will create a deeper
understanding by using new tools integrating high-throughput experiments,
quantum chemistry, and data science. The created artificial intelligence
resulting from a merger of chemical theory and chemical data will allow the
capture of the effects of complex many-body electronic interactions that elude
current algorithms. To gather the data needed to drive this effort, the Bernhard
team will develop massively parallel, automated chemical reactors capable of
sensing and recording the progress on a variety of reaction types in parallel
and in real time. Increasingly complex photochemical processes ranging from
simple energy transfers to light-driven polymerizations will be investigated and
their observed reactivity patterns will be modeled, compared and analyzed. The
initial phase of the work will focus on photocatalytic reactions catalyzed by
iridium complexes. These are expected to provide an excellent trial system due
to the ability to easily synthesize structures that span a vast chemical space,
but where the structure-activity relationships have been difficult to model and
predict. Later efforts will increase the chemical and structural diversity of
the photocatalyst by inclusion of a much wider variety of ligand frameworks and
involving central ions with a range of electronic structures. Quantum chemical
calculations on the photocatalysts will be the basis of a feature learning-based
approach to find and predict structure property/(re)activity relationships in
the studied photochemical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.