* 2102490
* Tracing Gas from Bars to Nuclear Outflows: The Fermi Bubbles &amp; Tilted Disk
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Dhanesh Krishnarao, Krishnarao, Dhaneshvaran
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2022
* USD 136,194.00

Dhanesh Krishnarao is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at Johns Hopkins
University. Krishnarao will track and study the flow of interstellar matter at
high resolution near the center of the Milky Way (MW) galaxy using optical
spectral lines. He will observe large plasma outflows called Fermi Bubbles
emanating from the MW nucleus, a structure of ionized gas called the “Tilted
Disk” along the MW bar, and the Galactic analog of Low Ionization (Nuclear)
Emission Regions or LI(N)ERs. Results from this study will allow astronomers to
understand how gas and radiation emerging from the center of a barred galaxy
influence its formation and evolution, and they will shed light on the origin of
LI(N)ERs. For the education component of this project, Krishnarao will develop
podcast-based audio courses to promote scientific inquiry in elementary and
middle school students, including ones in local underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper, this
research project will produce the first ever continuous kinematic map of ionized
gas in the Fermi Bubbles and the bar of the Milky Way. Combining existing
emission-line and upcoming absorption-line observations in the fifth Sloan
Digital Sky Survey, the project will develop a new statistical method to map the
gas distribution at the disk-halo interface within the context of the bar and
Fermi Bubbles. Lastly, the project will use 3D photoionization modeling with
optical and UV spectra to develop a new understanding of LI(N)ERs within the MW
bar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.