* 2102267
* CAS: Understanding and Controlling the Selectivity of Catalytic Metal-Free C-H Functionalizations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Forrest Michael, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Forrest Michael of the University of Washington is studying how to use more
abundant and economical elements as replacements for expensive transition metal
catalysts to introduce new functionality in complex organic molecules. As the
nation aspires toward a greener, more sustainable future, it is critical that we
find new catalysts for synthetic transformations of value that are less
expensive and more sustainable. One powerful and efficient way to build new
molecules is by selective activation of one of the many carbon-hydrogen bonds in
these structures and substitution of that hydrogen with a new chemical group.
Though many metal-based catalysts can be used for this purpose, this proposal
addresses two major challenges. First, new catalysts based on selenium are being
developed as potentially more economical alternatives to existing metal-based
methods. Second, because complex organic molecules possess many different types
of carbon-hydrogen bonds, the fundamental factors that control the selective
replacement of individual hydrogen atoms will be studied and this knowledge will
be used to design new ways to make molecules. The broader impacts of this work
include more sustainable access to new molecules with novel biological,
pharmaceutical, and materials properties. Additionally, Prof. Michael trains
scientifically-talented high school students in the US and around the world
about cutting-edge research in chemistry and mentors them in research projects
in his laboratory, through his work with the Center for Excellence in Education
and the Research Science Institute.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Forrest Michael of the
University of Washington is studying what steric, electronic, and structural
factors control the high regio- and stereoselectivity of C-H activation
catalyzed by novel complexes of selenium developed in his laboratory. Systematic
exploration of these factors will likely enable the more widespread use of these
catalysts in synthesis by allowing substrates and catalysts that give high
selectivity to be predicted and designed ahead of time. Identification of
functional groups that strongly direct C-H activation, but which also can be
easily transformed into a wide variety of new substituents will likely enable
new synthetic strategies for installation of nitrogen groups in complex
compounds. Furthermore, the more complete mechanistic understanding obtained
from these studies will expand the scope of nitrogen groups that can be
introduced using these reactions and lead to new modes of reactivity. The
fundamental reaction mechanisms and key intermediates in these transformations
will be studied by testing the effects of ligands and additives and by examining
intermediates by multi-nuclear (1H, 31P, 77Se) NMR spectroscopy. Dr. Michael is
engaged in outreach activities that mentor highly gifted and talented high
school scientists through his work with the Center for Excellence in Education
and the Research Science Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.