* 2102434
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Autumn transition in plankton ecology during an ocean heatwave on the Northeast U.S. Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Joel Llopiz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,832.00

The continental shelf waters off the Northeast U.S. are some of the most
productive on the globe. They are also warming at a faster rate than average.
While a variety of climate change impacts on ocean biology have been documented,
mechanistic understanding lags behind. The goal of the Northeast U.S. Shelf
Long-Term Ecological Research (NES-LTER) project is to understand and predict
how the composition and structure of planktonic food webs change through space
and time in response to the environment and how changes in the community impact
ecosystem productivity, particularly at higher trophic levels. This decade has
brought an increased prevalence of heat waves in the waters of the Northeast
Shelf, and 2020 was no exception. This project incorporates the effect of an
unusual warm temperature summer into the NES-LTER conceptual framework,
recognizing that marine heat waves are superimposed on long-term warming trends.
The Northeast Shelf provides an array of ecosystem services including food,
energy extraction, shipping, recreation, and conservation; its integrity is
critical to the function of the Northeast U.S. economy. In the face of climate
change and other patterns of disturbance, sustaining these ecosystem services
will require effective and efficient management. One broader impact of the study
is the contribution of key knowledge for the effective management of the region
through improved understanding of ecosystem dynamics and functioning.
Educational opportunities for six early career scientists include research
training in the field and the laboratory. These early career scientists are
involved in critical data collection in a year when opportunities for new
observations have been extremely limited due to disruptions caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A special process cruise is dedicated to
characterizing food webs and production regimes across the Northeast Shelf
during the autumn transition following the summer 2020 ocean heat wave. Field
observations are documenting the nature of the transition and testing the
hypothesis that autumn conditions fall along a linear continuum between summer
and winter community structure, productivity, and export. The suite of NES-LTER
measurements applied to past summer and winter transects are being carried out,
including underway continuous sampling for pico- to micro-plankton and gas
tracer-based productivity, discrete water sampling to initiate incubation
experiments for plankton growth and grazing rates at stations along a cross-
shelf transect, and net tows to sample larger plankton for genetic diversity and
isotopic analysis for food web characterization. Ultimately, quantifying and
understanding variability on seasonal, interannual, and decadal time scales is
enabling prediction of future productivity and ecosystem
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.