* 2102772
* Collaborative Research: Gateway to North America--the Great American Biotic Interchange (GABI) in Mexico and Origin of C4 Grassland
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jack Tseng, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 09/30/2023
* USD 53,206.00

Historical patterns of animal movements between the Americas are crucial to
understanding current ecosystems and natural resources. The Great American
Biotic Interchange (GABI) is a highly significant historical event of land
animal movements between North and South America, triggered by the emergence of
the continent-bridging Isthmus of Panama three million years ago. Isthmus
formation substantially modified global ocean circulation, climate, and American
ecosystems. Large animals such as giant ground sloths, armored glyptodonts, and
terror birds moved northward and became an integral part of North American Ice
Age ecosystems. North American elephant-like gomphotheres, horses, deer, camels,
and carnivorans expanded into South America and triggered the most recent large
mass extinction of native animals on that continent. A joint U.S.-Mexico team
will investigate the timing and magnitude of these events in central Mexico, a
critical gap in knowledge for GABI vertebrate and plant fossils. Integration of
long-term fossil records with paleoenvironmental analysis will permit a more
detailed reconstruction of the ecosystem reorganization events that led to
today’s biodiversity patterns in the Americas. Broader impacts of the project
include the development of Spanish and English museum exhibits and digital
media, and research training opportunities for students from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of vertebrate
paleontologists, structural geologist, functional morphologist, phytolith
botanist, and stable isotope geochemist will conduct field investigations in
central Mexico to establish an integrated regional chronological framework using
radiometric dates, fossil mammal biostratigraphy, and magnetostratigraphy to
document succession of GABI immigrants. They will assess associated vegetation
change using phytoliths and quantify relationships between herbivore diets and
C4 vegetation origin, regional climate, and hydrological cycles in North America
using isotope analysis of mammalian dental enamel and paleosol carbonates. Broad
inter-continental mammal distributional patterns will be contextualized using
network analysis to quantify deep-time biogeographic connectivity. Findings will
be used to test hypotheses regarding phylogenetic relationships of key immigrant
taxa, timing and delay in dispersal to high latitude regions, and climatic and
environmental implications of regional C4 grassland
expansion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.