* 2102282
* The Synthetic Use of Lewis and Bronsted Acid Catalyzed Electrophilic Deborylations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jeremy May, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 474,114.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Jeremy A. May of the University of Houston is developing new ways to
couple reagents with carbon-boron bonds to other organic fragments to rapidly
access complex molecular scaffolds with control of stereochemistry. These
reactions proceed to form new carbon-carbon bonds with organoborane reagents and
address limitations of related synthetic methodologies that require heavy
metals. This work is directed at establishing new methods to control C-C bond
formation in three-dimensional molecular structures. The methodology is targeted
toward improving the chemical synthesis of molecules with medicinally relevant
biological activity. Professor May is also collaborating with KIPP Sharpstown
Junior High, a liberal arts-focused school in Houston, to introduce the students
to experimental chemistry and other physical sciences. This partnership provides
disadvantaged and at-risk students the opportunity to bolster their scientific
understanding and desire to prepare for college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
May and his research team are developing new ways to activate and control
nucleophilic additions of organoboranes with the goal of constructing
challenging carbon-carbon bonds within architecturally complex organic
frameworks. Lewis and Bronsted acid catalysts will be investigated for their
ability to promote these additions into a variety of electrophilic organic
fragments with stereochemical control. The transformations to be studied include
examples involving heterocyclic organoboranes and other functionalities that are
often incompatible with transition metal-catalyzed carbon-carbon bond forming
strategies. Electrophilic deborylation approaches are further being tested in
annulation reactions and natural product synthesis. These activities are
expected to synergistically provide excellent training for a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students in synthetic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.