* 2102909
* Collaborative Research: Importance of the subtropical gyre and North Atlantic Current in interglacial warmth
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Kristina Faul, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 39,478.00

Microscopic organisms called foraminifera live in the ocean, in shells of
calcium carbonate the size of a small grain of sand. Every foraminifer has its
own living preferences - surface or deep ocean, warm or cold water, the amount
of food or the availability of light. In seafloor sediments the foraminifers’
shells become fossils; they provide a record of the living conditions in the
overlying water. One such species called Globorolatia truncatulinoides looks
like little party hats made from coiling paper either to the right or the left.
The left coilers like it warm. They prefer to live in areas where a layer of
warm water extends from the surface to a water depth as deep as 300 m, including
waters that today are found off the coast of Florida in the Gulf Stream. Their
fossil record tells scientist about one aspect of climate - the presence of warm
waters in a particular location. This project will study changes in the
abundance of fossil remains of these left coilers along the path of the Gulf
Stream from the east coast of North America, turning east toward Europe, and
then traveling north past Ireland. Imagine finding a whole bunch of these left
coiling party hats in ocean sediments as far north as Ireland! It would mean
that oceanic conditions and hence climate in the past may have been similar to
Florida. Finding these fossil remains requires laboratory work involving sieving
deep-sea mud to isolate foraminifera, in which the party hats can be identified
and counted. The laboratory work will provide undergraduate research experience
to undergraduates at both PI’s schools. It will give the students an opportunity
for hands-on work in a laboratory setting, including dividing up the sampling
locations and time intervals so that each student can “own” a portion of the
data. The students will then be responsible for interpreting their data with
respect to past oceanic and climate change. In this manner each student can
develop their own success story and present their results at a professional
meeting. The project will also support a graduate student at the University of
Delaware. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide a record of low to
high latitude oceanographic links during intervals of global warmth. The study
will test the hypothesis that poleward extension of the subtropical gyre and
enhanced warm water transport in the North Atlantic Current contributed to the
warmth of the past five interglacial intervals, and in particular, their maxima
(MIS 1, 5e, 7a-c, 7e, 9e, 11c, PAGES et al., 2016). Each of the interglacial
maxima corresponds to different boundary conditions (e.g., insolation, CO2, ice
volume, PAGES et al., 2016), yet there is no relationship between the degree of
warming and the amplitude of the forcing (PAGES et al., 2016). The proposed
study contributes another climate parameter, warm water advection, that may have
played a role in amplifying high latitude warmth during these intervals of time.
To reconstruct warm water advection, the study will use the coiling direction of
Globorolatia truncatulinoides as a proxy for upper water column structure at
three sites in the North Atlantic Ocean spanning the past 450 kyr. It will focus
on Marine Isotope Stages (MIS) 1, 5, 7, 9, and 11 in order to resolve
differences in upper ocean hydrography that may relate to the relative warmth
reconstructed for these intervals of time. Three proposed study sites provide a
spatial transect between the northern subtropical and subpolar North Atlantic
Ocean (U1313, U1308, and Site 980), and published orbital-scale age models
provide a means for temporal correlations. The abundance of G. truncatulinoides
(sinistral) in relation to total G. truncatulinoides (sinistral plus dextral)
reflects the relative depth of the permanent thermocline and hence the relative
size of the heat reservoir in the upper ocean of the subtropical to subpolar
North Atlantic. An increase in the ratio of sinistral to total G.
truncatulinoides tests at U1313 would reflect a northward expansion of the
subtropical gyre. Such an increase in sinistral tests at U1308 would suggest
enhanced warm water transport in the North Atlantic Current, and if the
influence of this current is significant at subpolar Site 980, sinistral tests
will increase there as well. The proposed records will have a temporal
resolution of 0.5 kyr in order to monitor the relative stability of warm water
advection in the northern gyre and the North Atlantic Current during the
interglacial intervals. The proposed project is a collaboration between
professors at a Hispanic serving small liberal arts college for women and gender
nonbinary students (Mills) and a major research University (University of
Delaware). The project will provide a concrete research experience to two
undergraduate students from Mills by having them participate in the University
of Delaware’s NSF sponsored REU site. The laboratory work is designed to provide
the undergraduates with a meaningful research experience, with the goal of
solidifying their interest in a STEM related career. The project will also
support a graduate student and an undergraduate student assistant at the
University of Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.