* 2102112
* Phase Space Geometry of Critical Transitions in Collective Behavior Modeled by Mean Field Type Control Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Piyush Grover, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 311,533.00

This grant will support research on understanding and manipulating the
collective behavior of engineered large-population multi-agent systems,
promoting both the progress of science and advancing national prosperity.
Examples of such systems include mobile robot swarms, smart grid, metamaterial
structures, and vehicular traffic. A key challenge is to impart systems such as
robot swarms with the capability to autonomously switch between different
collective behaviors, e.g., in response to external stimuli. In other systems
such as mixed autonomous-manual traffic, it is desirable to nudge or incentivize
the agents toward more desirable collective state(s), e.g., to reduce
congestion. Qualitative changes in spatiotemporal collective behavior of a
system are studied under the umbrella of phase transitions in physics. This
research will extend such methods to controlled large-population multi-agent
systems, and create a unifying framework for understanding and triggering phase
transitions in such systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
understand bifurcations and global phase space structure of non-standard
dynamical systems originating in the mean field games and mean field control
framework. The mean field control theory for large-population multi-agent
systems combines ideas from statistical physics with optimal control, and models
scenarios where a large number of interacting agents are acting optimally,
either in cooperative or non-cooperative setting. The resulting dynamical
systems consist of fully-coupled forward-backward in time nonlinear partial
differential equations, and their complexity has to date prevented qualitative
understanding of the nature of solutions. Phase transitions in the controlled
collective behavior are the result of bifurcations of the solutions of closed-
loop mean field control problems as problem parameters, such as cost functions,
penalties, and supervisory control action, etc., are varied. This research will
adapt local bifurcation theory of existing descriptive (forward) models such as
the nonlinear Schrodinger equations and flocking to characterize bifurcations in
prescriptive or closed-loop (forward-backward) models of mean field games and
mean field control theory. The research will also produce low-order models of
these infinite dimensional systems. The phase space geometry of such models will
enable discovery of global bifurcations and connecting orbits responsible for
switching between different collective behaviors. The use of phase space
geometry to understand and induce criticality is a stepping stone towards a
‘theory of thermodynamics’ of large-scale controlled dynamical systems. The
insight gained from this project can prove useful in rational design of control
penalties and/or incentives to shape the collective behavior of nonlinear agents
for diverse applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.