* 2102944
* The Last deglaciation in Greenland: demystifying the mystery interval
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Christo Buizert, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 08/31/2024
* USD 489,233.00

The ‘last deglaciation’ is the transition from the last Ice Age to our current
climate state; a transition that took from approximately 18,000 to 11,000 years
ago. The last deglaciation is the most recent natural example of large-scale
global warming, which can help scientists better understand scientifically and
societally important problems such as the sensitivity of climate to atmospheric
carbon dioxide and the sensitivity of the Greenland ice sheet to climate change.
The award supports new and improved reconstructions of Greenland temperature and
snowfall rates for the last 23,000 years. The work will enhance scientific
understanding of Greenland climate history, can improve Greenland ice sheet
model simulations of past and future ice loss, and provides a benchmark for
climate model simulations. The award supports a graduate student at Oregon State
University and a summer undergraduate internship at University of Washington,
contributing to the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
workforce. The researchers will visit regional middle and high schools annually
for a day of polar research. The award supports the further development and
professional design of a Climate Feedback boardgame – an active-learning
classroom activity for teaching climate feedbacks and their role in global
climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a new climate
reconstruction strategy that combines four independent sources of Greenland
climate information from ice cores: borehole temperatures, water stable isotope
ratios of ice, isotopic fractionation in atmospheric nitrogen, and methane-based
empirical constraints on the ice core gas age-ice age difference; previous
reconstructions have only considered two or fewer of such constraints at a time.
Targeted high-precision measurements of methane and nitrogen isotopic
fractionation (∂15N-N2) will be performed on the Greenland NEEM, NGRIP and GISP2
ice cores to aid these reconstructions, and to replicate recently discovered
glacial ∂15N-N2 signals in the GISP2 core. The award supports new model
development to incorporate these new sources of climatic information into a
single reconstruction. The work further includes a series of hypothesis-driven
modeling experiments using a state-of-the-art isotope-enabled climate model that
seek to answer the paradoxical observation of an extremely weak near-field
Heinrich Event response in Greenland, and a strong far-field response in the
global monsoon and tropical hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.