* 2102663
* Seeking Innovation and Efficiency in Natural Product Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Erik Sorensen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Erik Sorensen of Princeton University will develop new
synthetic methods toward the synthesis of natural products that possess
architecturally novel and challenging scaffolds. The ideas and methods of
organic synthesis being established in these studies have the potential to
contribute to broader advances at the chemistry/biology interface and in
materials science and polymer chemistry. This project seeks to demonstrate how
the intricate structural elements of the cyclobutastellettolide and curvularol
classes of natural products may be formed in a relatively small number of steps
from simple starting materials. Professor Sorensen and his students are
developing synthetic strategies based upon reactive intermediates that may be
induced to undergo cascades of bond-forming reactions. Such cascade processes
are desirable because they directly form substantial fractions of the target
compounds and yield laboratory syntheses that are efficient. This research is
expected to produce new bond-forming reactions, provide knowledge about the
scope and limitations of these transformations and provide access to a wide
range of novel molecular structures, some of which are expected to have
therapeutic potential. Additional societal benefits include the recruitment and
participation of under-represented college students from non-R1 institutions in
summer research experiences that teach students how to approach challenging
problems in organic synthesis and help them to discover that they can do
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Sorensen and his students will harness
the reactivities of high-energy carbon radicals, carbenes, and organometallic
species in controlled constructions of crowded carbon–carbon bonds, a
longstanding problem in the field of organic synthesis. On the foundation of a
powerful free radical cascade cyclization that directly generates three of the
four rings of the cyclobutastellettolide natural products, they will determine
if a reactive carbene can insert into a nearby carbon–hydrogen bond to form the
last remaining carbon–carbon bond. Should it succeed, this transformation would
produce one of the most crowded carbon–carbon bonds ever constructed via a
rhodium carbene C–H insertion reaction. In the course of this project, a new
reaction for trapping tertiary radicals in nickel-catalyzed acylations will also
be developed and new insights into the capabilities of the Norrish-Yang
photochemical cyclization process will be gained. The feasibility of a
distinctly direct strategy for synthesizing the anticancer natural product
curvularol will also be evaluated. At the heart of this approach is an
innovative reductive cleavage of an oxetane heterocycle as a prelude to a
Barbier cyclization to establish the challenging curvularol ring system and
pattern of relative stereochemistry. In all of these undertakings, new methods
and ideas for forming chemical bonds are being developed with potentially far-
ranging scientific impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.