* 2102406
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Designing New Zintl Phases with Motif-based Learning and Ab Initio Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Qian Yang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2024
* USD 249,997.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
data-science-enabled design of a useful but under-explored class of materials
called Zintl phases, which have unique properties suitable for thermoelectrics,
batteries, and photovoltaics. Data-driven design of materials with tailored
properties has become increasingly viable with the expansion of computing
resources, algorithmic advances, and growing databases. However, it remains
challenging in practice to explore vast search spaces, and data-driven models
still face difficulties with limited accuracy and interpretability. In this
project, the research team will study the central hypothesis that materials
properties for certain classes of materials such as Zintl phases are more
accurately modeled through interactions between groups of atoms within a
structure rather than interactions between individual atoms. This physical
intuition will be used to build a new suite of methods integrating advanced
computer simulations with state-of-the-art machine learning (ML) models for
enabling fast inverse materials design. In addition to improving accuracy and
speed, these methods will be designed to enable interpretation and scientific
understanding of the important interactions between groups of atoms in the
material that contribute to desired properties. The research team will use these
methods to discover new Zintl phases and work with experimental collaborators to
validate their discoveries. The interdisciplinary research team of computational
materials scientists and computer scientists is well positioned to advance
knowledge in these challenging problems of fundamental and technological
interest. This project also supports training of graduate and undergraduate
students to be the next generation of leaders in interdisciplinary research at
the intersection of materials and data science. Activities planned within this
context include the development of cross-disciplinary seminars and workshops on
data-enabled materials discovery and course materials introducing materials
applications into ML courses. The project will also support public engagement
through a podcast on ML for materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and data science-
enabled inverse design of a class of materials called Zintl phases that have
applications in thermoelectrics, batteries, and photovoltaics, among others.
Computational design of new materials has become increasingly viable with
advances in computing power and methodologies. However, exploration of large
chemical spaces with millions of compounds is still computationally intractable
for ab-initio methods. Machine learning (ML) has emerged as a means to
accelerate such large explorations, but popular ML methods still have
limitations in accuracy and interpretability. In this project, the research team
will develop novel computational methods for materials design focused on the
central idea that crystal properties are better modeled through interactions
between motifs (groups of atoms) within a structure rather than between
individual atoms. The team will apply this idea to design new Zintl phases,
where the structural motifs strongly influence functional properties. Zintl
phases are an under-explored class of compounds, presenting opportunities to
discover and design new phases. The ultimate goal of this project is to discover
Zintl phases with new compositions and structure types and learn relationships
between their compositions, structural motifs, and functional properties that
will allow inverse design of Zintl phases with tailored properties. The team
will use chemical decorations and Lego-like assembly to "construct" Zintl phases
and develop hierarchical graph representation algorithms to automatically learn
the relationships between structural motifs and functional
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.