* 2102761
* CDS&amp;E: Multi-scale Coherent Structure Extraction and Tracking For Modern CFD Data Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Guoning Chen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2024
* USD 539,899.00

Coherent structures are persistent and recognizable patterns that can be found
in fluid flows. In turbulent flows, coherent structures are closely related to a
diverse range of physical phenomena, and understanding their behavior is crucial
for characterizing, predicting and controlling these flows. However, reliable
identification and characterization of coherent structures is challenging due to
their diversity and complex inter-relations across different space- and time-
scales. This project brings together experts from both the data visualization
and fluid mechanics communities to investigate novel solutions to multi-scale
coherent structure extraction, separation, tracking, and visualization. It aims
at significantly advancing the ability to analyze large datasets of turbulent
flows stemming from computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations in a wide
range of engineering and scientific applications. This project provides
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students with different and
diverse backgrounds to participate in the proposed research. The research
outcomes can be integrated into the development of a number of undergraduate and
graduate courses taught at the University of Houston. The outreach activities
enabled by the proposed research help motivate more students to pursue a career
in STEM related fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To achieve an efficient and
reliable analysis for large-scale turbulent flow data, this project aims to
investigate a new multi-scale coherent structure representation that encodes
relevant flow physics, statistics, and uncertainty information, and to develop a
robust computation and exploration framework based on this new representation to
support data-driven research. To enable this multi-scale analysis, this project
applies a number of spatial and temporal domain decomposition strategies to the
computational fluid dynamic (CFD) data. Multi-field analysis and high-
dimensional data projection techniques are adapted to incorporate different
physical attributes to the representation. A novel graph representation is
leveraged to encode this multifaceted information in a concise and dimension-
independent form to enable multi-scale feature extraction and tracking. A matrix
representation of this graph is employed to accelerate its processing by
utilizing the recent advances in large-scale matrix calculation. A new visual
analytic paradigm is devised based on the proposed graph representation to aid
the exploration and comprehension of different turbulence structures
individually or collectively. The developed techniques implemented as a number
of software libraries can be integrated into existing software, e.g., Paraview,
for domain scientists to use in their daily research. The developed techniques
can also be used as pre-processing toolboxes to quantify and extract coherent
structures, which can then be visualized by existing software that are not
suitable for direct library integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.