* 2102033
* Understanding and Engineering the Nucleation of Enzyme Metal-Organic Frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Joe Patterson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2024
* USD 339,247.00

Enzymes are natural catalysts that can be used by chemical industries to speed
up the rate of reactions and reduce the energy requirements of catalytic
processes. However, enzymes are not typically stable outside of the
physiological environment in which they evolved, significantly limiting their
utility for industrial applications. A potential solution to this problem is to
immobilize enzymes onto support structures. The ideal support material must be
capable of loading high quantities of the active form of the enzyme. The support
should also increase the stability and recyclability of the enzyme compared to
the free enzyme in solution. Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are a promising
class of materials for enzyme immobilization. MOFs are porous crystalline
materials formed by the self-assembly of metal ions and organic ligands. Enzymes
can be immobilized on MOFs by simply mixing the metal, ligand, and enzyme in
aqueous solutions at room temperature. The enzymes are then incorporated into
the MOF framework during the nucleation and growth processes. Understanding how
this process works requires a detailed analysis of the system's nucleation and
growth mechanisms. This fundamental mechanistic knowledge will provide robust
design rules for the synthesis of enzyme-immobilized MOFs with high loading of
the active form of the enzyme. The ability to immobilize practically any enzyme
at the MOF surface has the potential to revolutionize the biotechnology industry
and benefit society through lower energy chemical processes. The investigator
will also develop a mobile K-12 outreach activity that uses low-cost microscopy
to observe salt crystal growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
determine the nucleation and growth mechanisms of enzyme MOF composite
materials. The approach employs cryogenic and liquid-phase electron microscopy.
Cryogenic electron microscopy will be used to trap intermediates and analyze
their high-resolution structure. Liquid-phase electron microscopy will be used
to monitor the kinetics of absorption, nucleation, and growth. The electron
microscopy data will be supported by bulk scattering analysis using light and
X-rays. The knowledge gained from these mechanistic studies will be used to re-
engineer the interfacial chemistry to improve both encapsulation efficiency and
enzymatic activity. The project will reveal the formation mechanisms, how the
mechanisms can be manipulated by tuning the interfacial chemistry, and the
structure-property relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.