* 2102049
* CAS: Achieving Long Lived Charge Separated States in Donor-Bridge-Acceptor Dyads Based on 3d Alkynyls – a Synthetic Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Tong Ren, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2024
* USD 567,500.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Tong Ren at Purdue University will prepare conjugated metal complexes
of interesting photo-activity based on earth abundant metals. Chemists and
material scientists have made great stride in molecular photovoltaics using so
called dye-sensitized solar cells. The key molecules for the initial capture of
solar energy are all based on rare precious metals such as Ru and Ir. Hence, it
is highly desirable to develop molecules of similar capturing capability but
based on earth abundant metals such as Cr, Fe and Co. However, most of compounds
based on earth abundant metals lose the captured solar energy (so called excited
state) before converting it into electricity. Professor Ren and his coworkers
will extend the lifetime of excited states by using a new family of macrocycles
to support Fe and Co containing molecules, and hence improve the conversion
efficiency of solar energy to electricity. Professor Ren will work with a group
of graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds. Through Purdue
Science Express, he and his students will strive to improve the high school STEM
education in the rural areas in Indiana through sharing laboratory equipment
sets and designing new laboratory curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistry
of metal alkynyls is a vibrant and evolving field, on which important
technological advances including photovoltaics, photo-catalysis and molecular
electronic devices have been achieved. This project will seek to develop
unsymmetric bis-alkynyl complexes with long lived charge separated excited
states based on the combination of earth abundant 3d metals and unsaturated
[14]-tetraene-N4 macrocycles. The initial effort will be directed at the
identification/preparation of suitable M([14]-tetraene-N4) starting materials,
where M is Co(III) or Fe(III) and L is one of the three [14]-tetraene-N4
macrocycles, HMTI, TIM and TMTI. The ensuing effort will be focused on both the
development of high yield preparation of the D-B-A dyads, and the understanding
of donor/acceptor properties through voltammetry, steady state emission
spectroscopy and ground state DFT calculations. The later phase of the project
will be focused on the dynamics of the excited states. Through collaborations,
significant aspects include the temporal and spatial evolution of the MLCT
states in [M(II)( [14]-tetraene-N4)] complexes will be studied using fs M-edge
XANES technique and companion high level CASSCF/CASPT2 analysis; and the
dynamics of photo-induced electron transfer with the D-B-A dyad using both pump-
probe and time-resolved IR techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.