* 2102587
* Cyclization Strategies and Methodologies Toward the Synthesis of Complex Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* David Williams, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor David Williams of Indiana University (IU-Bloomington) will
develop new methods and strategies for the construction of complex, bio-active
molecules. These concepts are important for two principal reasons. There is a
need to devise more efficient procedures for the assembly of molecular
complexity while finding environmentally benign reagents and reactions.
Secondly, there is need to expand the limits of structural chemistry to identify
new scaffolds that are biologically active, both as a tools for chemical biology
and as potential hit or even lead compounds for medicinal chemistry. Multi-step
synthesis pathways will be explored for the preparation of bio-active natural
products; this project is especially focused on metal-catalyzed cyclization
reactions of reactive compounds as a feature that may lead to the formation of
two or more rings in a single reaction. Educational aspects of this project are
geared to broadly develop students as problem-solvers in the field of organic
chemistry. Most of the graduates from this laboratory experience are employed in
the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. Societal benefits will include
the recruitment and participation of under-represented individuals and women in
all aspects of the research. Summer research opportunities will also be
available for undergraduate participants in this research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to forge new ground in
synthetic methodology and particularly in strategies for cyclization reactions.
Transition metal-catalyzed reactions of strained cyclopropanes and cyclopropenes
will be explored as a key element in the design of new pathways for the
synthesis of complex, bio-active natural products. The proposed activities are
expected to advance knowledge regarding the synthesis of substituted
cyclopropanes and the effective incorporation of these reactive building blocks
into complex molecular architectures. These investigations will also examine the
propensity for reorganization of small ring metallacycles to form more stable
pi-allyl metal intermediates in cyclization processes. Project objectives seek
to devise a reaction cascade concluding with intramolecular [3+2] and [2+2+1]
cyclizations. Studies are also planned on reaction scope and stereoselectivity
through the examination of electronic and steric factors imposed by the catalyst
and its ligands. New synthesis strategies are proposed for the efficient
construction of tricyclic cyathanes and fusicoccanes, as well as for completion
of the synthesis of daphnicyclidin A. The project is a significant component of
the Indiana University Department of Chemistry STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics) commitment with an emphasis on access for women and
underrepresented individuals through the IU ACS Bridging Program. Broader
scientific impacts are expected through planned collaborations with scientists
in allied disciplines including biology, animal sciences, neuroscience and
medicine. Overall, this project aims to advance fundamental organic chemistry
methodology and strategy and to provide a superior platform for student training
in modern synthetic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.