* 2102919
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Inter-Hemispheric Phasing of Tropical Andean Hydroclimate in Response to Holocene Orbital Forcing
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Anders Noren, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 142,947.00

The primary objective of this research is to investigate the mechanisms of
tropical South American hydroclimate variably during the last 10,000 years (the
Holocene). For more than two decades, latitudinal (north-south) changes in the
position of the tropical rain belt (also referred to as the Intertropical
Convergence Zone; ITCZ) in response to variations in the distribution of solar
energy across the Earth’s surface have been viewed as the primary driver of
tropical South American hydroclimate. A growing number of lake-level
reconstructions from the tropical Andes, however, show that changes in Andean
hydroclimate did not closely track long-term changes in solar energy. Instead,
there were abrupt and marked changes between drought and pluvial (wet phases)
conditions that lasted for centuries to millennia. How gradual changes in the
global distribution of solar energy produced abrupt and long-lasting changes in
tropical Andean hydroclimate remains an open question. Determining the
mechanisms responsible for abrupt Andean climate changes in the past has
profound implications for predicting the ways in which future climate change
will impact this region which provides freshwater resources to over 350 million
people across 11 countries. Because tropical climate variability directly
impacts mid-latitude regions, including North America, this research will
additionally provide critical insight into large-scale climate system
interactions that will improve our understanding of how mid-latitude climate
will change in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will investigate
Holocene tropical Andean hydroclimate by conducting biological, geochemical, and
sedimentological analyses of sediment from Lake Tota, a high-altitude lake in
the eastern cordillera of the Colombian Andes. The researchers will use these
data to develop proxy records of mean annual temperature (MAT), mean annual
precipitation (MAP), the hydrogen isotopic composition of precipitation and lake
water, and lake levels. Lake Tota was specifically selected for this work
because previous geophysical and sediment core research shows that it contains a
thick sequence of Holocene sediments that archive the aforementioned
hydroclimate proxies and can be accurately dated with radiometric techniques.
These data will provide insight on hydroclimate responses to external forcing in
the understudied core ITCZ region of South America. Integrating the proxy data
with lake and climate model simulations and existing paleoclimate records, the
researchers will test the hypothesis that Holocene Andean effective moisture
(the balance between precipitation and evaporation) was driven by MAP (as
controlled by ITCZ dynamics) and mean annual evaporation (as controlled by MAT)
responses to the hemispheric distribution of summer insolation and that Northern
Hemisphere (NH) Andean effective moisture was generally anti-phased with the
Southern Hemisphere (SH) Andes. For the NH, it is hypothesized that Andean MAP
was slightly lower during the early Holocene when the ITCZ was at its northerly
most position, increased during the early middle Holocene as the ITCZ migrated
southward, and generally lessened as the ITCZ migrated further southward as
summer insolation decreased in the NH and increased in the SH. Changes in MAE,
as moderated by MAT, mitigated or enhanced changes in ITCZ-driven MAP, resulting
in non-insolation-like effective moisture trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.