* 2102886
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Reconstructing Tropical Cyclone Precipitation throughout the Southeastern United States
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Monica Rother, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 105,497.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team aims to produce
long-term annually resolved well-replicated latewood tree-ring width data by
generating regional TCP (tropical depressions, tropical storms, and hurricanes
precipitation) reconstructions across the Southeast United States spanning the
past approximately 300 years. Longer TCP records (i.e., records that extend
beyond the instrumental period) for the region could provide new information
regarding: (1) past and current spatiotemporal characteristics of TCP
variability; (2) the full range and amplitude of pre-instrumental TCP; (3) the
historical precedence of recent large TCP producing storms such as Hurricane
Harvey and Florence and, (4) the influence of oceanic and atmospheric forcing
mechanisms on centennial-scale TCP variability and the sensitivity of TCP
changes to these forcing mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Landfalling tropical
cyclones (TCs; tropical depressions, tropical storms, and hurricanes) impact
coastal and inland communities due to strong winds, storm surges, and flooding
caused by heavy rainfall. While much research effort has focused on studying the
magnitude and spatiotemporal variability of TC strength and landfall frequency
across the southeastern U.S., the variability of rainfall derived from TCs for
this region remains understudied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
provide new information on TCP in the Southeast through analysis of existing
instrumental climate records and the development and application of multi-
century tree-ring proxy records. The overall objective for the research is to
provide a paleoclimate reconstruction of TCP throughout the Southeast using a
combination of old growth, older second-growth, and remnant stumps of longleaf
pine (Pinus palustris) throughout the range of the species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will test the hypotheses that: (1) the
strong relationship between TCP and latewood growth of longleaf pine will allow
for the development of a robust multi-century record that documents the
spatiotemporal magnitude and variability of TCP within the Southeast U.S.; and
(2) large-scale oceanicâ€“atmospheric conditions will interact and exhibit
substantive control over the timing and volume of TCP received in the
Southeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include greater
understanding of precipitation from tropical weather systems in the Southeastern
United States, engaging undergraduate and high school students, many of whom are
from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM (special needs students,
native American students, first generation college students) in the research and
outreach efforts, and science and technology transfer to the US Forest
Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.