* 2102306
* Placing spins in semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Hemamala Karunadasa, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2024
* USD 435,091.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remarkable optical and electronic
properties of metal-halide semiconductors, which adopt the perovskite crystal
structure, make them excellent candidates as component materials in solar cells
and light emitting devices (e.g., LEDs). Perovskites that excel in these
applications, however, are nonmagnetic. Thus, metal-halides with excellent
optical and electronic properties and a high density of magnetic spins remain
essentially unknown. With this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry and Electronic and Photonic Materials programs in the
Division of Materials Research, Professor Hema Karunadasa and her research group
at Stanford University propose the design and synthesis of new magnetic
semiconductors that form in solution. These materials, composed primarily of
metal ions and halides, are expected to display new phenomena stemming from
interactions between a) the spins of magnetic ions and b) the spins and
conducting electrons. The new materials designed in this project could have
strong applications in the field of spintronics, where magnetic spins add an
additional degree of control over electronic devices, has great potential in
next-generation high-speed and low-power information technologies. Revealing
such properties in materials that can be deposited from solution as films could
dramatically cut costs of such applications. Further, new phenomena of
fundamental scientific interest may be realized in these materials, including a)
magnetic spins that cannot order, even at very low temperatures, leading to
exotic spin patterns, b) spins that align to create permanent magnets, and c)
magnetic spins that control the flow of electrons inside a material. Local high-
school students will participate in the research through summer programs and the
PI will continue redesigning general chemistry to introduce undergraduate
students to materials chemistry earlier in the curriculum. Through a
collaboration with Hampton University, Virginia, materials developed in this
project will be assessed for near- and mid-IR emission. Undergraduates at
Hampton University and Stanford University will learn how to control light
through the incorporation of magnetic impurities in metal-halides.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remarkable
optoelectronic properties of halide perovskites have rendered them excellent
candidates for photovoltaic and phosphor applications. The common perovskites
explored for these applications, however, are nonmagnetic. Thus, metal-halides
that possess comparable optoelectronic properties and contain a high density of
spins remain essentially unknown. Spintronics has great potential in next-
generation high-speed and low-power information technologies, for example,
magnetoresistance has applications in high-density data storage. Revealing such
phenomena in materials that can be deposited from solution as films could
dramatically cut costs of such applications. This project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Electronic and Photonic Materials
programs in the Division of Materials Research, is addressing this challenge by
developing new synthetic routes toward the self-assembly of magnetic
semiconductors in solution. These new materials are anticipated to display
unprecedented phenomena in metal-halides, derived from spin-spin and spin-
carrier interactions. Specific objectives of the proposed work are: 1) the
design of new metal-halide architectures that contain spins in the organic or
inorganic components, 2) the development of magnetic metal-halides with
dispersive electronic bands and tunable carrier concentrations, 3) the
characterization of magnetic, charge transport, and optoelectronic properties of
these new materials. Fundamentally new phenomena in metal-halides will also be
targeted, including magnetic frustration, spin polarization, and coupling
between itinerant electrons and an embedded magnetic sublattice. High-school
students will participate in summer research programs and the PI will continue
to redesign freshman chemistry to introduce students to materials chemistry
earlier in the curriculum. Through collaboration with Hampton University,
Virginia, materials developed in this project will be assessed for mid- and
near-IR emission. Undergraduates at Hampton University and Stanford University
will study how to develop lanthanide-containing metal-halides for applications
in photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.