* 2102589
* CAS: Innovating New Strategies for Selective Electrocatalytic Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jenny Yang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Jenny Y. Yang of the University of California, Irvine is studying new
methods to improve the performance of catalysts that use electrical energy for
chemical transformations. Electricity-driven catalysts have many potential
economic and environmental advantages over conventional thermal catalysts. They
often function under milder conditions, are more energy efficient, and generate
less chemical waste. They also have a smaller carbon footprint if operated using
renewable electricity. However, some catalysts often convert water to hydrogen
as an undesirable side reaction that wastes energy. The proposed study seeks to
develop and test catalyst design strategies to inhibit hydrogen evolution while
achieving higher yields of the desired products. The concepts will be applied to
catalysts that can recycle CO2 into useful products. However, these design
strategies are general, and the studies have broader potential to improve the
performance of all electricity-driven catalysts. These studies will also provide
excellent training for undergraduate and graduate researchers and postdoctoral
associates in multiple topics directly relevant to training the next-generation
scientific work force. In addition to building expertise in state-of-the-art
experimental techniques, they will also develop skills in critical thinking,
hypothesis-driven experimental design, and written and oral communication.
Additionally, the researchers will work in a highly collaborative team
atmosphere that works towards common goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr.
Jenny Y. Yang of the University of California, Irvine is studying new strategies
for selective electrocatalytic reduction. Electrochemical methods for reduction
have several advantages over the use of stoichiometric reductants. These include
the ability to dial in a redox potential to elicit greater reaction selectivity,
fewer operational hazards and reduced chemical waste. However, electrochemical
and electrocatalytic reduction reactions that require protons often suffer from
low Faradaic yields due to direct proton reduction to hydrogen. The challenge of
product selectivity over hydrogen evolution is pervasive throughout
electrochemical reduction reactions. The studies will pursue catalyst design
strategies to kinetically suppress proton reduction while not inhibiting the
reduction of desired substrates. The strategies will be tested on complexes
designed to have CO2 reduction activity. Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction toward
fuels is important as a mechanism for renewable energy storage and transport.
Thus, the proposed research will concurrently develop guidelines for mediating
electrochemical reduction and result in new catalysts and mechanistic insights
into CO2 reduction to fuels. However, the design strategies are generalizable to
a broad range of catalysts, from electro-organic reduction to other feedstock-
to-fuel reductions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.