* 2102974
* Understanding changes in a plant-pollinator network over a century of global change
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Julian Resasco, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 04/30/2024
* USD 301,911.00

Understanding human impacts on biodiversity is hindered by a lack of long-term
studies spanning decades and documenting these changes. Such studies are so rare
because they are difficult to maintain and because they often take decades to
yield insights about global changes that occur over long time spans. Historical
datasets from studies documenting past ecological conditions can be repeated to
better understand human impacts on biodiversity. Mutualisms like pollination
support a great deal of biodiversity and are thought to be particularly
susceptible to disruption in the face of environmental change. We depend on
pollinators for the ecosystem services they provide. This project will evaluate
the long-term change in a diverse plant-pollinator network by re-sampling data
from a century-old classic study on community-wide plant-pollinator interactions
conducted by Clements and Long (1923). The influential ecologist, Frederic E.
Clements, and his protégée, Frances L. Long, carefully documented interactions
between a diverse assemblage of plants and pollinators in the region of Pikes
Peak, CO, USA, starting in 1910. Clements and Long’s study is special due to the
richness of its detailed data which go beyond species occurrences and include
observations of plant-pollinator interactions, phenology (dates), and pollinator
visitation rates. The habitat of the Clements and Long study has been preserved,
allowing researchers in this project to assess the roles of global changes with
uncertain impacts such as potential insect declines and climate-induced
phenological mismatches (compared to impacts like extensive habitat loss and
fragmentation which have large, well-documented impacts). The project will
provide opportunities to train and engage students. Findings from this work will
be disseminated to broad audiences in various ways which include local K-12
interpretive outdoor programs, museum exhibits, presentations to the general
public and managers, and web video to disseminate this work widely.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge of biodiversity change
and ecological networks by providing a rare opportunity to understand of how
interaction networks change over the temporal scale of a century. This work will
determine how the composition and structure of the plant-pollinator network has
changed and whether there is evidence for changes in phenology and pollinator
declines, which could in turn explain changes in interactions. The research
questions in this project are: (1) How has the abundance and richness of flower
visitors changed between historical and contemporary datasets? (2a) How has the
timing (phenology) of plants, pollinators and their interactions changed between
historical and contemporary datasets; (2b) and do shifts in phenological overlap
of plants and pollinators predict interaction loss? (3) How have the structure
and composition plant-pollinator networks on Pikes Peak changed between
historical and contemporary times? Only one other study examined long-term
changes in plant-pollinator networks at comparable time scales and it has done
so in highly modified, human-dominated landscapes. It recorded declines in
pollinator species and disassembly of networks indicating increased
susceptibility to further species loss. However, the long-term changes and their
consequences in habitats that have not been destroyed and fragmented remains
uncertain. This uncertainty has led to debate about whether wholesale insect
declines have occurred in natural ecosystems. This work will inform that debate
and explain the causes and consequences of biodiversity change. Additionally, it
will examine spatiotemporal dimensions of ecological networks, a burgeoning
topic in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.