* 2102363
* CAS: Cooperative Site and Electrolyte Design for Optimizing Interfacial Electrokinetics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Hongliang Xin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 514,548.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Drs. Huiyuan Zhu and Hongliang Xin of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University are studying new strategies to improve the performance of
catalysts that recycle carbon dioxide (CO2) using renewable electricity.
Traditional metal electrodes, including precious metals (Au, Ag) and base metals
(Cu, Zn), have shown encouraging performance toward CO2 reduction. However, the
process is limited by low energy efficiency and poor product selectivity. These
processes are conducted in water, and the competing reduction of water to H2 is
largely responsible for this inefficiency. This proposal addresses this
challenge using ionic liquids as non-aqueous electrolytes together with
electrode materials designed to work with ionic liquids. The educational
components of the project include the following: (1) The interdisciplinary
training of undergraduate and graduate students in electrochemical techniques,
materials characterization, and molecular modeling. (2) The involvement of
diverse underrepresented groups including female students in science and
engineering. (3) The implementation of STEM outreach programs to K-12 students
from diverse groups and low-income families through hands-on demonstrations that
illustrate the importance of nanomaterials, modeling, catalysis, and energy in
our daily life. Undergraduate summer interns from underrepresented minority
groups will be recruited to work on this project through a partnership with
Hampton University. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Drs. Huiyuan Zhu and Hongliang
Xin of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University are studying a
cooperative site and electrolyte tuning strategy for the rational design of
electrocatalytic systems to get beyond energy-scaling limitations, specifically
for electrochemical CO2 reduction reactions (eCO2RR) on bismuth-based bimetallic
nanocatalysts with non-aqueous ionic liquid electrolytes. The known Sabatier
principle, arising from the adsorption-energy scaling relations at geometrically
similar sites, generally imposes volcano-shaped constraints on the attainable
catalytic performance. The Zhu-Xin team hypothesizes that the crucial charge-
transfer intermediates toward CO2 reduction can be stabilized by cooperatively
tailoring the p-band of active Bi sites via doping and heterocyclic cations of
ionic liquids, while the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is
suppressed. Using a combination of precision synthesis, electrocatalysis,
advanced characterization techniques, as well as molecular modeling tools, the
team seeks to uncover structure-reactivity relationships at the interface of
nanoparticles and ionic liquid electrolytes. Success of this proposed research
has the potential to advance fundamental understanding of CO2 reduction
chemistry and provide guiding principles for catalyst design to address current
challenges in eCO2RR. The atomistic insights into physicochemical properties of
solid-electrolyte interfaces from this project may provide guidance for the
design of other electrocatalytic transformations. Beyond scientific and
technical impact, this project will train students at the interface of materials
chemistry, quantum-chemical modeling, and catalysis, and prepare them for career
pathways in academia and/or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.