* 2102567
* Chemistry of Strained Molecules with Radially Conjugated Pi Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ramesh Jasti, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Ramesh Jasti of the University of Oregon (UO) is studying
the synthesis, chemical reactivity, and properties of molecular fragments of
carbon nanotubes. These macrocyclic synthetic targets are of fundamental
interest for their structural, photophysical and electronic properties, and
supramolecular chemistry, as well as their potential to lead to the uniform
synthesis of carbon nanotubes. This research program, deeply rooted in organic
synthesis and new synthetic methods, is also relevant to the fields of materials
science, biology, and physics. The PIâ€™s choice of challenging synthetic targets
provides graduate and undergraduate students with a thorough background in
synthetic organic strategy, methodology development, and reaction mechanism. In
addition, these targets provide students opportunities to collaborate with
physicists, engineers, and theorists to measure, utilize, and understand the
physical properties of the newly created precision nanomaterials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecules with radially oriented pi-systems have been
appreciated by chemists for decades, but have recently undergone a renaissance
in that new developments in synthetic methodology have rendered what were
previously mostly theoretical curiosities into now accessible structures. In
this next grant period, the Jasti research group aims to continue to push the
synthetic boundaries to the growing class of strained macrocycles with radially
conjugated pi systems. Specifically, new pi-extended belt-like structures,
twisted aromatics, and nitrogen doped nanohoops are all targeted in this grant
cycle. In addition, strain promoted reactions of alkyne embedded nanohoops will
be investigated as a rapid synthetic strategy to diversify this class of
molecules. The methods and strategies developed for the targeted structures will
be applicable to other types of polyaromatic hydrocarbons and new graphitic
materials (not just the specific ones in this proposal) and therefore are of
high intellectual merit. The PI also partners with the UO Summer Science program
to provide educational experiences that highlight interdisciplinary research and
hands-on science to groups of students that are traditionally underserved in the
state of Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.