* 2102046
* Systematic Modulation of Lanthanide Physical Properties Using Functionalized Metallacrowns
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Vincent Pecoraro, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2023
* USD 187,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Vincent L. Pecoraro of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor is developing a
class of metallamacrocycles containing lanthanide ions. The goal of this
research is to understand the electronic properties of lanthanide ions that are
critical to a vast range of modern technologies such as magnetic materials,
white light displays, and luminescent imaging in biological systems. In
addition, these studies seek to develop the foundation to make new molecular
nanothermometers that can be used over a wide temperature range for applications
in both the electronics industry as well as in basic biological research or
eventually clinically to measure temperatures within cell organelles or animal
tissue. The project lies at the interface of organic, inorganic, materials
chemistry and biological chemistry. The research is well suited for the
education of scientists at all levels. Through general interest presentation,
outreach to the lay public is also planned. An example is that Professor
Pecoraro will give public lectures related to his research both in the United
States and Europe. Professor Pecoraro has a history of supporting the education
and training for students underrepresented in science and these activities will
continue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lanthanide containing metallacrowns can be
exploited to understand the fundamental properties of lanthanides. Because these
ions contain electrons in their f-orbitals, which are contracted within the
d-orbitals, they have interesting properties related to molecular magnetism,
magnetocoolants and luminescent emission. In this project, metallacrowns will be
prepared to answer the following questions: (i) How does the molecular symmetry
and coordination number influence the electronic structure of lanthanides that
are highly emitting or display single ion slow magnetic relaxation? (ii) Can
metallacrowns be used as emitting cores for the class of polymers known as
dendrimers, which are being applied for a variety of advanced applications in
chemistry and biology; and (iii) Can one use magnetic fields to interrogate the
excited ground states of lanthanides to understand, and calculate, the extent of
ground state mixing to these excited states?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.