* 2102639
* Detangling energy and charge transfer in Photosystem I
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Lyudmila Slipchenko, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Lyudmila Slipchenko of Purdue University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop computational methodologies and software tools for
predictive modeling of energy and charge transfer in photosynthetic complexes,
and to provide computational analysis of the main steps of energy transfer and
charge separation in Photosystem I. Photosystems I (PS I) is a major complex
shared by all oxygenic photosynthetic organisms utilized for sunlight energy
conversion on Earth. The structure and function of PS I is optimized by
evolution and preserved for billions of years. However, while disentangling the
structure-function relations in this highly efficient natural solar cell is
essential for designing optimal routes of solar energy conversion, molecular-
level understanding of energy transfer and charge separation in PS I lacks
critical details. Slipchenko will develop efficient and robust computational
methodology in which hybrid quantum-classical description of the photosynthetic
protein is augmented with machine learning algorithms. Using these models,
Slipchenko and her research group will pursue to elucidate the structure-
function relations in PS I that can be mimicked and templated in artificial
photocells. The developed methodology will provide the community of
computational chemists with new algorithms and tools for efficient and rigorous
modeling of complex molecular systems. Slipchenko’s research program will
provide training opportunity for participating students and postdocs in the
field of theoretical and computational electronic structure theory and data
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lyudmila Slipchenko and her group will develop
computational methodologies and software tools for predictive modeling of energy
and charge transfer in photosynthetic complexes. The method developments are
based on (i) hybrid machine learning, quantum and classical mechanics models
that dramatically speed up ground and excited state calculations in biological
systems, and (ii) energy decomposition models for electronic excited states that
elucidate the structure-function relations in a coupled system. Empowered by the
new methodological developments and expertise in modeling photosynthetic
proteins of the Fenna-Matthews-Olson (FMO) family, Slipchenko group is pursuing
to build the system Hamiltonian consistent with optical signatures of energy
transfer and charge separation in Photosystem I, and to elucidate kinetics of
the primary charge-separation events and the role of accessory pigments in the
PS I reaction center. Understanding of the structure-function relations in PS I
is of both fundamental and practical importance as PS I encompasses an
evolutionary optimized photovoltaic machinery that can be mimicked and templated
in artificial photoelectronic devices. The developed algorithms, computational
codes and machine learning potentials provide the community of computational
chemists with tools for efficient and rigorous modeling of complex molecular
systems. All developed codes will be available to the community via open-source
libraries and software packages libefp, GAMESS, GROMACS, and open-source modules
in the Q-Chem quantum chemistry software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.