* 2102433
* Ligand Controlled Redox Catalysis with Late Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Thomas Gunnoe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor T. Brent Gunnoe of the University of Virginia will study the
development of new catalysts for the conversion of chemicals derived from
natural gas and petroleum into value-added products. Many starting materials for
the chemical industry are hydrocarbons derived from fossil sources (primarily
natural gas and petroleum), which must be chemically converted into higher value
materials. The chemical industry's energy consumption for this process is
substantial and accounts for approximately 10% of total global energy use and
greater than 5% of global carbon dioxide emissions. While there are
opportunities to dramatically increase the energy efficiency of large-scale
chemical processes, there are also substantial scientific challenges to
realizing this goal. In this project, Professor Gunnoe's group aims to develop a
fundamentally new understanding of how to perform selective and energy-efficient
catalytic chemical transformations that are essential to the goal of using
natural gas and other fossil resources in a more environmentally benign manner.
The project will provide a foundation for Professor Gunnoe to work with
primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to expand a program to increase
interest among students from diverse backgrounds in careers as scientists and
engineers, especially in the energy arena. In this program, graduate students
will visit PUIs to deliver short courses based on their research, and
undergraduate students will participate in summer research internships in
Professor Gunnoe's laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the
Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor T. Brent
Gunnoe of the University of Virginia will study the development of new catalysts
for the conversion of chemicals derived from natural gas and oil into higher
value products. The project will focus on the development of new catalysts,
based on Co, Rh, Ir and Pt for the functionalization of hydrocarbons (arenes,
alkanes and olefins). A key goal will be to advance a fundamental understanding
of ligand design to control redox chemistry necessary to achieve efficient C–H
functionalization, especially under oxidizing conditions such as acidic media.
This broad goal is to be achieved through two primary objectives: (i) to
understand the impact of "capping arene" ligands on redox reactions, including
catalytic hydrocarbon oxidation, using Co, Rh and Ir complexes. The Gunnoe group
will quantify how the capping arene ligand structure, including arene
functionality and positioning of "capping arene" group relative to the
transition metal and arene substituents, impacts metal-based redox
transformations as applied to catalytic olefin hydrogenation, olefin oxidation,
and hydrocarbon C–H activation and functionalization; and (ii) to understand the
effect of new Z-type ligands on redox reactions, including catalytic C–H
activation and functionalization, using Rh, Ir and Pt complexes. The Gunnoe
group will determine the ability of the Sb group to control transition metal
electronic structure, shuttle reactive groups to/from the transition metal, and
to directly activate hydrocarbon substrates in concert with the transition
metal. These studies will be applied to catalytic hydrocarbon C–H
functionalization. The targeted outcome of these efforts is to gain an improved
understanding of ligand design to optimize rates of C–H activation, especially
under oxidizing conditions such as in acidic media, to develop new strategies
and processes for the oxidative functionalization of metal-coordinated olefins,
and to access new catalysts for C–H functionalization, including partial
oxidation of hydrocarbons using air-recyclable
oxidants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.