* 2102668
* RUI: Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Theory and Methods for Implicit Molecular Solvation in Ligand and Ion Binding
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Tyler Luchko, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 412,422.00

Tyler Luchko of California State University, Northridge (CSUN) and David Case of
Rutgers University are supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models
and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to reduce the
computational cost of calculating the binding of small molecules and ions to
proteins, DNA and RNA. The ability of computer models to make accurate
quantitative predictions about how effectively molecules bind with (or “stick”
to) each other in a liquid environment is key to understanding the healthy
functioning of biological systems or the structure and stability of advanced
materials. But the models required to achieve the desired accuracy often come
with impractical computational costs. To address this, Drs. Luchko and Case will
develop methods to improve the computational efficiency of predicting the tight
binding of drug-like molecules to biological and non-biological targets and also
the diffuse (“cloud-like”) binding of ions around DNA and RNA. They will be
pursuing new algorithms that offer a high degree of accuracy in the required
calculations while also lowering the computational cost, by taking advantage of
advancing hardware options, like GPUs, to speed up calculations. Both aspects
will require iterative testing and tailoring to achieve maximum effectiveness.
These methods and software will be freely available for broad application as
part of the AmberTools molecular modeling suite. This work will directly involve
students at CSUN, of whom over 50% are from traditionally underserved groups,
thereby contributing to the training of a diverse STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to the
methods that will be developed is the 3D reference interaction site model
(3D-RISM) of molecular liquids. 3D-RISM is a potentially powerful tool for
molecular modeling, as it rapidly provides equilibrium solvent density
distributions and accurate solvation free energies; however, its computational
cost is too high for many molecular binding applications at present. To preserve
the strengths of 3D-RISM while reducing the overall computational load, Drs.
Luchko and Case will develop methods to address the specific challenges of the
tight binding of small, drug-like molecules and the diffuse binding of ions
around DNA and RNA. For small, drug-like molecules, he and his group will create
a thermodynamic cycle that employs fast implicit solvent methods to efficiently
include sampling, followed by a 3D-RISM correction. For diffuse ion binding,
they will optimize ion force field parameters and solvers for 3D-RISM to predict
the stability of DNA and RNA at different concentrations of divalent ions. In
addition, they will implement 3D-RISM on GPUs, to directly reduce the
computational cost of the model for all 3D-RISM for these and all other
applications. When combined, these objectives have the potential to provide
easy-to-use tools and solvent models for calculating binding free energies that
do not sacrifice speed or accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.