* 2102557
* Understanding the Fundamental Behavior of Single Molecule Electrical Junctions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Eric Borguet, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Eric Borguet and his
students at Temple University seek to understand how chemical modification of a
target molecule affects charge transport along different directions inside the
molecule. Moving electrons lie at the heart of chemistry and biology. This
process is sensitive to, and therefore can be controlled by, the electronic
properties of the molecules through which the electrons travel as well as the
chemical and physical properties of the environment in which the molecules are
embedded. This is done by trapping a single molecule in a nanoscale junction
where the electrical properties are measured. This knowledge will be exploited
to achieve desired single molecule junction electronic characteristics, and may
ultimately enable the development of useful device platforms for molecular
switching and sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is known that chemical
substitution changes the electronic properties of molecules, the impact on the
conductance measured perpendicular to the molecular plane vs. that measured
along the molecular plane has not been determined. Taking advantage of the
ability to control molecular orientation in a junction (e.g. upright or flat),
using the electrode potential in an electrochemical environment, this question
will be tackled by measuring the directional dependence of the conductance of a
series of molecules with different functional groups. Calculations suggest
promising chemical substitutions of small benzene derivatives that modulate
electrical conductivity in an unanticipated manner, e.g., different effects for
different molecular orientations. The analysis of the large complex data sets
generated will be enabled by sophisticated tools to identify low probability
events and multiple possible junction configurations. In terms of scientific
broader impacts, these fundamental studies have the potential to enable the
construction of efficient systems for nascent technologies, such as nanoscale
electronics and sensors. In terms of educational broader impacts, high school,
undergraduate and graduate students will have the opportunity to participate in
this collaborative study with an international team of experts in state-of-the-
art measurement, data analysis and theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.