* 2102978
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Boronium Ionic Liquids - Impact of Structure on Chemistry, Electrochemical Stability, Ion Dynamics, and Charge Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Davis, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 510,249.00

In this collaborative research, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, James Davis of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of South Alabama (USA) and Paul Trulove, Tyler
Cosby, David P Durkin of the Chemistry Department of the U.S. Naval Academy
(USNA) will prepare and characterize a new class of liquid salts (ionic
liquids), that are unique in having boron-centered cations at their core. The
primary goal of this research is to investigate how the structure and
composition of these boron-based ionic liquids impact key physical and chemical
properties. This is vital information in that ionic liquids have the potential
to serve as superior electrolytes (key battery components), and, as such, could
lead to significant improvements in electrical energy storage (e.g., batteries,
capacitors), synthetic electrochemistry, and the recovery of metals from
electronic waste. This project synergistically ties the synthesis efforts at USA
with materials characterization at USNA in a dynamic cycle to drive optimized
material performance. Furthermore, this collaborative effort at undergraduate-
only research institutions provides the opportunity for significant involvement
of undergraduate research scientists in cutting-edge
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to generate a library of
structurally and compositionally novel ionic liquids based upon boronium cations
paired with the triflimide anion [(CF3SO2)2N-]. The initial suite of compounds
will consist of salts that include cyclic, bicyclic, and acylic boronium
cations. These ionic liquids will then be characterized using a battery of
physicochemical techniques which will interrogate their physical, spectroscopic,
thermal, ionic, and electrochemical properties. A major emphasis of this portion
of the proposed work will be to elucidate the influence of specific cation
molecular structure changes on the ion dynamics. The information gleaned from
these studies will then, in combination with computational evaluations, be used
in a feedback loop to guide the synthesis of new cation variants in order to (a)
validate (or refute) the apparent relationships, and (b) guide the design of new
cations with optimized properties, especially ones that may be germane to the
use of these salts as electrolytes in energy devices (i.e., batteries,
capacitors) and as dual solvent-electrolytes for synthetic electrochemistry
and/or for the electrowinning of metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.