* 2102488
* Site-Specific Functionalization of Peptides by Cooperative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Masayuki Wasa, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 474,999.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Masayuki Wasa of Boston College is developing non-natural catalysts with the
goal of mimicking protease enzyme activity and selectively cleaving peptides at
specific amide bonds. The ability to predictably break specific amide bonds in
complex peptide structures would be a tour de force in biomimetic catalyst
development and would provide important information about the principles
underlying enzymatic catalysis. Dr. Wasa and his research team have designed
catalysts that can activate acidic and basic groups simultaneously without
reacting with each other. In this project, they are further developing this
catalytic technology to mimic the spatial differentiation of active sites in
enzymes and investigating new ways to cleave amide bonds in ways that are not
easily achievable with naturally occurring protease enzymes. Dr. Wasa's team
seeks to achieve a generalizable solution to this challenge. Dr. Wasa and his
research group are also involved in outreach activities to promote engagement
with STEM disciplines among diverse populations through internship programs for
students and teachers from high schools in Boston and
Brookline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Masayuki Wasa and his research group are
developing “frustrated” Lewis acid/Bronsted base pair catalysts for the site-
selective cleavage of polyfunctional peptides to access fragments that are
difficult to form by known methods and have significant biological and chemical
value. “Frustrated” Lewis acid/Bronsted base catalyst systems are being targeted
for these reactions because they have the unique ability to increase the acidity
of the amide functionalities towards deprotonation without undergoing self-
quenching and the modularity to be tuned toward site-selective alcoholysis and
hydrolysis. A diverse array of cyclic and acyclic peptide substrates are being
explored in these studies, including complex peptide-based natural products
whose structures have not been fully elucidated. These site-selective catalyst
development activities are also serving as a training ground for a diverse group
of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.