* 2102427
* Ultrafast 2DIR Studies of Dynamics in Dense Gas and Supercritical Fluid Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Lawrence Ziegler, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 543,776.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Lawrence Ziegler and his group
at Boston University are investigating how molecules behave in supercritical
fluids (SCFs). SCFs are a special state of matter found at high pressure and
temperature, where the difference between liquid and gas vanishes. How well
other molecules dissolve in a SCF is readily tunable, because the fluid
properties are sensitively dependent on temperature and pressure. The tunable
properties of SCFs are already being used for a wide range of applications in
the energy, food, and pharmaceutical industries. However, SCFs have the
potential for even greater impact as an inexpensive, efficient, and
environmentally clean alternative to organic solvents that have negative
environmental and human health consequences. The Ziegler group is conducting
experiments with very short-duration pulses of infrared laser light to determine
how molecules dissolve and lose their energy in SCFs. These measurements reveal
whether dissolved molecules are found in spatial regions that are more liquid-
or gas-like, how long they stay in such regions, and what molecular properties
determine these behaviors. The research group also uses computational methods to
gain additional insight into the behavior of molecules in a SCF by comparison
with the experiments. This research challenges fundamental concepts that
students in beginning general chemistry classes are taught about SCFs. Aside
from the research activities, the research team mentors undergraduate and high
school participants in Boston Universityâ€™s ongoing NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) and Research in Science and Engineering (RISE) programs,
respectively, in order to expand the impact of these studies and contribute to
the development of the next generation of molecular scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to exploit ultrafast two-
dimensional infrared spectroscopy (2DIR) to gain a more detailed understanding
of the local solvation environments in dense gases and supercritical fluids.
While previous ultrafast 2DIR studies have been carried out for vibrating
molecules in condensed-phase solutions, this project exploits the special
characteristics of 2DIR spectra of dense gases and supercritical fluids to learn
about rotational and vibrational relaxation in dense fluids, special solvation
effects in the supercritical fluid phase, and the evolution of liquid phase
character as a function of fluid density. The echo-like properties of 2DIR allow
rotational energy relaxation rates of solutes to be precisely determined in high
density and supercritical fluid solutions, where the rotational structure is
completely unresolvable in the linear IR spectra. Unlike pump-probe
spectroscopy, 2DIR directly reports on solvent fluctuations, and thus offers a
window on the role of fluctuations in the local solvation dynamics of molecules
in the region of the critical point. Additionally, 2DIR spectra distinguish free
rotor and liquid-like character at a given state point, thus providing new
molecular-level descriptions of these high-pressure and high-temperature regions
of phase space that can be compared with previously established descriptions of
inhomogeneities in the supercritical region. The different rates of vibrational
and rotational energy relaxation are contrasted by these studies, which
highlights the quantum bottlenecks for restoring equilibrium in dense, highly
excited molecular systems. Finally, the researchers are working with the Boston
University Instructional Production Services Team to develop a series of video
lectures to accompany each chapter of a book on the principles of linear and
nonlinear spectroscopy that is intended for beginning graduate and upper-
division undergraduate students, as well as the greater science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.