* 2102210
* Emergent Opto-Mechanical and Electro-Mechanical Coupled Behavior of Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Nitin Padture, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;So-called ‘halide perovskites’ are a family
of materials at the heart of a new type of solar-cell technology. These new
solar cells are showing great promise as they are not only highly efficient in
converting sunlight into electricity but also potentially very inexpensive to
manufacture. However, the mechanical properties of these new solar cell
materials are not known, especially under operating conditions of a solar cell:
in sunlight, and also when electric current is passing through them. Thus, it is
very important to study and understand these properties because they determine
the long-term durability of the new solar cells, which are expected to operate
efficiently for twenty years or more in the element. To that end, systematic
research is conducted, where the following relevant mechanical properties of the
new solar cell materials are studied under light and/or electric current: (1)
cracking and healing of the cracks; (2) plastic deformation; and (3) time-
dependent deformation. These studies are conducted on materials of well-defined
chemical compositions, configurations, and morphologies. The results from these
studies are analyzed critically to understand the behavior of the new solar cell
materials. This is expected to have a broad impact on the ability to make highly
durable, low-cost solar cells of the future, and to help this new solar-cell
technology then reach its full potential. As part of this effort,
underrepresented minority undergraduate researchers from Tugaloo College are
trained. This leverages the fifty-year old partnership between Brown University
and Tugaloo College -- an Historically Black College or University. The public
outreach effort is aimed at enhancing the public's understanding of concepts in
science, engineering, and technology. This entails leveraging the well-
established science cartoons (SciToons) program at Brown University for creating
two new SciToons on: ‘Emerging Solar Cells Technologies’ and ‘Strength of
Materials.’&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;There are
compelling reasons to suggest there are fascinating, rich opto-mechanical and
electro-mechanical coupled behavior in halide perovskite materials, yet there is
extreme paucity of research in this area. Considering the unprecedented promise
of halide perovskites for new types of solar-cell and other devices, it is
imperative to have a more in-depth understanding of the mechanical degradation
of halide perovskites coupled with optical and/or electrical stimuli that are
ubiquitous in devices. To that end, this project comes at a highly opportune
time, and it entails four interrelated Tasks, and several Subtasks within. In
Task 1, the effect of electric field on the fracture and crack-healing behavior
in halide perovskite single-crystals and thin films is studied experimentally
and quantified. Task 2 involves the quantitative study of plastic deformation of
halide perovskite single-crystals, and the effect of light (photoplasticity). In
Task 3, the effect of electric field on the time-dependent creep deformation of
halide perovskite bulk polycrystalline pellets is studied. The efficient
generation of photocarriers and facile ion migration in soft halide perovskites
are expected to mediate crack-healing, plasticity, and creep phenomena, through
their interactions with point and line (dislocations) defects in halide
perovskites. Finally, in Task 4 the manifestation of photoplasticity effects, as
an example, are demonstrated in devices. The considerable research
infrastructure needed for the project developed at Brown University is leveraged
fully. This research contributes to the scientific foundation for the
development of next-generation perovskite solar-cell and other devices that are
more efficient, and importantly more durable over the long term. As such, this
research is expected to be highly impactful, and useful to researchers and
technology developers alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.