* 2102529
* Hyperpolarization Catalysts for in situ Mechanistic Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Alison Fout, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2023
* USD 475,001.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Alison Fout in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign, will develop new cobalt-based compounds that can facilitate the
reactions of hydrogen in important chemical processes. Hydrogen is an extremely
important chemical feedstock that is used a wide variety of chemical processes.
However, by itself it does not react or reacts very slowly. To circumvent this
problem a number of metal compounds have been developed that activate hydrogen
and greatly speed its rate of reactions. These compounds are called catalysts
and almost all are based on expensive, rare metals. This project studies the
ability of a less expensive metal, cobalt, to activate hydrogen. As the details
of how hydrogen adds to various compounds is difficult to determine, an unusual
form of hydrogen known as parahydrogen will be used in this study to increase
the sensitivity of measurements up to 200,000 times. In addition, the project
aims to improve diversity, equity, and inclusion in the next generation of
scientists. Prof. Fout and her students will participate in the 3M Summer
Scholars Program, which aims to provide research experiences to undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups, the Next Generation Illinois Scientist,
which engages elementary students in rural schools, and the Bonding Camp for
Girls, which targets 6-8th grade girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
synthesizes cobalt complexes that may serve as parahydrogen-induced polarization
(PHIP) catalysts. This requires diamagnetic complexes that remain S=0 throughout
the catalytic cycle for both direct and indirect hyperpolarization. To achieve
this and to access a Co(I)/Co(III) catalytic cycle, complexes of ligands
containing electron-rich moieties and carbenes are prepared. Their activity to
catalyze PHIP is evaluated across a range of substrates including olefins,
alkynes, and arenes, which feature long-relaxing nuclei in their functional
groups. Some of the substrates are key reactants in polymerization catalysis. In
these cases, the PHIP effect is used to detect and study of mechanistic
intermediates that have not previously been observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.