* 2102181
* Microfeature Fabrication in Brittle Materials Using Rotary Ultrasonic Micro-Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Weilong Cong, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 10/31/2024
* USD 374,672.00

Microfeature fabrication (including micro-drilling, micro-grooving, and micro-
texturing) of brittle materials has been used in a variety of applications, such
as the micro-drilling of silicon wafers/panels for use in pressure and flow
sensors and solar panels, micro-drilling in dentistry and orthopedic surgeries,
micro-machining of high-temperature ceramic fuel nozzles for aerospace engines,
and micro-featuring of optical components like lenses and fibers. The
brittleness of these materials makes them difficult to be machined using
conventional mechanical processes, which can cause chipping and fracture.
Thermal and chemical non-traditional machining (NTM) processes have also been
applied for micro-machining. However, NTM can cause unwanted material oxidation
and heat-affected zones, can have poor machining efficiency and can require
chemical use. A high-efficiency, cost-effective, and high-quality micro-
fabrication process for brittle materials is needed. This award supports
fundamental research in microfeature fabrication in brittle materials using
rotary ultrasonic micro-machining (RUµM). Many knowledge gaps on the RUµM
process prevent its widespread use today. The research will fill some of the
knowledge gaps and could have significant impacts on electronic, medical,
aerospace, optical device, and other high-tech industries. Research results can
help reducing manufacturing cost and eliminate chemical usage, which would
benefit the environment, economy, and society in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to generate
fundamental understanding of tool and workpiece behavior in rotary ultrasonic
micro-machining to enable an effective, efficient, and high-quality microfeature
mechanical grinding process for brittle materials. The research objective is to
discover the mechanisms of material removal, cutting force generation, and
surface formation and quality through the interactions between abrasive and
workpiece with the assistance of ultrasonic vibration. The successful completion
of this project will specifically generate knowledge on (1) material fracture
and removal mechanisms for different tool abrasive geometries under different
machining variables, (2) cutting force generation mechanisms through single
abrasive particle-workpiece interactions at the microscale with ultrasonic
vibration, and (3) surface formation under different ultrasonic vibration
conditions and modeling of surfaces which result from the material removal
processes. Both undergraduate and graduate students, including those from the
underrepresented groups, will be involved in conducting experiments and
analyzing results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.