* 2102048
* Understanding How Remote Residues Influence Enzyme Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Christopher Cheatum, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Christopher Cheatum and his
group are using advanced laser spectroscopy techniques to study how distant
parts of a protein affect the chemistry that occurs within the active site. This
research advances the fundamental understanding of catalysis and the ways that
enzymes make use of networks of protein motions in order to achieve high
efficiency and selectivity. Such understanding has the potential to support the
development of new catalysts for targeted chemical reactivity, as well as the
design and optimization of biocatalysts for applications in bioreactors. In
addition, Prof. Cheatum and his group are working to extend the capabilities of
the laser spectroscopy technique to make it more widely applicable for solving
chemical and biochemical problems of broad scientific interest. The students
engaged in this research develop skills in molecular biology, computational
chemistry, and laser spectroscopy that are important for applications across
science and technology, thus preparing them to make critical impacts in the
scientific workforce. Professor Cheatum is also engaged in high-impact outreach
activities involving K-12 students, and partners with faculty at a local
community college in order to involve their students in his research and to
encourage those students to pursue science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
fundamental questions about the role of the long-range protein superstructure in
enzyme catalyzed reactions: How does the peripheral molecular structure around a
catalytic center affect its selectivity and efficiency? How far away from the
catalytic center can this influence extend? How can one identify the key
residues that modulate the catalyzed reaction dynamics? The central hypothesis
of this work is that long-range networks in enzymes dynamically regulate
catalysis. Two-dimensional infrared (2D IR) spectroscopy is a powerful tool for
probing protein conformational distributions and dynamics, and is the primary
tool the team is using to probe the dynamic effects of remote protein residues.
The team is working to determine the effects of remote residues on the dynamics
of the catalytic center in dihydrofolate reductase, to understand the effects of
remote residues involved in the rate-promoting vibration in purine nucleoside
phosphorylase, and to identify remote residues that are involved in the active-
site structure and reaction dynamics in formate dehydrogenase. Understanding how
long-range interactions affect enzyme reactivity has broad impact across many
disciplines. Additional broader impacts of the project include the advanced
technical training of graduate, undergraduate, and community college students,
as well as Prof. Cheatum’s involvement in Skype a Scientist and Data Nuggets
programs to share his research with K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.