* 2102643
* Molecules in 2D h-BN
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Arnold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2024
* USD 230,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, Professor Michael Arnold and his research group at the University of
Wisconsin will investigate the creation of ultrathin, sheet-like materials that
are only one atom thick. The materials will be created from an electrical
insulator, containing the elements boron and nitrogen. Embedded and bonded
within the sheets will be ultrasmall islands of carbon atoms. These islands will
be as small as molecules, and, like normal molecules, these islands will have an
exactly defined number of atoms and precisely defined shapes. The carbon islands
will also mimic the electrical and optical properties of normal molecules but be
seamlessly integrated and lie flat within the boron-nitrogen sheets. Materials
like these, with this precision, have never been created previously. This
project will address the challenge of synthesizing these materials and develop
the fundamental understanding needed to create them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomically well-defined structures like these have the
potential to be employed as next-generation filter-like materials with record-
efficiency because of the materialsˈ extreme thinness and thus promise to impact
applications of societal importance pertaining to the purification of air and
water. The resulting materials moreover promise to possess properties needed for
next-generation electronics and quantum electronics technologies, important for
national defense and prosperity. The impact of the supported research and
science, and of research and science in general, will be communicated to the
public by the researchers through planned outreach activities, for example via
the University of Wisconsin’s Badger Talks initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Molecules are the ultimate nanostructures. Their size, shape, and
composition can be nearly infinitely tuned, and exact replicas can be created on
a massively parallel scale. Moleculesˈ physical, electrical, and optical
properties can be vastly tailored – to realize insulating, semiconducting, and
metallic behaviors and manipulate photons from the ultraviolet to the infrared.
In this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research, we will create and explore analogs to
molecules – specifically analogs to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)
molecules – that are not free but covalently embedded, in-plane, in crystalline
monolayer sheets of insulating hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN). While nanoscale
domains of carbon have been fabricated from the top-down in h-BN previously,
these domains have been relatively large and/or disordered in shape and size,
and none have been defined with molecular precision. Here, atomically precise
carbon domains will be realized, from the bottom-up, by using PAH molecules
themselves to create them. The embedded PAHs will offer the exactness and
tunablility of conventional molecules but in a planar, immobilized, and
atomically thin form. Molecularly embedded h-BN sheets promise phenomena not
previously possible – including exceptionally thin materials with exact pores of
widely tunable size and shape (through selective carbon etching) for molecular
sequencing or sieving applications, h-BN sheets (conventionally insulating) with
functional semiconducting dopants, and immobilized single molecules that are
individually addressable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.