* 2102095
* Heterobimetallic Group 9 Complexes for C-F Bond Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Connie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting Professor Connie Lu of the University of Minnesota–Twin Cities,
Department of Chemistry, to study organofluorine compounds; that is, chemical
compounds that feature a carbon fluorine (C-F) bond. Organofluorine compounds
are used as medicinal agents, insecticides, refrigerants, fire-fighting foam and
stain-protective coatings for furniture and carpet. The C−F bond is especially
strong and resistant to cleavage. As a consequence, organofluorines can persist
and accumulate in the environment and physiologically. This project seeks ways
to chemically degrade organofluorines by breaking the relatively unreactive C-F
bonds and replacing all the F atoms with H atoms. The methods are to utilize
rhodium and iridium catalysts to insert into the C-F bond, with molecular
hydrogen serving as the reductant and H source. The project contains a strong
educational component in which undergraduate and graduate students are trained
for future careers in science and technology. For outreach, Dr. Lu will partner
with science teachers at Antwatin Middle School with a majority of
underrepresented students (50% African American, 26% Hispanic) to develop hands-
on experiments related to energy and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterobimetallic Group 9 (Rh or Ir)
complexes where the transition-metal has a formally zero or subvalent oxidation
state and is braced are being investigated as reagents and catalysts for heat-
or light-activated hydrodefluorination reactions. The metal centers in these
Rh/Ir complexes are braced by sigma acceptor metalloligands and provide for
electron rich character and engender enhanced nucleophilicity upon these metal
centers thereby promoting C-F bond activation. The specific objectives of this
project are to: (1) to synthesize and characterize heterobimetallic group 9
complexes bearing formal M(0) and M(-1) centers; (2) to investigate
stoichiometric heat- and light-driven C-F bond activation facilitated by the
heterobimetallic complexes; and, ultimately, and (3) to develop catalytic
reactions that feature C-F bond activation as a key step. If successful, an
important long term broader scientific impact of this research will reside in
the development of fundamentally new chemistry to address the societal need to
degrade pervasive perfluoroalkyl compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.