* 2102986
* Surface ocean pH over the last ~300 years: A synthesis and re-evaluation of coral-based reconstructions
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Weifu Guo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 280,414.00

Roughly a third of global carbon dioxide emission is absorbed by the ocean,
causing an increase in seawater acidity since the pre-industrial era. This
phenomenon, known as ocean acidification, not only poses serious threat to the
health of many marine ecosystems, but also decreases the ocean’s capacity as a
major sink for carbon dioxide which in turn will likely accelerate the increase
of carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere. Therefore, to accurately
predict ocean’s chemical and biological responses to future ocean acidification,
it is essential to understand how various ocean regions have already responded
to the atmospheric dioxide increase since the pre-industrial era. This project
seeks to use coral skeletons to reconstruct histories of surface ocean acidity
over the past ~300 years. The chemistry of coral skeletons changes with the
composition of the seawater in which corals grow and is thus an excellent
archive of past changes in ocean acidity. This project provides a much-needed
historical perspective on the current and future ocean acidification. It
supports the education and training of one graduate student and at least one
undergraduate. It also promotes the education about ocean acidification and
coral research in local middle and high schools through planned outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean acidification reduces seawater pH and the
concentration of carbonate ions in seawater. It threatens the health of many
marine ecosystems, especially the survival of marine calcifying organisms that
need carbonate ions to produce their calcium carbonate skeletons. Furthermore,
it decreases the ocean’s capacity as a major sink for anthropogenic CO2 which in
turn will likely accelerate the increase of CO2 concentration in the atmosphere.
However, instrumental records of seawater pH are sparse and at most only span
the last ~3-4 decades. Geochemical compositions of the carbonate skeletons of
marine calcifying organism vary as a function of the physicochemical conditions
of the seawater in which these organisms live, and provide one of the few
opportunities to extend our records of past changes in seawater pH. In
particular, the boron isotope composition of long-lived coral skeleton is
regarded as a very promising proxy of seawater pH. However, accurate
interpretation of coral boron isotope composition in terms of seawater pH is not
straightforward, as growing evidence suggests that many factors other than pH,
such as seawater temperature and biological regulation, can also influence coral
boron isotope composition. The investigator team will synthesize and re-evaluate
coral-based constraints on surface ocean pH, building on recent improved
understanding of the mechanisms of coral calcification. The PI team will (1)
develop an inverse Bayesian method for accurate seawater pH reconstruction
considering all factors influencing coral boron isotope composition; (2) produce
robust surface ocean pH records over the last ~300 years by applying the
Bayesian method to published coral records; (3) determine the drivers of surface
ocean pH variations at different sites on annual to multi-decadal scales. In
addition to providing a much-needed historical perspective on the current and
future ocean acidification, this project will produce a suite of numerical
methods that are readily to be used by the community for robust coral-based
seawater pH reconstruction and for accelerating future experimental studies in
this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.