* 2102916
* RUI: Investigating Non-Linear Tissue Deformations Using Hydra Mouth Opening as a Quantitative in Vivo Model
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Eva-Maria Collins, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 618,549.00

Epithelial tissues are found throughout the body and exercise a variety of
critical functions. Epithelial integrity is indispensable for maintaining
physiological functions during development and homeostasis. Epithelial tissues
withstand extreme deformations - bending, stretching, and compression - on a
broad range of time and length scales. This project creates an interdisciplinary
research and education program aimed at characterizing the causes and effects of
extreme deformations in epithelial tissues. A major strength lies in the
originality of the experimental system: the freshwater polyp Hydra, which has
been demonstrated to be a powerful in vivo biomechanical system. The PI will
study Hydra mouth opening, a physiologically important process, that relies
exclusively on tissue deformation wherein epithelial cells experience azimuthal
strains up to 200% per cell, within tens of seconds. Mouth opening is quick and
can be visualized using epifluorescence microscopy. Thus, this is an exciting
system to teach undergraduate students about dynamical systems in a hands-on
teaching laboratory setting. The PI will design a 3-week mouth opening
laboratory module for her Systems Biology course. This module will provide
unique hands-on exposure to tissue biomechanics. The PI will also develop a
hands-on exercise on Hydra behavior for the Science for Kids program at
Swarthmore College, which serves children from the neighboring town of Chester,
a primarily minority community. Finally, she will build upon her track record of
successfully engaging undergraduate students in her research and continue her
efforts toward increasing research participation of women and other
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study addresses
fundamental questions on the role of non-linear tissue mechanics in a
physiological context. Hydra mouth opening sits in the ‘Goldilocks zone’ as an
in vivo biophysical system because it is simple enough for a mathematical
description and complex enough to study effects of multicomponent layering,
structure, and biomechanical feedback. The PI will dissect the cellular and
molecular mechanisms by which Hydra opens its mouth. It is hypothesized that
mouth opening is triggered by a neuronal signal (sensation), which is propagated
through the epithelium from cell-to-cell by calcium waves and/or mechanical
coupling. This will be tested using in vivo fluorescence time-lapse imaging
using calcium indicators, grafting experiments of normal and nerve-free Hydra
strains, and physical and chemical manipulations to change cell-cell
communication and mechanical properties. The group will quantify the effect of
these perturbations using existing image analysis and rheology tools. In
addition the PI will determine how tissue-level constraints affect mouth
opening. To study this, the PI will surgically excise different amounts of
tissue and use geometrical constraints to alter head geometry. The PI will also
study the role of the extracellular matrix (ECM), which couples the epithelial
cell layers via live imaging of fluorescently tagged ECM components and chemical
manipulation of ECM properties. A mathematical model of the spatial and temporal
dynamics of mouth opening will be developed. The PI will constrain the scaling
and dependencies of the non-linear terms in the model using experimental data
and extract emergent length and timescales associated with the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.