* 2102386
* Theory and Simulation of Laser Dressed Molecules and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ignacio Franco, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 461,766.00

Ignacio Franco of the University of Rochester is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop the theory and simulation of the emergent properties of
matter when driven or “dressed” by lasers. Characterizing and controlling matter
driven far from equilibrium by lasers represents a key challenge for science and
technology. This is because matter can behave very differently when shaken by
the intense coherent light provided by lasers. Further, lasers offer the
possibility of manipulation on an ultrafast timescale (on the order of a
millionth of one billionth of a second), something that is simply not achievable
by more conventional means such as an applied voltage, chemical or thermodynamic
control. The Franco group will develop general schemes for the laser control of
electrons in matter and, in doing so, catalyze the development of a novel class
of laser-dressed dynamical materials with “on-demand" effective properties that
are tunable on an ultrafast timescale. Recent proposals by the group include the
use of light to drive ultrafast electronic currents, turn insulators into
conductors, and optically transparent materials into broadband absorbers. In
addition to the fundamental interest in being able to manipulate electron
dynamics with lasers, this ability also serves as the basis for the development
of ultrafast electronics, switching, imaging, catalysis, and, in fact, any
science and technology at large based on electrons and their control. The
outreach activities of this proposal include the organization of annual
conferences exploring quantum frontiers in molecular science, integrating
research with education by developing a graduate course on “Quantum Dynamics”,
and advancing initiatives to increase diversity in STEM at the University of
Rochester. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the Franco group will investigate
the fundamental limits in the quantum control of electrons and advance our
capabilities to use high and intermediate intensity ultrafast laser pulses to
manipulate electronic properties and dynamics in molecules, nanostructures and
extended systems. The group is particularly interested in effects that are
triggered by the Stark effect induced by strong non-resonant laser fields. These
fields effectively modify the energy levels in a dynamic and reversible fashion
thus creating laser-dressed materials with transient properties that can be very
different from those observed near thermodynamic equilibrium. The general
objective is to understand the ability of laser-dressed matter to absorb light,
transport charge, and the use of light to control electron dynamics. For this,
the group will develop Floquet-based theories of the optical absorption
properties of matter, the theory and simulation of laser-driven currents in
nanoscale junctions, and advance the use of Stark based strategies to control
electron dynamics at material interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.