* 2102505
* Quantum Chemistry via General Tensor Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Garnet Chan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 465,003.00

Garnet Chan of the California Institute of Technology is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new computational techniques to solve the
equations of quantum mechanics. Some difficult problems of this kind can be
found in the chemistry of molecules with transition metal atoms, because the
electrons there behave in a concerted, correlated manner across different atoms.
Dr. Chan's main focus is to develop techniques to solve these classes of
problems, and especially to create computational approximations that are
“robust” in that they can be applied to many different problems in chemistry,
without fear of them breaking down or providing an incorrect answer. His work
draws on ideas from several disciplines, thus one focus of his broader work is
to produce new educational material for the field that tackles different
theoretical topics from the perspective of multiple disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Garnet Chan is pursuing two specific complementary
intellectual directions. The first is to develop quantum chemical techniques to
treat dynamical correlation in very large multi-reference problems, in order to
bring the most complex electronic structure problems within the reach of
quantitative 1 kcal/mol accuracy. The second is to forge a path toward
electronic structure methods that remain robust regardless of interaction
strength, sign structure, or single- or multi-reference nature. This is based on
foundational work to carry out three-dimensional tensor network simulations in
realistic chemical problems. The ideas in the proposal, which draw on the areas
of quantum chemistry, quantum information, and quantum circuits, will be
condensed into online resources that will be material that can be used to train
the next generation of quantum chemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.