* 2102555
* Molecular Design of Solid Acid Catalysts for Upgrading Shale Gas Ethylene to Butenes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Wachs of Lehigh University is studying the reactivity of solid acid
catalysts for the production of chemicals and fuels from the abundant and
inexpensive shale gas in America. The investigated solid acid catalysts are
materials that accelerate chemical reactions for upgrading ethylene derived from
shale gas by converting ethylene to chemicals and fuels such as gasoline,
diesel, and jet fuel. By increasing understanding and improving the efficiency
and selectivity of these catalysts, Professor Wachs and his research group are
contributing to the development of more efficient and selective processes that
avoid the separation challenges and undesirable emissions associated with
traditional liquid acid catalysts. These activities are helping to advance the
use of solid acid catalysts toward the production of less expensive chemicals
and fuels from abundant shale gas and decrease imports of crude oil with its
environmentally undesirable emissions. The results generated from these
activities are being showcased in annual summer workshops at the Lehigh Valley
Da Vinci Science Center where visitors of all ages are being exposed to the new
technologies being developed for shale gas that create valuable chemicals and
fuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of numerous reported studies of ethylene
coupling by solid acid catalysts, a fundamental understanding is still lacking
that is preventing the rational design of improved systems. Professor Wachs and
his research team are working toward the development of an advanced
understanding of the behavior of nickel sulfated zirconia catalysts and
investigating whether the performance of these materials is tunable by adjusting
the catalyst synthesis procedure. Fundamental details of how ethylene is
interacting with these solid acid catalysts to undergo the coupling reaction are
being directly monitored with modern spectroscopic methods during the ethylene
dimerization reaction. These studies are providing insight and guiding the
rational design of improved solid acid catalysts for upgrading shale gas-derived
ethylene to chemicals and fuels. The diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students involved in these activities are also receiving excellent training,
exposure to cutting edge research instrumentation and introduction to pressing
technological problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.