* 2102762
* RAPID: Forest fire effects on snow-water storage and downstream water quantity, quality, and timing of availability
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Kelly Gleason, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 10/31/2022
* USD 49,962.00

Immediate strategic deployment of instrumentation and field sampling is needed
to capture the initial impacts of the unprecedented forest fires in the western
Oregon Cascades on snow hydrology and quantity, quality, and timing of
downstream water resource availability. The research project will quantify
immediate post-fire impacts on watershed hydrology and downstream water quality
in the headwaters of the Santiam River, which have not burned in recent history
and provide drinking water to hundreds of thousands of people. The research will
bring together headwater hydrology, fire, and forest ecology researchers, while
supporting a female early career faculty, a PhD student, and a female MS student
in a new research collaboration, developing relationships and cooperation across
federal agencies. This research will facilitate informed post-fire policy and
management decisions that will reduce post-wildfire costs and risks to public
health and maintain long-term water security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forest fires
may increase snow accumulation, but accelerate snowmelt rates, and advance the
timing of snow disappearance and associated peak streamflow for years following
fire. This advanced spring flush will likely alter the timing of downstream
water resource availability, as well as mobilize sediment and nutrients into
critical water source areas. Using forest, stream, and snow monitoring, this
research will quantify snow-water volume, snowmelt rate and timing, soil
moisture, streamflow, downstream turbidity, soil and forest burn severities, and
weather variability with elevation during the first winter after fire. This
first season of data will initiate future research to more broadly and deeply
understand the patterns and processes linking post-fire forest structure to snow
hydrology and downstream water resource availability. Improved understanding of
how the mosaic of post-fire gaps and forest structure may optimize snow-water
storage, retention, and will facilitate policy and management decisions to
mitigate the impacts of climate change on vulnerable snow-water
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.