* 2102189
* RUI: A variational enhanced sampling approach to enzyme kinetics and protein dynamics in condensed phases
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* James McCarty, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 342,131.00

With this award, the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry is supporting Dr. James McCarty of Western
Washington University to develop molecular simulation algorithms for computing
dynamical properties of biomolecules in solution. Computer simulations of
biological molecules can spur the design and optimization of engineered proteins
and biomimetic nanomaterials. However, obtaining dynamical information at a
reasonable computational cost is limited by the time required to overcome
kinetic bottlenecks that characterize rare events in biological systems. Dr.
McCarty and his research group will leverage a variational formalism, based on
the statistical mechanics of rare events, to compute long-time dynamical
observables for proteins in solution and biochemical reactions. A goal of this
work is to provide a computational framework to bridge the gap between computer
simulations and experiments that probe long-time dynamics. The methods developed
by Dr. McCarty’s group will be made accessible to experimental and computational
research groups and will provide new tools for experimentalists to interpret
dynamical measurements. Dr. McCarty’s research will offer increased access and
opportunities for undergraduates to engage in computational biochemistry
research. An outcome of the planned activities is expected to be the integration
of computational advances into the undergraduate biochemistry lab, pairing
computer simulation with experimental mutational screening
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhanced sampling methods in molecular simulations
use an external bias potential to more efficiently sample state space. Dr.
McCarty will make use of a variational approach to enhanced sampling in which an
external bias potential accelerates rare-event transitions along a low-
dimensional reaction coordinate. The bias potential is constructed on-the-fly by
optimizing a set of variational parameters in an iterative procedure. Through
algorithmic advances, benchmarking, and applications of this variational
formalism, Dr. McCarty’s work will extend the scope of the variational approach
into two key areas important for understanding macromolecular dynamics and
enzyme reaction rates. (i) Dr. McCarty will be developing methods to predict the
mean-first-passage times of enzymatic reactions from ab initio molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations. (ii) Dr. McCarty will be developing an approach to
extract time correlation functions from time-series data obtained from biased
classical (MD) trajectories that is expected to efficiently compute NMR
relaxation rates. In both of these areas, dynamic observables are computed by
rescaling the biased simulation time according to the statistical mechanics of
rare events. The orders-of-magnitude improvement in efficiency that will likely
be afforded by Dr. McCarty’s work has the potential to accelerate the
capabilities of quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) hybrid simulations
for drug development and protein engineering, and to ultimately provide a new
tool for researchers to interpret dynamical NMR
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.