* 2102465
* CDS&amp;E: Mixed Quantum/Classical Theory for the Collisional Quenching of Interstellar Complex Organic Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Dmitri Babikov, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 438,179.00

Dmitri Babikov of Marquette University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to predict the collisional quenching rates of several molecules
important for astrochemical applications. These data, obtained for the relevant
broad range of temperatures, will be delivered to the scientific community at
large, and especially to astronomers, by means of publishing these data in the
database BASECOL. Being incorporated into the radiation transfer codes presently
in use in the astrophysics community, this information will enable astronomers
to quantify the abundance of these molecules in pre-stellar cores and proto-
stellar jets. The standard quantum calculations of rotationally inelastic
collisions become prohibitively demanding at higher collision energies and for
heavier molecules, such as the interstellar complex organic molecules (iCOMs).
To overcome this obstacle, it is proposed to develop a practical computational
treatment of scattering where the relative motion of collision partners is
described classically, while their internal degrees of freedom (rotation,
vibration) are still described quantum mechanically. This approach is expected
to be both accurate and computationally affordable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
the successful quantitative interpretation of astrophysical observations it is
imperative to know cross sections for collisional state-to-state
excitation/quenching of the light-emitting molecules by typical background
gasses, such as He and H2, across a broad range of temperatures. This
information, however, is largely unavailable and there is no simple way of
obtaining this from experiments. Dmitri Babikov is developing a mixed
quantum/classical theory (MQCT) and a user-friendly suite of programs for
efficient simulations of inelastic molecular collisions, capturing the effects
of scattering phase important for differential cross-sections, translational-to-
internal resonant energy transfer and revealing the role of PES anisotropy. In
this project MQCT calculations of inelastic scattering will be carried out for
several SOLIS molecules (seeds of life in space: includes methanol (CH3OH),
methyl formate (HCOOCH3(, dimethyl ether (CH3OCH3(, acetaldehyde (CH3COH) and
formamide (H2NCOH), colliding with He and H2 in temperature ranges that are
typically found in solar-like proto-stars, and in interstellar and circumstellar
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.