* 2102780
* I-Corps:  Integrated System for Rapid Pathogen Enrichment and Detection
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Eric Fossum, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project addresses the
need for rapid, accurate, and high-throughput diagnostic testing platforms.
Given the urgency of this need, the team's first product aims to support ongoing
SARS-CoV-2 disease diagnosis by enabling point-of-care diagnosis from a patient
nasal swab within minutes. Despite the prevalence and rapid spread of the
disease, the majority of diagnostic tests remain time intensive, require
numerous external reagents, and/or lack detection sensitivity in the early
stages of infection. The team hypothesizes that the technology has significant
value in this space and is interested in exploring this potential value more
thoroughly through I-Corps. The technology may also find application to other
diagnostic markets that traditionally rely on culture-based detection and/or
nucleic acid amplification technologies. The platform can process complex
biofluids and large volume samples, which could translate to pathogen detection
in a range of biological fluids, including urine, saliva, and synovial fluid for
the detection of urinary tract infections, respiratory infections, and joint
infections, respectively. There are also a number of potential non-medical
applications, including food and water quality monitoring, biosecurity
surveillance, and applications to the point-of-care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project focuses on understanding the market need for the platform, which
performs nanoscale Pathogen Enrichment and Detection (nano-PED). For infectious
disease, current diagnostic methodologies remain extremely time-consuming,
costly, and rely on labor intensive sample preparation steps, followed by
additional steps for pathogen identification and characterization. The platform
aims to: 1) circumvent laborious sample preparation steps through direct
isolation of rare pathogens from a patient's biofluid sample, and 2) eliminate
the need for molecular amplification through ultrasensitive, sequence-specific
nucleic acid detection. More specifically, nano-PED capitalizes on the diverse
scientific applications of nanoparticles to integrate pathogen capture and
species-specific detection onto a single chip. The technology is a micro-scale
platform that isolates bacteria, fungi, and/or virus from a patient sample and
identifies the disease-causing pathogen through ultrasensitive nucleic acid
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.