* 2102462
* Harnessing the Power of Weak Bonds: Cleavage of N-O Bonds as Key Steps in Domino and Rearrangement Reactions of Functionalized Hydroxylamines
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Laszlo Kurti, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 04/30/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor László Kürti of Rice University is studying the design and
development of new streamlined methods for the production of nitrogen-containing
molecules. These new methods offer potentially greener and more economical
alternatives for manufacturing intermediates and target molecules for numerous
applications ranging from agriculture, medicine, molecular electronics all the
way to 21st century materials. The new molecular transformations exploit weak
nitrogen-oxygen (N–O) bonds, which when ruptured, initiate carefully
orchestrated sequences of chemical reactions, also known as domino reactions.
The domino processes cause the skeletons of the original molecules to rearrange
into completely new ones. These types of molecular rearrangement reactions are
among the most efficient and atom-economical processes known to chemistry. Prof.
Kürti has been a faculty sponsor of the Rice University chapter of Fun with
Chemistry, an outreach program that has the short-term goal of establishing a
robust Houston-area satellite program. The long-term goal is to initiate similar
satellite programs in other major Texas metropolitan areas. This outreach
program provides K-12 students in Texas with the opportunity to participate in
experimental-learning through captivating science experiments. Curiosity for
science is piqued through fun demonstrations that highlight important
educational lessons by utilizing a variety of role models. In particular, this
educational program strives to reach traditionally underrepresented minorities
and highlight that anyone can be a scientist! The ultimate goal of the program
is to inspire young students to pursue careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM)-fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Kürti’s research group will be exploring four fundamentally new domino reaction
strategies to produce small-ring- and aromatic heterocycles. The common theme of
these transformations is the nature of the activation of the substrates or
intermediates: by a scission of their weak N–O bonds. Depending on the strategy,
this N–O bond cleavage either triggers or drives the particular transformation,
which include new ring-contractions and [3,3]-sigmatropic rearrangements. Making
highly-substituted nitrogen-containing molecules is a long-standing challenge in
synthetic organic chemistry. The proposed project aims to address this
challenge: the driving force offered by cleaving N–O bonds enables the
operationally simple construction of numerous challenging nitrogen-containing
molecules, including ones currently unknown to chemistry. The proposed research
promises to offer new, reliable, transition metal-free synthetic methods as
alternatives to traditional approaches, and is expected to have impact on
chemists in academic, governmental and industrial
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.