* 2102642
* Fluorescent Nucleosides and Oligonucleotides with New Capabilities
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Byron Purse, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 495,940.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Byron Purse of San Diego State
University is seeking to develop a deep understanding of the relationship
between chemical structure, local molecular environment, and fluorescent
properties of nucleobase analogues, synthetic building blocks for DNA and RNA.
These fluorescent nucleobase analogues (FBAs) are an important class of
molecular probes, used to understand the biochemical mechanisms that control
gene expression and the maintenance and copying of the genetic code. Designing
fluorescent molecular probes for these applications is challenging and the
capabilities of FBAs are limited because it is not yet possible to predict how
their fluorescence will change when the probes are placed in a biological
context. Integral to this research is a plan to train graduate students who will
lead the laboratory work and participate in all aspects project planning, data
analysis, interpretation, collaborations, and the dissemination of results. The
involvement of undergraduate researchers is included, as is a Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) in the SDSU Physical Chemistry Lab to
further broaden participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three
specific technical objectives: (1) to develop fluorescent nucleobase analogues
(FBAs) with high brightness and photostability and assess their performance in
fluorescence studies of nucleic acids at the single-molecule level; (2) to
develop the ability of pairs of FBAs to measure short and long-range structure
and dynamics simultaneously using spectral feature analysis and FRET and (3) to
develop a theoretical approach to understanding FBA photophysics and responses
to local environment using a combination of new analogue design and synthesis,
fluorescence studies, and computation. The research supported by this project
seeks to measure and understand how fluorescence changes when FBAs are placed in
differing contexts in DNA and RNA and use this understanding, together with
synthetic organic chemistry, to create new fluorescent probes with enhanced
capabilities to accelerate discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.