* 2102030
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Gradient Nanostructured Metals by Multi-Pass Plastic Wave Deformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Dinakar Sagapuram, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2024
* USD 228,534.00

This award supports research to understand a novel and scalable surface
deformation process for enabling controlled creation of gradient nanocrystalline
microstructures in metals. Gradient nanostructured metals are a new class of
structural materials that possess superior combination of strength and
ductility, when compared to the conventional coarse-grained metals or bulk
nanostructured metals. The research specifically aims to overcome major
processing barriers in generating metal surfaces with controlled spatial grain-
size gradients by investigating a novel deformation process that utilizes
controlled propagation of surface plastic “waves”. The research will have
bearing on the U.S. manufacturing industry by providing the scientific knowledge
to efficiently manufacture this new class of materials with performance benefits
across a wide range of critical applications, including in automotive and
aerospace. Education-related impacts of the project include training of graduate
students in deformation-based processing methods via internships at national
labs, materials processing curriculum development to enhance undergraduate and
graduate education, and development of visualization-based tools for materials
manufacturing education to foster widespread interest in STEM-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to investigate two material
modification processes: the ability to control subsurface strain distribution
over large surfaces through repeated creation and propagation of plastic waves
across the metal surface; and the ability to engineer surfaces with tunable
grain size gradients and nanostructured layer thickness via control of the
subsurface strain distribution. To achieve these goals, an interdisciplinary
team from multiple institutions will engage in collaborative research in the
following areas: (1) in-situ analysis of surface plastic flow and surface strain
mapping, (2) deformation-microstructure correlations, (3) predictive modeling of
surface plasticity and microstructure evolution under extreme plastic strains
and strain gradients, and (4) mechanical property characterization. Taken
together, these research activities will help establish a thorough scientific
understanding of the process-microstructure-property relationships essential for
realizing gradient nanostructured metals and metal surfaces in a scalable
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.