* 2102316
* The Role of Differential Stress in the Physics of Asymmetric Lipid Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Markus Deserno, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Markus Deserno of Carnegie Mellon University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to investigate how so-called “differential stress” affects the
membranes of biological cells. These membranes consist of two leaflets that have
long been known to differ in their lipid composition. Recently, Deserno has
argued that they also differ in their lateral stress (think of the tension in a
stretched sheet of rubber). This impacts many important biological processes,
such as cellular signaling, nutrient uptake, and the shaping of intracellular
organelles. Deserno will develop theoretical and computational models in the
quest to uncover how a stress difference between the leaflets changes many other
membrane properties, such as their preferred shape, rigidity, or composition.
Since it is still a major challenge to measure differential stress directly,
Deserno will place special emphasis on finding observables that allow an
indirect determination of this value, for instance, via shifts in phase
transitions. The PI will closely coordinate his investigations with several
experimental and computational groups, aiming to advance our understanding of a
this fundamental cell biological phenomenon. This research will offer training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at Carnegie Mellon, and it
will be incorporated into several public outreach and science communication
activities at high schools in the Pittsburgh area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, Dr. Deserno and his research team aim to develop a theoretical
framework that quantifies how differential stress affects the thermodynamics of
asymmetric lipid membranes. Such a framework would enable ways of measuring such
differential stress on cell membranes via “proxy-observables” that are
experimentally accessible. The theory will be tested against and refined by
Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations at different levels of coarse graining.
Specifically, Deserno will study the interplay between differential stress and
four thermodynamic situations: (i) the liquid-gel transition, as the cleanest
example where hidden mechanical stress directly couples to observable phase
behavior; (ii) competing driving forces for cholesterol’s inter-leaflet
distribution, as a path to uncover its physiologically important but largely
unknown partitioning in cellular plasma membranes; (iii) a liquid-
ordered/liquid-disordered (lo/ld) phase coexistence, as a more complex but also
stronger and biophysically more relevant coupling to a phase transition, with
implications for how signals originating in the plasma membrane’s inner leaflet
might be transduced to the raft-associated signaling platforms on its outer
side; and (iv) semi-grand canonical lipid exchange, as an intriguing conjecture
for how bilayer mechanics, in conjunction with lipid remodeling enzymes, could
affect lipid homeostasis by co-regulating a cell’s
lipidome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.