* 2102832
* NSF/BSF: Post-Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression: From Molecular Interactions to the Network Level
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Diego Krapf, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 540,000.00

Transcription is the first step on the path of protein synthesis and consists of
copying a DNA sequence into an RNA sequence. In addition to the transcriptional
regulation of gene expression, a regulatory layer exists, known as post-
transcriptional regulation. In eukaryotes, micro RNAs (miRNAs) are key mediators
of this regulatory network. Post-transcriptional regulation is still poorly
understood and many fundamental questions remain open. Some features of miRNA-
based regulation make it different from other mechanisms of gene regulation: it
is stoichiometric and, thus, competition effects emerge, it occurs in the
cytoplasm, and it involves transport of both the regulator and targets. The goal
of this project is to understand cellular properties that arise from post-
transcriptional regulation across spatiotemporal scales, from the motion and
interactions of individual molecules to the network level. This project will
support an outreach program at Webber Middle School in Fort Collins, CO.
Research experiences for students will be developed in coordination with school
teachers and integrated within an established exceptional program therein,
namely the Webber’s Aerospace Ventures in Education (WAVE), which offers
students an engaging, challenging, and rigorous experience simulating how to
organize and conduct extra-planetary exploration with the goal of encouraging
students to pursue space science research and future careers within the
industry. The collaboration with school teachers will enable valuable
innovations to the WAVE curriculum. The main activities will focus on testing
for the presence of life using biomarkers of RNA and DNA, attending
demonstrations of single-molecule RNA tracking, and evaluating the motion RNA in
live cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are (i) to
dissect the effects of the complex cell environment on post-transcriptional
regulation and (ii) to elucidate the crosstalk effects of the post-
transcriptional network. The PIs will use optical imaging to track the paths of
miRNAs and mRNAs at the single-molecule level in living cells. Experimental
trajectories will be analyzed using theoretical and computational approaches
that include first passage processes and anomalous diffusion theory for the
calculation of kinetic rates coefficients. These coefficients will be employed
in mathematical models. The analysis of multiple paths will determine
localization patterns and decipher whether the network should be divided into a
set of weakly coupled subnetworks. It is posited that a key factor in
understanding post-transcriptional regulation lies in its coupling to the
transcriptional regulation network. A data-driven mathematical model that
combines transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations as a mixed network
of directed (transcription) and bidirectional (post-transcription) links will be
built. &lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of
Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the Systems and Synthetic
Biology and Genetic Mechanisms Clusters in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.