* 2102554
* Multifunctional Metal-Organic Frameworks for Cooperative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Wenbin Lin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Wenbin Lin of the University of Chicago is developing new metal-
organic frameworks (MOFs) as cooperative catalysts for chemical synthesis.
Cooperative catalysts accelerate two or more steps in concert, which increases
the efficiency of chemical bond construction and thereby facilitates multi-step
processes. Although solid catalysts are used in many catalytic reactions, they
are difficult to precisely engineer for cooperative catalysis due to the
inability to install spatially-controlled catalytic sites. Professor Lin and his
research group are addressing this problem by using recent advances in MOFs to
build multifunctional MOFs for cooperative catalysis. A bottom-up approach is
being used to build recyclable and reusable multifunctional MOFs with
cooperative catalytic sites and to optimize these structures for important
chemical synthesis applications in the pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and fine-
chemical industries. The structure-function relationships between the MOFs and
the targeted catalytic processes are being studied to support continued design
improvements. These activities are further being used to support research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students to improve engagement
in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many natural enzymes possess multiple
precisely engineered active sites to cooperatively catalyze multiple
transformations of simple molecules, such as carbon dioxide, to complex
molecules, such as carbohydrates, with high efficiency and selectivity. Despite
the importance of solid catalysts in the production of commodity chemicals, they
cannot be used for cooperative catalysis because of the lack of methods to
precisely engineer uniform and synergistic catalytic centers in a spatially
controlled manner in these solids. Professor Lin and his research group will
utilize synthetic strategies to prepare new MOFs with large open channels/pores
and multifunctional active sites for cooperative catalyst combinations
including: (ii) Lewis acid and transition metal catalysts, (ii) photoredox and
transition metal catalysts, or (iii) photoredox and Lewis/Bronsted acid
catalysts. These MOFs will then being examined for C-C and C-heteroatom cross-
coupling, olefin metathesis, and olefin oligomerization reactions. The intrinsic
MOF properties are being leveraged with the aim of discovering viable new
catalytic systems and developing biomimetic materials with cooperative
functions. This research program will also provide important training for a
diverse group of postdoctoral researchers and graduate students in the
development of sustainable chemical processes for environmental
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.