* 2102314
* Collaborative Research: Soft Interfaces and Charge Separation Stabilization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Limmer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Heather C. Allen at Ohio State University and
David T. Limmer at University of California-Berkeley are using state-of-the-art
experimental and computational tools to understand chemistry at soft interfaces.
Soft interfaces are those involving two phases, like liquid water and its vapor,
with a transition zone of molecular width. Properties of these interfaces can be
difficult to predict, especially how they affect the outcomes of chemical
reactions. The PIs will overcome these technical challenges by examining related
gas phase molecules that have distinctly different electronic structures at the
surface of different solvents. This systematic approach is expected to provide
insight into how chemical reactions occur at soft surfaces generally, with
potential implications to atmospheric and industrial chemistry. This project is
supporting the training of a graduate student and a post-doctoral associate at
Ohio State, and a graduate student at UC-Berkeley. In addition to formal
research training and education, the project will support the development of
videos on molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of interfacial dynamics that can be
used in General Chemistry courses to reinforce equilibrium and interfacial
chemistry concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on tuning the
dielectric constant and viscosity of solutions and will utilize gas phase
molecules, N2O5 and N2O4, as interfacial probes of their resultant charge
stabilization. These molecules possess significantly different reactivities at
interfaces, as N2O5 elicits a significant level of charge separation whereas
N2O4 does not. Solvents with different polarities, chain lengths and structures
will be studied to modulate these intrinsic differences. Experimental
observations will be interpreted with the help of molecular dynamics simulations
employing artificial neural network potentials. The broader impacts of this
research include societal benefits from an increased understanding interfacial
reactivity, with particular attention to the interfacial accommodation of
atmospheric aerosols. In addition, this highly collaborative and combined
theoretical and experimental inquiry will provide good opportunities for the
training of graduate students and postdoctoral research
associates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.