* 2102721
* Unveiling the Formation and Evolution of Neutron Star and Black Hole Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Margaret Lazzarini, Lazzarini, Margaret
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 197,125.00

Margaret Lazzarini is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the California Institute of
Technology. Using observations at infrared, optical, ultraviolet, and X-ray
wavelengths, Lazzarini will study properties of high-mass X-ray binary (HMXB)
systems containing a star and a massive compact object (CO) such as a neutron
star or a black hole. Results from this project will allow astronomers to better
understand binary stellar evolution and how HMXBs yield binary COs which can
undergo mergers to produce gravitational waves. Lazzarini will also conduct a
weekly after school enrichment program which will provide astronomy research
experiences to high school students from underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lazzarini will use photometry, time-resolved
spectroscopy, and computational binary evolution modeling to place precise
constraints on the allowed common envelope efficiency and supernova kick
magnitudes of over 200 HMXBs in three nearby galaxies: M31, M33, and the Small
Magellanic Cloud. By constraining these two parameters in a large sample of
HMXBs in a wide range of galactic environments, this project will greatly
improve formation models of CO mergers via isolated binary stellar evolution and
enable precise estimates of the rates of merger events producing GWs. This
project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.