* 2102100
* Ultra-High Efficiency Microwave Plasma for Extreme Low-Power Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Abbas Semnani, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2024
* USD 364,986.00

Cold plasma is a critical technology in many application fields such as plasma
medicine, food preservation, water treatment, reconfigurable electronics, high-
quality lighting, electric propulsion systems, sterilization, and
microfabrication. However, generating stable plasma is not a trivial task as
bulky, expensive, and energy-hungry units are often required. To facilitate
widespread use, particularly in low resource settings, there is a need for high
efficiency, low power, and low-cost plasmas. Preliminary results indicate that
it is indeed possible to achieve plasma of required density with very low input
power, even in the milliwatts range, by properly employing microwave resonant
structures. Hence, the overarching objective of this effort is to fundamentally
investigate extremely low-power and highly efficient resonant microwave plasmas
using theoretical, computational, and experimental approaches. This research
will advance the knowledge on the fundamental understanding of low-temperature
resonant microwave plasmas and is expected to elucidate the interactions between
electromagnetic waves and plasmas including self-sustained resonant microwave
plasmas. The outcomes of this research will pave the road for the next
generation of low-cost and readily available plasma generators. This project is
expected to change the understanding of not only the plasma community but also
the engineering community that rely on conventional bulky and cumbersome plasma
sources that inherently limit their applications. The research results will also
be utilized for educational purposes, both at the undergraduate and graduate
levels, as well as for scientific demonstrations to children to increase their
knowledge about plasma and potentially attract them to the STEM
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although DC, pulse, and RF plasmas have been
extensively explored, there is no comprehensive understanding of microwave
plasmas, especially in resonant mode. Resonant microwave plasma occurs in the
alpha–discharge regime with an extremely low sheath voltage drop, ensuring that
the ignited plasma is stable with no electrode erosion as an important lifetime
issue. The proposed research is aimed at developing a theoretical framework for
extreme high efficiency and low power plasmas, simulating their behavior
computationally, and experimentally validating the theory and computational
models. Such plasma can potentially be powered by low-power and readily
available supplies including cell phones, solar cells, or even batteries, which
makes it safe, low cost, portable, and readily available to many end users. To
turn this vision into reality, four major objectives are being pursued: (1)
development of a fundamental understanding of resonant microwave discharge
physics, (2) assessment and utilization of proper high quality-factor microwave
resonant structures, (3) design and implementation of innovative engineered
electrodes, and (4) investigation of pre-ionization (e.g., DC and RF) and pulsed
microwave techniques. In addition, arrays of scalable resonators will be
employed for larger plasma regions. The results of this research are expected to
facilitate the realization of ultra-low power plasma sources that can become
directly available to many end users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.