* 2102818
* Mechanisms for Film Formation During Room Temperature Micro Cold Spray of Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Desiderio Kovar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2024
* USD 432,013.00

This grant advances the understanding of a recently discovered direct-write,
additive manufacturing process for producing films. Additive manufacturing by
direct writing is the process of producing a patterned film from a digital
computer model without the need for a mask or other part-specific tooling. The
technique has the potential to revolutionize the way things are made because it
can dramatically lower the cost for making patterned films for low production
volume parts or even allow custom geometries for each part. There are many
existing direct-write manufacturing processes that can produce patterned films.
However, they generally require high temperature which can damage the substrate
that the films are deposited on and this is particularly problematic for ceramic
films since the processing temperatures are usually very high. This award
supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of
a room temperature direct-write additive manufacturing process for depositing
ceramics. This process will enable the deposition of high-quality ceramic films
at room temperature. Combined with metal films that can be deposited using the
same process, these ceramic films can be use in hybrid devices that require
multiple materials such as sensors, actuators, and rechargeable batteries.
Therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and society.
This research requires expertise in both experimental and computational
materials science. The multi-disciplinary approach will train students in an
areas that can contribute immediately to industry and outreach activities that
will broaden participation of female engineering students in research and
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The micro cold
spray process offers unique advantages compared to existing manufacturing
processes for depositing thick films of metals and ceramics: 1) Deposition
occurs at or near room temperature allowing for the use of film materials and
substrates that are temperature sensitive; 2) It is possible to deposit oxygen-
sensitive and very high melting temperature metals without highly specialized
and expensive equipment; 3) Non-equilibrium mixtures of materials can be
deposited onto a wide range of substrate materials with minimal surface
preparation. However, experiments have shown that micro cold spray produces high
quality ceramic films only over a narrow window of processing parameters. The
existing empirical approach was required because the mechanism(s) for particle
bonding remain poorly understood. A fundamental understanding of the physics of
film formation would allow the establishment of a processing window a priori
that would dramatically reduce the number of experiments required to produce
high quality patterned thick ceramic films using micro cold spray. An
understanding of the factors that affect film deposition by micro cold spray
requires the study of new fundamental science to advance the manufacturing
process because the combination of extremely high strain rates, large strains,
primarily compressive stress states, and locally high temperatures that arise
during particle impact for micro cold spray are unique in ceramics processing
and have not been previously explored. This grant uses a combined experimental
and molecular dynamics simulation-based approach to establish the scientific
underpinnings advancing this manufacturing process and provides a fundamental
understanding of the particle and agglomerate deformation mechanisms that lead
to film formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.