* 2102247
* CAS: Electrocatalytic Oxygen Atom Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Neal Mankad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

With this collaborative project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics
&amp; Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division, Ksenija Glusac, Neal Mankad
and Jordi Cabana from the Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois
at Chicago (UIC) will investigate new molecular/electrode hybrid
electrocatalysts that can perform chemical reactions relevant to energy
conversion (e.g. fuel cells) and chemical industry applications (e.g.
electrosynthesis of epoxides). The collaboration is synergistic, with each
member of the team bringing distinct expertise to the team, ranging from
electrochemistry to inorganic catalysis to X-ray spectroscopy. The
multidisciplinary nature of the proposed research will enable the training of
graduate students beyond the traditional disciplinary boundaries. Team members
aim to leverage the uniquely diverse student body at UIC to enhance the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Porous graphitic structures functionalized with
heteroatoms are excellent carbon-based electrodes for energy storage
applications. However, the chemical tunability of catalytic sites in these
materials is limited due to extreme pyrolytic temperatures needed for carbon
graphitization. Here, the research team will investigate the functionalization
of carbon electrodes with chemically tunable molecular catalysts for
electrocatalytic oxygen atom transfer (e-OAT). The planned activities involve:
(i) expansion of the chemical toolbox for functionalization of carbon edge and
basal planes using covalent linkers and pi-interactions; (ii) electrochemical
performance of molecule/carbon hybrids toward e-OAT; (iii) detailed mechanistic
studies of reaction intermediates using UV/Vis, mid-IR and X-ray spectro-
electrochemical methods. The research is a collaborative effort among the three
principal investigators at UIC with synergic expertise in electrocatalysis,
transition metal catalysis and chemical characterization of materials, as well
as an external collaborator, Dr. John Keith, University of Pittsburgh, who
provides expertise in computational electrochemistry. The lessons learned from
his research study could enable future catalyst design, for example, by guiding
the incorporation of well-defined catalytic sites via post-pyrolysis
modification of the nanocarbon edge and basal plane sites in such
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.