* 2102071
* The Development of Spin-Adiabatic Approaches for Studying Spin-Crossing Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yihan Shao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 444,855.00

WIth support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Yihan Shao and Zhibo Yang of the University of
Oklahoma will develop spin-adiabatic approaches for studying spin-crossing
reactions. Spin-crossing reactions are central to a wide range of chemical,
biochemical, and photochemical processes such as gas-phase ion-molecule
reactions, transition metal complex catalysis, oxygen activation, natural and
artificial water splitting, and chemiluminescence/bioluminescence. However, it
remains extremely challenging to model spin-crossing reactions due to several
reasons: complex nature of such type of reactions; difficulties of
simultaneously exploring multiple spin-diabatic potential energy surfaces; lack
of sufficient methodology/software support for efficiently identifying spin-
crossing reaction energy pathway (and reaction free energy pathway) and for
accurately predicting their reaction rates. To overcome this challenge, the Shao
and Yang groups will develop an accurate, efficient, and open-source
computational protocol for studying spin-crossing reactions directly on the
lowest-energy spin-adiabatic potential energy surface. Software developed under
this program will be released in a free and open-source manner. Under this
award, the team also host a qm-mm.org website and hold monthly webinars to
provide young researchers an opportunity to learn from the latest applications
of computational chemistry tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Shao, Dr. Yang and
their research teams at the University of Oklahoma are developing methods to
construct and explore spin-adiabatic surfaces, so that one can transition
automatically and smoothly from a high-spin state to a lower-spin one (or vice
versa) during a transition state search or molecular dynamics simulation. This
research is projected to proceed with the following objectives: (a)
implementation of multiple spin-orbit coupling and spin- crossing probability
schemes; (b) formulation of analytical energy gradients; (c) incorporation of
environment effects through hybrid quantum mechanical molecular mechanical
models; (d) combination with pathway optimization methods in free energy
calculations; (e) improvement to the energy and free energy results with active-
space or coupled-cluster quantum chemistry calculations on selected
configurations; and (f) assessment of the contribution from higher-energy spin-
diabatic excited states. The team will apply these new computational methods to
several spin-crossing ion-molecule reactions studied with mass spectrometry
experiments. They will also investigate oxygenation reactions in
chemiluminescence and bioluminescence to gain mechanistic
insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.