* 2102927
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating Snowlines Across the Tropics - The geomorphic imprint of tropospheric cooling and drying during the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Meredith Kelly, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 241,434.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the great unsolved
mysteries of Earth science is why the global climate oscillates between glacial
periods, when multi-kilometer thick ice sheets spread across North America and
northern Europe, and interglacial periods, when the Earth is much warmer and
continental ice sheets are restricted to very high latitudes. Due to the
integrated nature of the global climate system, unlocking this mystery requires
knowledge of the chronologic order in which elements of the climate system
change during transitions between glacial and interglacial periods and the
magnitude of climate changes across latitudes. This project will leverage new
and emerging remotely sensed datasets, including high-resolution satellite
imagery and digital topography, to address the magnitude of climate changes in
the tropical latitudes. Specifically, the researchers will use remotely sensed
data to reconstruct former glacial extents throughout the tropics, where
glaciers were restricted to the hard-to-reach highlands of high-elevation
mountains. The research will produce a globally consistent dataset which will
allow the testing of hypotheses about how much the Earth’s low latitudes cooled
during the last glacial period, and how tropical changes play into major climate
reorganizations. The project will rely heavily on a team of undergraduate
researchers and will collaborate with the U.S. Ice Drilling Program to produce
public educational material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodological approach is
based on the realization that past changes in the global climate system can
imprint on the topography of mountains. One of the clearest examples of this
phenomenon is the transformation of mountain valleys by erosional patterns
beneath glaciers. Glaciers only exist where temperatures are cold enough for
year-round ice, so if glaciers leave telltale signs of their former extents in
erosional and depositional landforms, then it is possible to calculate the
position of the freezing line associated with these glaciers. By creating a
global dataset of tropical glacial extents in carefully selected areas, the
project will achieve three goals: 1) produce a global estimate of the lower
bound of the tropical freezing line during the last glacial period 2) use
numerical modeling of a “type example” tropical glacial system (Costa Rica) to
evaluate the relationship between the annual freezing line and the elevation of
glaciers in the tropics and 3) determine whether the lapse rate (change in
temperature with elevation) was steeper during the last glacial period.
Achieving these goals will advance the understanding of why the global climate
has been subject to cyclic variations during Earth’s recent geologic
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.