* 2102623
* Experimental and Computational Studies of Bifunctional Organometallic Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Andrew Cooksy, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 10/31/2024
* USD 549,999.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Douglas B. Grotjahn and Andrew L. Cooksy of San Diego State
University are performing research aimed at determining the best catalysts for
new reactions that can be used to make organic compounds of interest for a
variety of applications, including pharmaceuticals, materials, and biology. To
accomplish this, many catalysts that contain a metal and a larger non-metal
portion (ligand) will be made and tested, to determine what combinations of
metals and ligands will yield the best performing catalysts. In addition,
fundamental studies of how the catalysts operate on the molecular level will be
performed. This grant will support the training of several young investigators
in the field of catalysis. Because catalysis accounts for a third of global GDP
and a majority of chemical products and chemical processes, the discovery of new
or improved catalysts for organic reactions and new mechanisms has great
practical importance, contributing to economic development and recovery. As in
the previous grant period, practical catalysts will be developed and improved.
Also, to broaden public understanding of catalysis, the PIs and the graduate
students will introduce the concept into an existing and highly successful high
school outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Douglas B. Grotjahn
and Andrew L. Cooksy of San Diego State University will employ design principles
of Nature’s enzymes, particularly hydrogen bonding and proton transfer, to
accelerate (often by more than 1000-fold) organometallic catalysis and reactions
by new mechanisms. Ligands containing proton-donating or hydrogen-bonding groups
will be synthesized and combined with a variety of metal precursors to form
their metal derivatives for catalysis. Interactions of these pendant groups with
nonpolar and polar reactants, intermediates, or transition states are expected
to create faster catalysts. The focus will be mostly on waste-free addition or
isomerization reactions, with several goals: (1) integrate the use of computer-
based molecular predictions before and after catalyst discovery; (2) build and
apply a toolbox of alkene isomerization catalysts; (3) use ligands to enable X-H
activation; and (4) develop catalysts for addition reactions. The project will
include significant one-on-one training in modern techniques of organic and
organometallic chemistry, including NMR spectroscopy, catalysis screening, and
computation. The proposed research will add new mechanistic insight to our
picture of bifunctional catalysis, using complementary experimental and
computational studies to allow the design of better catalysts and chemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.