* 2102984
* Collaborative Research: An integrated model-proxy approach to understanding Western US hydroclimate change since the last glacial period
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kristopher Karnauskas, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 172,417.00

Understanding what processes drive changes in rainfall along the U.S. West Coast
is essential for predicting future water availability in this densely populated
and agriculturally productive part of the country. However, given the short
duration of direct meteorological observations (~100 years), it is beneficial to
reconstruct past changes in rainfall over longer time periods (i.e., thousands
of years) in order to uncover the potential sensitivity of water resources in
the Western U.S to future climate change. This research project combines
measurements of ancient groundwater and state-of-the-art climate model
experiments to both quantify and understand the dynamical drivers of
hydrological change along the American West Coast during the last ice age (i.e.,
the Last Glacial Maximum or LGM, ~25,000 years ago). This project also includes
a comprehensive public outreach component, involving the creation of a museum
exhibit for display at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). In
collaboration with the University of Colorado Boulder, the researchers will lead
an interdisciplinary course for students to design and prototype a museum
exhibit that brings to life the radically different atmospheric circulation and
rainfall patterns present during the LGM.&lt;br/&gt;The first research component
of this project involves a field campaign to collect groundwater samples from a
network of wells within the Columbia Plateau Aquifer system in northeastern
Oregon and southeastern Washington, which will provide a much-needed
quantitative constraint on LGM hydroclimate in the data-poor Pacific Northwest.
A new analytical technique for high-precision measurements of dissolved noble
gas concentrations and Krypton and Xenon isotope ratios within the groundwater
will be employed to reconstruct past temperature and regional water table depth.
The second research component of the project involves climate model experiments
using NCARâ€™s Community Earth System Model version 1.2 (CESM1) to build upon
existing fully equilibrated climate simulations to study the influence of
different LGM boundary conditions (ice sheet albedo/topography, greenhouse
gases, orbital forcing, etc) on North Pacific atmospheric circulation and the
intensity, variability, and landfalling orientation of moisture-rich storms
known as Atmospheric Rivers (ARs). The project also includes a series of time-
slice experiments, simulating both deglacial and glacial conditions, to examine
the transient response of ARs and western North American hydroclimate to
shrinking and growing continental ice sheets. Finally, detailed comparisons will
be made between these model simulations and the proxy reconstructions of Pacific
Northwest water table depths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.