* 2102143
* CSEDI: Searching For Hadean Impacts: Clues From the Sudbury Impact Basin and Machine Learning Approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Dustin Trail, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 07/31/2024
* USD 361,878.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Mechanisms of crustal formation provide crucial
information on the planetary environment. For example, if Earth’s crust formed
during the Hadean eon (4.5-4.0 billion years ago) in the same way as the modern
Earth, this might indicate that early Earth had plate tectonics. This has
significant implications for the early Earth’s environment, given that plate
tectonics promote volatile cycling and chemical weathering, which in turn
provide key ingredients for life. However, it is also possible that a
significant fraction of early Earth’s crust formed by other mechanisms, such as
crystallization from magmas that formed by meteorite impacts. This hypothesis
does not require early Earth to have had plate tectonics. Information about
either mechanism is challenging to obtain because of our extremely limited
access to preserved terrestrial materials older than 4 billion years. Most of
our direct information about the Hadean crust has been obtained from the
extremely resistant mineral called zircons, with ages that approach 4.4 billion
years. Zircons contain trace impurities, such as titanium and rare earth
elements. Their concentrations can be affected by the formation mechanisms of
the magmas from which zircons crystallize, e.g., related to plate tectonics v.
meteorite impacts. Here, we will investigate early Earth’s crust formation
mechanisms though a multi-pronged approach that includes detailed analysis of
trace element chemistry in Hadean zircon. These will then be compared with
simulations that predict the trace element chemistry in zircon due to meteorite
impact and melting of the early Earth. With these results, we will be able to
estimate possible Hadean crust composition and hence its genesis due to impact-
related processes. This project will also support students training in modern
computational methods, machine learning, and modern methods of mineral analysis.
Two of the students will write their senior theses on this project, providing
opportunities for the students to participate in this cutting-edge research
project. The outcome will be presented at the Rochester Museum and Science
Center (RMSC) to enhance local community engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
will be the first time machine learning methodologies have been explored to
characterize the origin of zircons based on their trace element abundances. We
will train our machine learning model with more recently formed zircons whose
origins are well known, and subsequently apply the model to the Hadean zircons
to identify their origins. We propose to conduct the following tasks; (1) we
will characterize trace impurities in zircons formed from impact-induced magma
by analyzing samples provided by the Smithsonian Institute, (2) We will collect
rock samples from the Sudbury impact basin, which formed 1.85 billion years ago
and has the largest preserved crust crystallized from impact-induced magma on
Earth, and (3) we will conduct impact simulations and melt evolution
calculations, which will be compared with whole rock chemistry and zircon trace
elements from the Sudbury basin samples. Once chemical, physical and machine
learning models are developed, we will apply it to Hadean zircon data to
identify whether some of the zircons formed by impact. Finally, based on our
model and trace element abundances in Hadean zircons, we will explore the Hadean
crust composition and its potential relation to impact-related processes. Our
unique and comprehensive approach will provide new insights to understand the
poorly constrained environment of the early Earth. By understanding the crust
formation process during the Hadean, we can better constrain the early Earth's
environments, including crust production rate and volatile cycling. Moreover,
with machine learning being a key component of this project, data preservation
and archiving will be a top priority. We plan to archive our analyzed sample
data in a similar format as the extant GeoRoc database, which will be publicly
accessible. We will dedicate one class for this project and student
participation will be a key aspect of this proposed work. Through the class
activity, the students will learn impact processes, Sudbury geology, and the
geochemical techniques involved in rock (x-ray fluorescence) and mineral (laser
ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry)
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.