* 2102129
* PZT-hydrogel integrated active non-Hermitian complementary acoustic metamaterials with real time modulations through feedback control circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Yuhang Hu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,997.00

This grant will support research that will generate new fundamental knowledge on
the dynamic and acoustic properties of a PZT-hydrogel based active complementary
acoustic metamaterial. Such acoustic metamaterials will enable high energy
transmission at high frequency through sound barriers, including those with
strong intrinsic loss like skull for brain imaging and brain-machine interface.
Transcranial ultrasound (i.e. ultrasound transmission through skull) has many
applications including noninvasive surgeries and drug delivery. However, current
transcranial ultrasound techniques are all based on sound waves with relatively
low frequency and poor spatial resolution, and the energy transmission through
the lossy skull is low even for such low frequency sound waves. Brain imaging
and brain-machine interfaces require better spatial resolution, which can be
realzied by enabling transmission of high frequency ultrasound through skulls,
which is not achievable with existing technologies. Active non-Hermitian
complementary acoustic metamaterials (NHCMM) are promising compensation media to
complement with the strong transmission loss through skull for high frequency
acoustic waves. This project explores the acoustic and material properties of
PZT-hydrogel composites integrated with feedback control circuits for the
experimental realization of NHCMM that can compensate the high frequency
ultrasound transmission loss through a real skull. This experimental realization
will set the foundation for high resolution ultrasound brain imaging and brain-
machine interface. This research will have broader impacts in science, defense,
industry and general society by satisfying the critical need for high
performance brain imaging and brain-machine interface. In addition, this
research will promote the progress of fundamental acoustics, soft matter
physics, and metamaterials. This multi-disciplinary research will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering and
positively impact STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to design, fabricate, and experimentally characterize an active
NHCMM by integrating PZT elements, hydrogel, and feedback control circuits that
can be used to complement sound barriers, including those with strong intrinsic
loss such as skull, to achieve optimal energy transmission for brain imaging and
brain-machine interface. The NHCMM has effective density and bulk modulus with
negative values of that of the barrier to suppress the strong impedance mismatch
and material gain that balances the intrinsic loss in the barrier. The NHCMM
will be realized by integrating piezoelectric elements and hydrogel with
electrical circuit components. The integrated feedback control circuit will
actively modulate the effective acoustic properties of the metamaterials to
realize the desired parameters of NHCMM and compensate impedance mismatch and
loss simultaneously. This fundamental research project will pave the road for
the realization of noninvasive ultrasonic brain imaging, high intensity focused
ultrasound treatments, brain stimulation, and brain-machine interface. To
achieve the proposed objective, the two PIs will utilize their complemented
expertise in acoustics, metamaterials, and soft matter to accomplish the
following research tasks: 1) Identify the dynamic properties of different types
of hydrogels in a wide ultrasonic frequency band; 2) Design and fabricate
hydrogel-based active NHCMMs with feedback-circuit-controlled piezoelectric
elements to realize any desired effective density and bulk modulus with acoustic
gain; 3) Characterize and optimize NHCMMs to enhance acoustic energy
transmission through lossy skull for brain imaging and brain-machine
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.