* 2102592
* Discover and Understand Microporous Polymers for Size-sieving Separation Membranes using Active Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Tengfei Luo, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2024
* USD 426,990.00

Membrane-based separation technologies have great promise to dramatically drive
down the energy, carbon, and water intensity of traditional thermally-driven
separation processes such as distillation. The creation of novel membrane
materials with tailorable yet predictable structure and properties holds the key
to providing low energy solutions to some of the nationâ€™s most challenging and
important separations, such as in clean energy industries (e.g., hydrogen gas
purification) and environmental remediation (e.g., carbon capture). However, the
development cycles of such materials are usually exceptionally long due to the
requisite trial-and-error strategy employed. This project aims to combine
simulations, machine learning, and experimental studies to accelerate the
development of high-performance polymer gas separation membranes. The knowledge
gained from this project will enable a more rational strategy for the design of
advanced materials for energy-efficient separations and provide potentially
revolutionary solutions to the grand materials challenges in the membrane
separation field. This project will also strengthen the multi-disciplinary
collaboration for incorporating machine learning into polymeric membrane
materials. In addition to advancing knowledge and technology, the research will
be integrated with graduate and undergraduate student education and training
opportunities and through local K-12 student and teacher outreach programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to accelerate the
discovery and enrich the fundamental understanding of highly permeable and
selective polymer gas separation membranes using an active learning scheme that
synergistically combines molecular simulations, machine learning, and
experiments. The scope of this project will include (1) establishing a
standardized polymer database by combining existing database, open literature,
and high-throughput molecular simulations; (2) employing transfer learning,
molecular simulations, and experiments to develop accurate surrogate models that
map out chemistry-property relations for polymer gas separation membranes; (3)
establishing a Bayesian Optimization framework to guide the iteration of
transfer learning and experimental discoveries; and (4) using classification
together with detailed molecular simulation and experimental study to understand
molecular features impacting polymer free volume architecture and gas transport
properties. The Materials Informatics-based active learning approach to be
established in this project will be a valuable strategy for the field concerning
polymer separation membranes, and it can be readily extended to design polymers
with other desirable properties beyond gas separation, which can save the cost
and time traditionally required for new material development in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.