* 2102649
* De Novo Asymmetric Synthesis of Natural and Unnatural Oligosaccharide Motifs
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* George ODoherty, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program (SYN) in the Division of
Chemistry (CHE), Professor George Oâ€™Doherty and his research team at
Northeastern University will work to develop new methods and strategies for the
construction of complex, oligosaccharide structural motifs. Of the bio-
polymers/oligomers, including proteins, DNA (2'-deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA
(ribonucleic acid), oligosaccharides stand unique in terms of their limited
synthetic accessibility. Specifically, modern synthetic chemistry has
established methods for the rapid assembly of peptide and nucleotide oligomers
with both natural and unnatural subunits. In comparison, the ability to assemble
carbohydrates into oligomeric motifs is limited in the ability to practically
prepare the full range of accessible regio- and stereo-isomeric structures.
These synthetic limitations inhibit the study and use of oligosaccharide motifs
as new materials and therapeutics. The broader impacts of this project are to
(i) the long-term benefits to science that generalizable oligosaccharide
synthesis methods will bring and (ii) the training that these studies engender
to a diverse set of students. In addition to the creation of new oligosaccharide
structures and new methods for their assembly, these projects will give students
training in the concepts and techniques of multi-step complex molecule
synthesis. The students who take up these challenges come from a range of
backgrounds and experience levels. This diverse group of students (high school,
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral) is significantly made up of women and
under-represented students from the US and around the world. The skills in
organic synthesis that these students gain are highly valued by the
biotechnology, pharmaceutical and material science industries, where most of
them find employment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new
synthetic methods to access a wider range of carbohydrate monomers and the
resulting natural and unnatural oligosaccharide motifs. This unique synthetic
approach heavily relies on the use of transition metal catalysis unlike most
oligosaccharide synthesis methods. First asymmetric catalysis for the
stereoselective synthesis of the carbohydrate monomers will be pursued. Then an
underexploited approach; namely, transition metal-mediated glycosylation or
cyclitolization will be used to regio- and stereo-selectively assemble the
carbohydrate monomers, or their carbocyclic analogues, into
(pseudo)oligosaccharide motifs. The use of asymmetric catalysis for the
synthesis of the monomers allows a degree of stereochemical flexibility to the
approach that more traditional methods do not readily offer. The glycosylation
reaction assembles double bonds containing carbohydrate monomers, which also
engenders a degree of structural flexibility as well as allows for the minimal
use of alcohol protections. Avoiding protecting groups can significantly reduce
the amount of chemical waste generated. Overall, the project aims to
fundamentally change oligosaccharide synthesis and in turn also change the
application of carbohydrate chemistry to real-world problems in chemical
biology, and eventually, medicinal chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.