* 2102211
* CAS: IrO2 Based Mixed Metal Oxides for the Selective Oxidation of Methane
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jason Weaver, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 03/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Weaver, Hagelin-Weaver and Hibbitts of the University of Florida will
study selective methane oxidation using elaborately structured IrO2-based mixed
metal oxides. Developing efficient catalytic processes to transform methane, the
primary component of shale and natural gas, to more valuable products is a grand
challenge for the chemical industry and would have significant economic and
environmental benefits. The availability of new and cost-effective methane-to-
chemicals processes could incentivize the use of shale and natural gas as a
chemical feedstock rather than a combustion fuel, thereby mitigating greenhouse
gas emissions and facilitating a transition toward renewable energy. Currently,
direct catalytic processes to convert methane to chemicals are scarce and
unsuitable for commercial use. The major difficulty is that most catalytic
materials must operate at high temperatures to initiate chemical conversions of
methane, whereas milder conditions are needed to direct the subsequent chemistry
toward desirable products. In this project, the investigators will develop a
fundamental understanding of the selective conversions of methane to more
valuable chemicals using well-defined oxide catalysts. Designing the catalyst
structures with atomic-level precision is necessary for efficiently and
selectively converting methane to chemicals. The investigators will provide
opportunities for high school and undergraduate students to participate in their
research, and focus on recruiting students from underrepresented groups to
engage in these activities. These outreach activities seek to promote the
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a fundamental understanding
of how the local structure and composition of IrO2-based mixed metal oxides
influence the oxidation chemistry of methane, and may be tailored to promote the
selective oxidation of methane to value-added products, such as ethylene,
formaldehyde or other organic oxygenates. The key idea is that atomically
dispersed IrO2-sites in a less reactive oxide will induce initial methane
activation at low temperature and that subsequent conversion to products will be
mediated by the second, more chemically selective oxide. This research involves
investigations of the structural and chemical properties of IrO2-modified TiO2
and RuO2 prepared as planar crystalline surfaces as well as nanocrystalline
powders. Two general structural motifs are being investigated, namely, Ir atoms
substituted into the surface lattice of the host oxide and nanoscopic IrO2
islands dispersed on the host oxide surface. These materials will be
investigated using a combination of experimental and theoretical methods
including ultrahigh vacuum surface science and catalyst characterization,
reactor studies and density functional theory and kinetic Monte Carlo modeling.
Key aims of the project are to systematically characterize the atomic-level
structures of mixed metal-oxide surfaces of varying composition and morphology
and determine how the methane oxidation chemistry is influenced by the local
Ir-O structures. The project involves stringent comparisons of the results of
first-principles modeling with experimental results obtained from planar
crystalline surfaces and more complex nanoparticles to develop a robust
understanding of the selective oxidation of methane on the mixed metal-
oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.