* 2102544
* Spectroscopic and Mechanistic Studies of Odd-Electron Palladium Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Liviu Mirica, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 511,912.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Liviu M. Mirica of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign aims to develop a
fundamental understanding of the electronic properties and reactivity profiles
of paramagnetic palladium(Pd)systems. Toward this goal, these studies will take
advantage of the ability to judiciously design flexible multidentate ligands
that control the reactivity of metal ions in various oxidation states. In
addition, a wide range of spectroscopic techniques and computational studies
will be applied to studying in detail these uncommon paramagnetic Pd systems.
Their efforts could lead to fundamentally new synthetic methods, which are of
great value for the process chemistry side of the pharmaceutical industry, for
example. Professor Liviu M. Mirica will continue to be active in recruiting and
training undergraduate students from different backgrounds, either through the
St. Elmo Brady Summer Scholars Program and the 3M Summer Scholars
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In organometallic catalysis, palladium complexes
play an important role as catalysts for a wide range of transformations such as
carbon-hydrogen functionalization as well as carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom
bond forming reactions. The vast majority of these catalytic processes involve
Pd(0) and Pd(II) oxidation states, and more recently the Pd(IV) oxidation state
has been invoked in several chemical transformations. By contrast, the chemistry
of the odd-electron Pd(III) and Pd(I) oxidation states is much less known.
During the past several years, Professor Liviu M. Mirica’s research group has
reported the isolation, detailed characterization, and reactivity studies of a
series of novel mononuclear Pd(III) and Pd(I) complexes supported by flexible
multidentate ligands. With such uncommon complexes in hand, they propose to
investigate in detail the spectroscopic and chemical properties, as well as
uncover new reactivity profiles for these odd-electron Pd systems. In this
project, the immediate objectives are to: (i) perform spectroscopic and
mechanistic studies of Pd(III) complexes; (ii) perform spectroscopic and
mechanistic studies of Pd(I) complexes; and (iii) explore new
Pd(III)/Pd(I)–mediated chemical transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.