* 2102156
* CAS: Developing Homogeneous Mn Catalyst Systems for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Charles Machan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Charles W. Machan of the University of Virginia is studying the catalytic
reduction of dioxygen by molecular manganese compounds. The reduction of
dioxygen is important for producing energy from chemical bonds. Fuel cells, for
example, often employ the reduction of dioxygen to water to generate clean
energy. The current best catalysts for this reaction are based on platinum
metal, which is rare and expensive. In the search for earth-abundant
alternatives, systems containing iron and cobalt have been studied extensively,
however, manganese versions of these systems are more poorly understood.
Manganese generally interacts strongly with dioxygen and has the potential to
rival or exceed the catalytic activity of iron or cobalt. These studies will
achieve this by developing design principles for dioxygen reduction by manganese
complexes, thus enabling optimized systems with improved performance. Integrated
into these efforts is a research-focused educational outreach program, which
will develop a scientific communication training program and a research-based
lab experience. The integrated research and educational components will address
fundamental challenges for the field and priorities of the current NSF Strategic
Plan, with the goal of maximizing the health, environmental and economic
benefits of renewable energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support
of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Charles W.
Machan of the University of Virginia is studying the catalytic reduction of
dioxygen by molecular manganese compounds. When paired with the oxidation of
energy rich molecules, dioxygen reduction is a convenient way to drive oxidation
reactions or to convert chemical energy to electrical energy. Manganese metal
centers, while underrepresented as molecular catalyst active sites, have strong
interactions with dioxygen and could demonstrate catalytic activity that rivals
or exceeds the activity of more well-understood iron and cobalt species. A
coordination chemistry-based approach will be used to enhance the binding and
activation of dioxygen by tuning electronic properties at the Mn center, with
the ultimate goal of improving catalytic performance. In initial studies,
conditions for the selective generation of hydrogen peroxide or water as the
reaction product have been developed: hydrogen peroxide is a valuable chemical
oxidant and water is the desired half-reaction for fuel cells. Understanding how
to achieve high selectivity and activity for each of these products has
implications for renewable energy utilization. To address the ongoing need for
fundamental understanding of the reduction of dioxygen by manganese complexes,
the role of axial ligands in dioxygen binding and activation will be quantified,
the catalytic response will be improved by synthetically modifying the ligand
framework, and conditions for selective hydrogen peroxide and water production
will be sought using redox mediators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.