* 2102610
* Ab Initio molecular Dynamics with Quantum Nuclear Effects: Potential Surfaces and Gradients from on-the-fly Graph-Theory-Based Molecular Fragmentation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Srinivasan Iyengar, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Srinivasan S. Iyengar of Indiana University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry. Many problems at the forefront of energy, environmental and
biological research demand the quantum mechanical treatment of electrons and
nuclei, but the detailed quantum-mechanical description of such problems is much
too complex even in today’s high performance computing environments. This is
because the computational complexity in these problems grows exponentially with
system size, which makes them intractable. Iyengar and his research group are
developing new computational methods to address these issues. These methods are
based on a mathematical idea called graph-theory that allows Iyengar and co-
workers to partition a molecular system into regions that communicate through an
idea called electron correlation. This is very similar to Google maps, where
cities are connected through highways, and in the same way, in Iyengar’s
formalism molecular domains are connected through similar roads and bridges that
provide pathways for electrons to communicate through a concept called electron
correlation. Unfortunately, while electron correlation allows electrons to
communicate and has a critical role in all chemical processes, this concept is
also responsible for the catastrophic computational complexity of obtaining
accurate molecular properties. By creating such graph-theoretic methods, Iyengar
will help to reduce the computational complexity of these problems, to allow
state of art calculations. These methods are poised to have major impact on the
study of a wide class of problems in fields ranging from enzymology to
atmospheric chemistry to materials science, including the study of hydrogen
transfer in polymer electrolyte fuel cells. In addition, the methods are also
poised to allow innovative implementations on a mixed set of hybrid quantum and
classical computing systems. The methods being developed by Iyengar are at the
intersection of modern computational quantum chemistry and chemical physics.
Hence students in the group have the opportunity to learn and develop new
theoretical methods and apply these methods to important problems. The results,
involving computer codes as well as novel scientific ideas are to be
disseminated to the scientific community. Specifically, the computer programs
developed by Iyengar will appear as part of the NSF-funded SEAGrid science
gateway. Furthermore, as a member of the quantum science center at Indiana
University, and as the director of the university-wide scientific computing
program, Iyengar will be involved in the organization of summer workshops for
middle- and high-school teachers from the local Bloomington, Indiana area to
provide cross-disciplinary training in chemistry, physics and computer science.
These workshops will focus on the quantum nature of matter, providing a unified
treatment of problems in physics, chemistry and biochemistry; furthermore,
modeling these problems is then to be done through connections to computational
algorithms. Through involvement in the Holland Hudson Scholars Program (HHSP)
and the Indiana Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
program, the PI will work to recruit students from under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) is appealing, since it
does not need a priori fitted potentials. This allows application of AIMD as a
self-contained black box. But this advantage is deeply affected by the cost of
evaluating the electronic potential and forces. Hence, most applications of AIMD
are limited to density functional theoretic (DFT) treatment. While there has
been substantial progress in developing accurate DFT functionals, fundamental
challenges remain. This proposal deals with the development and application of
on-the-fly graph-theoretic techniques to compute accurate, low-scaling AIMD
trajectories that are in agreement with post-Hartree-Fock electronic structure,
but at the cost of DFT. These developments are applicable for both cluster
studies as well as periodic condensed phase problems, such as reactions on
surfaces. In addition, during a single AIMD step, the approach can integrate
multiple electronic structure packages. Current capabilities include the ability
to use Gaussian, ORCA, Psi4, Quantum Espresso and OpenMX within a single AIMD
umbrella. There are three specific aims in this proposal: (1) to implement the
team's graph theory-based approach in an asynchronous fashion on novel hybrid,
interleaved, quantum/classical computing hardware. This will allow the steep
scaling aspects of our method to be treated on quantum hardware, the lower
scaling aspects and graph-theoretic decomposition of molecular structure on
classical hardware and provide a new thrust for studying reactive chemical
problems; (2) to study hydrogen transfer reactions on the surface of water. The
systems studied are in the condensed phase, and of critical importance in
atmospheric chemistry. The reactions considered deal with isoprene-based
hydroxy-peroxy radicals, thought to be pivotal on hydroxyl radical
concentrations in the atmosphere. (3) The graph theory-based approach will be
used to construct multi-dimensional potential surfaces for hydrogen-transfer
reactions to gauge quantum nuclear effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.