* 2102229
* Vinyl Diazonium Ions as Synthetic Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Matthias Brewer, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Matthias Brewer of the University of Vermont is developing new ways to
make organic molecules using compounds called vinyl diazonium ions to achieve
new carbon-carbon bond connections. Vinyl diazonium ions are uncommon chemical
building blocks with the potential to become important synthetic tools.
Professor Brewer and his students are testing these compounds in complex
synthetic examples and systematically establishing their fundamental reactivity.
Investigating innovative strategies to prepare organic molecules is an important
goal as it enables advances in many other fields of research that depend on
complex organic molecule synthesis such as drug discovery and materials science.
This program is being used to engage economically-disadvantaged high school
students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) activities
in collaboration with the American Chemical Society (ACS) Project SEED program.
Professor Brewer is also organizing an annual retreat for University of Vermont
students of color in STEM disciplines. This retreat will help to overcome the
sense of isolation that students of color in STEM fields feel by providing these
students a chance to meet and build a greater sense of community at the
University of Vermont.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vinyl diazonium ions are
underdeveloped synthetic intermediates with the potential to provide solutions
to current synthetic challenges. Professor Brewer and his research team are
investigating the reactivity of vinyl diazonium ions to provide new approaches
to the synthesis of all-carbon quaternary centers, access complex structures
that contain a diazo functional group, and provide a strategy towards the first
total synthesis of anadensin, a fusicoccane diterpenoid with anti-cancer and
anti-microbial activity. All-carbon quaternary centers in complex organic
compounds are challenging to install due to their sterically encumbered nature
but are found in many biologically active molecules including natural products
that have been shown to be excellent medicinal leads. Vinyl diazonium ions are
being studied as electrophiles to provide new stereoselective routes to all-
carbon quaternary centers that are difficult to make by traditional methods. The
diazo group is one of the most versatile functional groups in synthetic
chemistry and the products formed by the addition of nucleophiles to vinyl
diazonium ions are being explored as activated synthetic intermediates for
subsequent complexity building reactions. Investigations towards the synthesis
of anadensin are being used to test a new strategy for preparing complex
dicyclopenta[a,d]cyclooctene 5-8-5 ring systems. These activities are
synergistically providing important training in synthetic chemistry for a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students at the University of
Vermont.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.