* 2102901
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Western United States Hydroclimate during the Last Interglacial: Developing Proxy Records and Using Model Intercomparison to Glimpse the Future
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Ibarra, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,664.00

Freshwater availability is critical to agricultural, energy and urban systems in
the arid to semi-arid western U.S. Quantifying hydroclimate change during past
warm periods, such as the Last Interglacial (LIG; ~129,000-116,000 years before
present), is essential for evaluating climate model simulations of Earthâ€™s past.
This project aims to reconstruct variations in the spatial and seasonal
distribution of precipitation in the western U.S. during the LIG during which
global temperature are comparable to low-end 21st century projections. The
project will include the application of novel methods (calcium and triple oxygen
isotopes) on stalagmites from Lake Shasta Caverns (northern California) and
Titan Cave (northern Wyoming), and will provide new chronological data and novel
measurements (carbonate clumped and triple oxygen isotopes) at four lake sites
in the northeast Great Basin (Bear Lake, Utah/Idaho and Bonneville Basin,
Utah/Nevada), and southwest Great Basin/Mojave Desert (Lake Manix and Owens
Lake, California). The anticipated results of this project are past records of
changes in temperature, rainfall amount and moisture source and seasonality.
These new past climate records will be integrated into a regional proxy-data
network used to benchmark climate model simulations of the Last Interglacial
period (127 ka).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The paleoclimate modeling intercomparison
(PMIP4) and coupled model intercomparison project (CMIP6) efforts of the climate
modeling community include Tier 1 LIG (127ka) simulations as a benchmarking
target for models with similar CO2 levels, different orbital configuration,
unchanged topography and higher sea level. The validation of hydroclimate-
relevant variables at a regional scale using climate models requires robustly
dated and spatially distributed paleoclimate observations in order to place the
LIG water cycle in the western U.S. in the context of geologic and future
climate change. Yet, few quantitative estimates of paleoclimate exist for this
interval, which offers geochronologic challenges too as it is beyond the limit
of radiocarbon age control. This project seeks to improve our understanding of
LIG climate in the western U.S. by providing: 1) new observations from
speleothem records, 2) new U-Th dating of existing lake cores, and 3) the
application of novel semi-quantitative proxies for temperature, precipitation
and humidity to speleothems and lake sediments. Through the development of new
high-resolution proxy time-series from speleothems and lake sediments, we will
provide new insight into the behavior of the North American Monsoon during a
past warm period and reconstruct hydroclimatic response to abrupt climatic
events during the penultimate deglaciation (Termination II) and Marine Isotope
Stage 5 (MIS5). The research uses existing lake cores recovered and archived by
previous NSF- and USGS-funded continental drilling projects, and recently
collected speleothems known to span much of MIS5 and the
LIG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include quantifying
regional hydroclimate changes during past warm periods and benchmarking of
climate model simulations for the last interglacial. Other Broader Impacts
include translating the project research outcomes via a workshop (paleo to
policy) convening water resource managers, government agencies (e.g., USGS),
climate and weather risk assessment and projection companies and early career
paleoclimate researchers from across the U.S. This workshop will emphasize on
the information that terrestrial past climate records (lake sediments, tree
rings, speleothems) can provide in terms of hydroclimate data beyond the
instrumental records needed by policy makers to assess climate variability and
extreme events such as drought and floods. The researchers will produce a white
paper, policy briefs for water resource managers and a presentation at an
education and outreach session at a scientific meeting (American Geophysical
Union). The project will provide scientific training, mentorship and
professional development for two graduate students and one postdoctoral
researcher. Through joint field trips and collaborations, these students and
postdoc will have opportunities to develop interdisciplinary expertise in
climate archives, novel proxy systems, geochronology and model-proxy comparison.
In addition, the researchers will recruit undergraduate students to complete
summer internships related to the project. The undergraduate students will be
recruited through (1) the Earth Horizons program and partnership between
Vanderbilt University and Tennessee State University, a Historically Black
University (HBCU); (2) the Leadership Alliance program at Brown University
funded through NSF-REU-EPSCOR. The undergraduate students will be encouraged to
develop their research into presentations at regional, national and
international scientific meetings (e.g., AGU, GSA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.