* 2102028
* Angular momentum transport in insulators:  Magnons and other emergent excitations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Douglas Natelson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 556,997.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a magnetic insulator, magnetism (“spin”)
can be made to flow through the material without the heating that happens when
flowing charge through an electrical conductor. This makes spin currents
appealing for future low power technologies. In most magnetic insulators, spin
travels via waves, each carrying a certain amount of magnetism, but in some
materials the spin is thought to be carried in more complicated ways, so that it
comes in packets of different amounts or arranged differently in time, as if
packets of magnetism are tied to each other. The flow of spin can be driven and
detected electrically using recently developed techniques. This project uses
these methods to examine the flow of spin in several such materials as a
function of temperature and other conditions, to try to test these ideas about
non-wave-like spin motion. For example, fluctuations in the flow of spin can
quantify the amount of magnetism carried per packet, in the same way that the
fluctuating sound of rain gives information about the size of rain drops. The
Principal Investigator is working with leading theorists in the interpretation
of the data. Foundational knowledge of spin flow in these systems is essential
for the full realization of their potential in future technologies, including
quantum information processing. This project incorporates the research and
communications training of two graduate students as well as undergraduate
researchers recruited from Rice and nearby minority-serving institutions. These
individuals are gaining valuable experience with quantum materials as well as
written and oral communications skills, preparing them for the technological
workforce. Results are spread to the scientific community via publications and
conference presentations. The PI is working with Rice K12 teacher training
programs, continuing outreach to the public via blogging, and
developing/presenting a lifelong learning course about the physics of materials
through the cooperation of Rice’s Glasscock School for Continuing Studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Angular momentum transport
via the spin degree of freedom is an alternative channel for the flow of
information and energy in future technologies. Of particular interest is the
propagation of spin through magnetic insulators, with the potential for ultralow
dissipation in the absence of Ohmic charge flow. Recent methods based on the
spin Hall effect have enabled the measurement of spin transport in a variety of
magnetically ordered systems via magnons, the quantized spin waves of the
electrons in the lattice. The intellectual merit of this project is the
addressing of fundamental open questions, including: How is spin transported in
materials that host exotic emergent spin-carrying excitations rather than
magnons? Can spin transport be controlled through coupling to electric
polarization in multiferroics? What are the fundamental limitations of noise in
spin transport? Measurements will compare injection- and thermally-driven spin
transport in classical spin liquids, a classical spin ice, a quantum spin ice, a
candidate fermionic quantum spin liquid, and a multiferroic. Noise techniques
are used to observe and quantify spin shot noise, the predicted (but not yet
observed) fundamental fluctuations in driven angular momentum transport due to
the discrete nature of spin-carrying excitations. The Principal Investigator is
working with leading theorist collaborators in the interpretation of the data.
Spin propagation is of interest for application in information technology, and
quantum spin liquids are potentially relevant for quantum information
processing. Foundational knowledge of spin propagation in these systems is
essential for the full realization of their potential. This project incorporates
the research and communications training of two graduate students as well as
undergraduate researchers recruited from Rice and nearby minority-serving
institutions. These individuals are gaining valuable experience with quantum
materials as well as written and oral communications skills, preparing them for
the technological workforce. Results are spread to the scientific community via
publications and conference presentations. The PI is working with Rice K12
teacher training programs, continuing outreach to the public via blogging, and
developing/presenting a lifelong learning course about the physics of materials
through the cooperation of Rice’s Glasscock School for Continuing
Studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.