* 2102227
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Graphical Modeling of Multivariate Functional Data
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lexin Li, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,563.00

Multivariate functional data, where continuous observations are sampled from
multiple processes, are emerging in a wide range of scientific applications. A
central problem in analyzing multivariate functional data is to understand the
interdependency among the functions. This can be formulated as the problem of
graphical modeling of multivariate functions. The majority of existing
solutions, however, focus on random variables, and extension to random functions
is far from trivial. This project is developing a class of novel statistical
methods and associated theory for functional graphical modeling. This research
is timely in that it responds to the growing demand for functional data
analysis, and is expected to advance numerous biological and medical research
areas, including the analyses of brain connectivity networks, gene regulatory
networks, and protein-protein interaction networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is studying three sets of problems: (1) nonparametric functional
graphical modeling, which relaxes the Gaussian distribution or the linear
structural assumptions, and avoids the curse of dimensionality and works for
large graphs; (2) functional directed acyclic graphical modeling, which combines
directed graph and functional graph, and offers a tractable solution for
inferring directional dependency among multivariate functions; and (3)
conditional and dynamic functional graphical modeling, which models graph that
varies continuously with one or multiple external variables such as time. At the
heart of its development is linear-operator-based statistical learning, which
provides a highly flexible and efficient platform to handle massive and complex
functional data. The accompanying estimation algorithms and asymptotic theory
also make useful additions to the toolbox of multiple fields, including
functional data analysis, network and graphical modeling, and statistical
machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.