* 2102662
* Spatial Organization of Ions in Supramolecular Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Samuel Stupp, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 571,266.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Samuel Stupp and Professor Monica Olvera
de la Cruz of Northwestern University will explore nano-sized structures formed
by the assembly of molecules (named amphiphiles) containing two distinct
segments: one that has affinity for water and one that does not mix well with
water. Specifically, the investigators will study how the arrangement of various
species that bear one or more charged species (ions or electrolytes) can be used
to change the structure and function of the nano-sized structures. The building
blocks will be based on peptides, and therefore the findings can illuminate
several biologically important processes. This work is inspired by the natural
functions of cells, including signaling, movement, and ultimately survival, all
of which depend on the tight regulation of ions inside and outside the cell
membrane. The researchers will use a simultaneous experimental and computational
approach to understand how added electrolytes interact with nanomaterials and
how they impact critical cellular functions such as catalysis, energy storage,
and bioactivity. This work is expected to have a broad impact on education as it
is a risky approach that attempts to innovate beyond traditional scientific
inquiries and therefore has a great deal of potential for unexpected
discoveries, a good motivator for early career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research under this study is to
investigate how the presence of ions affects the shape and dimensions of
supramolecular nanostructures based on self-assembling peptide amphiphile
molecules. The work will also probe how the spatial positioning of these ions
within nanostructures and in their immediate environment affects their mobility.
The study is motivated by a recent discovery in the Stupp laboratory, which
surprisingly showed that ion clouds can be engineered around supramolecular
nanostructures and controlled by internal interactions between ionic liquids and
the self-assembling PA molecules. The hypothesis is that large organic ions can
act as dopants that produce denser clouds as electrolyte reservoirs that will
impact in turn on properties such as bioactivity and external control of charge
transport. By varying ionic strength of solutions and ion type, it is expected
that hydration of the supramolecular structures will change as well as polarize
associated water molecules and, in this way, provide for an opportunity to
possibly tune ionic mobility. This work could lead to novel materials and also
have great impact on our understanding of the role of environmental ions in
biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.