* 2102614
* Non-Mean Field Treatments of Surface Chemistry: Incorporating Adsorbate-Adsorbate Interactions into Deterministic Kinetic Theories
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Jeffrey Greeley, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 299,833.00

Jeffrey Greeley of Purdue University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry to study heterogeneous catalysts
with new theoretical methods. Heterogeneous catalysts accelerate the conversion
of chemical species to valuable products, and they underpin a host of
technologically important chemical processes, ranging from production of
plastics to generation of electricity in fuel cells. These catalysts are often
composed of metal nanoparticles, the surfaces of which break and form chemical
bonds in molecules to produce valuable products. Fundamental models of how these
molecular transformations occur have been developed for many chemical reactions
and have greatly enhanced both the understanding of these transformations and
the design of new catalytic materials. However, these models often make
significant approximations in their descriptions of the relevant molecular
processes, including the assumption that reacting molecules and products are
randomly distributed across the catalyst surfaces and do not interact with one
another. The development of improved theoretical descriptions that correct these
approximations and explicitly describe how the reactions change when molecules
interact strongly with one another, is, in turn, the central focus of this
project. The improved models will lead to more accurate descriptions of
heterogeneous catalytic processes and may ultimately facilitate the design of
improved catalysts. For broader impacts, the new capability and software will be
made available to the catalysis community. Outreach and education efforts will
focus on high school students at a very early stage in their academic path, to
encourage the pursuit of STEM studies. PI will make a focused effort to engage
students from diverse and under-represented groups. This activity will be a
continuation of a successful effort by the PI, whereby the students are paired
with the PI and graduate students to pursue tailored research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mean field theories of surface kinetics permit
crucial information about heterogeneous catalytic processes, including the
overall reaction rates, effective activation barriers, and reaction orders, to
be predicted from a combined knowledge of the elementary reaction steps
occurring on a catalyst surface and the rate constants of these elementary
steps. In spite of the power of these theories, however, the mean field
approximation begins to break down under conditions of strong interactions
between surface adsorbates, and there is a need to develop surface kinetic
modeling techniques that directly incorporate non-mean field effects while, at
the same time, preserving the powerful physical and mechanistic insights that
emerge naturally from deterministic mean field descriptions. In this work,
analytical or semi-analytical corrections to mean field expressions for
equilibrium constants and rate constants of elementary reactions will be
developed on square planar and hexagonal catalyst surfaces. These expressions,
which will be based on the Bethe-Peierls approximation to the Cluster Variation
Method, will be used to identify mathematical and conceptual principles that
describe when non-mean field effects will significantly impact surface
catalysis. The resulting formalisms, which will deterministically treat non-mean
field effects while preserving the powerful mechanistic insights that can be
obtained from mean field microkinetic analyses, will be benchmarked on two
classic surface reaction chemistries, the direct and H2-assisted decomposition
of NO and the synthesis or decomposition of ammonia from N2 and
H2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.