* 2102250
* NRI: FND: Customizable Haptic Co-Robots For Training Emergency Surgical Procedures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Ann Majewicz Fey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 11/30/2023
* USD 789,152.00

This National Robotics Initiative (NRI 2.0) project will develop a collaborative
robot (co-robot) system that will enhance the ability of expert physicians to
coach trainees to achieve expert-like performance in complex emergency medical
procedures. The system will consist of wearable sensors, tactile actuators, and
a robotic device that promotes two-way physical collaboration between the mentor
and trainee. The project's three aims are: (1) to develop methods to transform
trainee kinematic and kinetic information into meaningful feedback to the expert
mentor; (2) to optimize haptic guidance cues about proper tool manipulation
technique from the expert to the novice trainee; and (3) to assess the
effectiveness of the collaborative training system through human-user studies.
The project will promote the progress of science and advance the national health
by accelerating the development and use of collaborative robotic systems in
healthcare settings, The tele-mentoring aspect of this project may also enhance
the national defense by developing systems that can train life-saving skills in
remote environments where expert surgeons may not be available. The project also
supports education and broadens participation in engineering through support for
elective courses promoting biomedical innovation and healthcare technology
development and through workshops focused on medical simulation and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
customizable haptic co-robot that enables a remote expert surgeon to coach a
remote trainee to achieve expert-like performance in complex emergency medical
tasks that depend critically on the sense of touch. The project has three aims.
The first develops hardware and software methods to transform real-time trainee
kinematic and kinetic performance data into intuitive haptic cues for the
mentor. The second develops analogous haptic cues for the trainee based on
guidance from the expert about proper tool use kinematics and kinetics. The
third uses human-user studies to assess the collaborative training robot ability
to enhance the learning and retention of three intraoperative surgical skills
(needle insertion, chest tube placement, and suturing). If successful, this
project will lay the groundwork for more effective and ubiquitous co-robotic
training of complex manual skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.