* 2102307
* CAS: Investigations of Monometallic, Bimetallic and Dual-Anion Transition Metal X-ide Water Oxidation Electrocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Charles Mullins, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Charles B. Mullins of the University of Texas-Austin will be studying
materials to facilitate and increase the efficiency of the electrochemical
decomposition of water molecules to make oxygen. This is the most important and
limiting chemical reaction involved in electrochemical water-splitting to
produce hydrogen. Currently hydrogen is heavily used in many industrially
important chemical processes and it is anticipated to play a larger role in
clean energy production in the future. The energy needs of the world will double
over the next ~30 years as the global population increases and underdeveloped
nations modernize. Electrochemical water-splitting will play a substantial role
in clean energy production to serve this need. In addition to the important
science to be uncovered, Mullins and his team will (i) create an animated video
regarding energy for grade 8-12 students to assist in motivating these students
to become more scientifically literate, (ii) involve researchers from
underrepresented groups in this research to broaden participation, and (iii)
communicate the results obtained to the broader scientific community and to the
general public so that the work can have maximal impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Charles B. Mullins and his
research group at the University of Texas-Austin will be studying the
transformation of various types of metal X-ide (e.g., carbides, chalcogenides,
pnictides, and borides) materials into highly active electrocatalysts (i.e.,
metal oxide/(oxy)hydroxide counterparts). In so doing, a key question will be
how the in situ self-oxidation affects the oxygen evolution reaction (OER)
performance-governing factors such as active surface area, electrical
conductivity, incidental iron incorporation, and so forth. The team will also
investigate the water oxidation electrocatalysis of X-ide catalysts which show
no apparent self-oxidation during OER. Generally, these performance governing
factors are complexly intertwined. To deconvolute the factor of interest from
the measured OER activity, Mullins and coworkers will fabricate X-ide films with
well-controlled shape, thickness, stoichiometry, and crystal structure via vapor
deposition of target X-ide components under high vacuum conditions. The as-
obtained films will be probed with many different ex situ characterization
techniques as well as with an array of electrochemical methods. To more deeply
understand model OER systems, Mullins and team will perform in situ measurements
during OER testing, thoroughly undertake physicochemical characterization of
post-OER X-ide materials, and perform computational studies as well. Through
these systematic investigations, the investigators aspire to be able to provide
some universal guidance for designing metal X-ide electrocatalysts, thereby
putting forward protocols that could then potentially find broad application in
the field of energy transduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.