* 2102568
* In Search of an Optimum Reference
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Filipp Furche, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Filipp Furche of the University of California,
Irvine (UCI) aims to develop, implement, evaluate, and apply a new family of
electronic structure methods of computational chemistry to address critical
limitations of current theories. These limitations hamper our ability to predict
and simulate accurately energies and properties in areas such as catalysis, drug
design, atmospheric chemistry, and quantum materials. The ‘optimum reference’
(OR) methods proposed by Furche promise to minimize by design the ‘reference
bias’ of current methods and are expected to extend the scope of electronic
structure calculations to hitherto elusive systems and properties. The methods
developed in this project will be made available to the public through the
Turbomole quantum chemistry software. The program will support education and
workforce readiness through an interdisciplinary program in quantum science at
UCI and a high school outreach program aimed at students who otherwise would
have limited opportunities to participate in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on and aims to generalize previous developments such as orbital
optimization and Brueckner methods, as well as self-consistent random phase
approximation methods. While the development of ever more sophisticated
correlation treatments in quantum chemistry has produced exceedingly accurate
methods for "well behaved" systems, the Achilles' heel of virtually all electron
correlation methods in use today is their unphysical dependence on a reference
state, i.e., a qualitatively accurate, and readily computable approximation to
the physical quantum state of interest. Furche's work aims to develop stable OR
methods guided by four propositions: (i) The OR should minimize the distance to
the physical state of interest in a well-defined metric, (ii) have a well-
defined physical meaning and give rise to a model chemistry, (iii) the total
energy should be stationary at the OR, (iv) the correlation energy as a
functional of the reference must be amenable to explicit, controlled
approximations. The resulting methods will be assessed for their ability to
capture magnetic and spin properties of open-shell d- and f-element compounds
systems that are particularly challenging for available
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.