* 2102192
* CAS: Taming the Reactivity of Base Metal Hydrides Through Bifunctional Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hairong Guan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Hairong Guan of the University of Cincinnati will study molecules with
metal-hydrogen bonds (i.e., metal hydrides) as catalysts for the hydrogenation
or reduction of fatty acid methyl esters, carbon dioxide, and sugar-derived
polyols. These catalytic processes are highly desirable to the chemical industry
that manufactures surfactants used in many consumer products, and converts
renewable materials to fuels and value-added chemicals. This project will focus
on the use of earth-abundant, inexpensive metals such as manganese, iron,
cobalt, nickel, and copper to design such catalysts. To enhance the reactivity
of the metal hydrides and to minimize degradation of the catalysts, ligands that
not only participate in hydrogen transfer but also bind tightly to the metals
will be employed. The project will contribute to the rigorous training of a
diverse group of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students via a number
of programs including the American Chemical Society Project SEED Program, the
NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates program, and the University of
Cincinnatiâ€™s Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) Program. Through this
project, Professor Guan will also develop research-based materials for a
laboratory course that can be used by community colleges or institutions with
limited resources, provide research opportunities to underrepresented minority
students, and enhance student professional development through collaborations
with local chemical companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the
Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Hairong Guan
of the University of Cincinnati will study the strategies of improving the
reactivity of base metal hydrides, which are key intermediates in many
hydrogenation or reduction processes. Bifunctional and strongly chelating
ligands will be designed under the hypothesis that they can deemphasize the
roles played by the metals, participate in two-electron transfer, or suppress
cluster formation. The specific research objectives include the development of
more robust and active hydrogenation catalysts based on iron and nickel, the
design of hydroxycyclopentadienyl complexes of manganese and cobalt as masked
metal hydrides, and the pursuit of phosphine-ligated mononuclear copper
hydrides. In support of the broader impacts of the project, Professor Guan will
actively engage in programs focusing on providing research opportunities to
underrepresented minority students including those from collaborating primarily
undergraduate institutions. Research-based teaching materials will be
disseminated more broadly in the chemical education literature and to other
institutions. Active collaborations with local companies will be geared toward
enhancing student problem-solving skills in an industrial
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.