* 2102552
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Macrocyclic and Supramolecular Pincer Catalysts Using Ruthenium and First Row Metals for Carbon Dioxide Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Charles Edwin Webster, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 182,909.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Elizabeth T. Papish of The University of Alabama, Jared H. Delcamp of The
University of Mississippi, and Charles Edwin Webster of Mississippi State
University will study the transformation of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide
into synthetic fuels with new metal catalysts of novel structure. Envisioning a
sunlight-driven energy infrastructure in our future requires efficient and
robust catalysts that can power artificial photochemically driven reactions for
fuel production. Using sunlight to create fuels as stored chemical energy
available on demand is attractive relative to our current fossil fuel-reliant
infrastructure. Nonetheless, this vision requires fast, durable, and selective
catalysts that would ideally utilize readily available and affordable metals
where feasible. The current lack of such catalysts represents a significant gap
in the current knowledge base. The investigators will design new catalysts for
carbon dioxide reduction to fuels with innovative structures previously
untested. They will work on controlling and understanding carbon dioxide
reduction through design of robust and highly active catalysts via synthetic,
mechanistic, and computational studies. These studies can elucidate the factors
that impact catalysis and eventually lead to the production of solar fuels from
a greenhouse gas in a carbon neutral fashion. The results of this research are
to be shared broadly, and this project is expected to help train a diverse group
of 10-15 undergraduate and graduate students over the project period. The
investigators will visit local schools for outreach events and host high school
students in their research laboratories. In addition, undergraduate students
will perform catalytic reactions in a teaching lab setting, and the results will
be shared with the community, to offer educational experiences along with
experiment verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Elizabeth T. Papish of
The University of Alabama, and her collaborators, Jared H. Delcamp of The
University of Mississippi, and Charles Edwin Webster of Mississippi State
University, will study carbon dioxide reduction with new metal catalysts
containing first row transition metals and macrocyclic ligands. More efficient,
robust, and selective catalysts are needed for artificial photochemical schemes
aimed at converting carbon dioxide to fuels or fuel precursors. Using prior
experience in the synthesis and testing of efficient self-sensitized catalysts
that retain activity in water, the collaborative team will work on designing new
robust catalysts using two strategies: active site isolation via use of a
macrocyclic pincer ligand, and low-coordinate metal complexes via the use of
low-valent metals. Synthetic, mechanistic, and computational studies will be
directed toward three goals: (1) to increase the understanding of CNC-pincer
ligated first-row metal catalysts, (2) to expand the knowledge of under-explored
supramolecular catalysts with iridium photosensitizers, and (3) to understand
the behavior of homogeneous catalysts linked to semiconductor electrodes. The
long-term goal is to move the field of molecular catalyst design closer to a
durable, earth-abundant metal-based catalyst system for the photocatalytic
reduction of carbon dioxide coupled to water splitting in a solar powered photo-
electrochemical cell using the knowledge gained in the above tasks. Applying
these ideas systematically to first-row metals is still largely uncharted
territory, with the potential payoff being understanding how to make solar fuels
with first row-metal complexes. The scientific results will be communicated
through publications, presentations, and patents; the broader impacts will
include outreach events and catalysis research experiments in an undergraduate
teaching laboratory setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.