* 2102669
* CAS: Electrosynthesis via Electrochemical Hydrogen Permeation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Yogesh Surendranath, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Yogesh Surendranath of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is studying how
to use renewable electricity to drive the production of value-added fuels and
chemicals. Renewable energy sources such as solar and wind are poised to play an
increasing role in meeting future demand for fuels and chemicals in a
sustainable manner. Currently, technologies for converting electrical energy
into fuels and chemicals are inefficient and often require complicated
separation and processing steps. This project aims to develop new integrated
strategies for driving chemical transformations with renewable electricity by
intimately coupling catalysis and separations. The work will allow graduate and
undergraduate students to learn the modern techniques of renewable energy
science and collaborate to discover new catalysts and materials. The research
work will also be integrated with a broad-based educational outreach effort that
will employ a rhetoric-based framework to advance interactive learning,
professional communication, and critical discourse in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program
in the Division of Chemistry, Yogesh Surendranath of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology is studying how to use renewable electricity to drive the
synthesis of value-added fuels and chemicals. Electrosynthetic reduction
reactions can be bifurcated into electrochemical proton-coupled electron
transfer steps to generate reactive surface H-atoms that then hydrogenate
substrates via coupled chemical reactions. In conventional electrocatalysts, the
chemical and electrochemical steps are co-localized to the same interface
preventing independent control of each. This proposal advances a new paradigm
for electrocatalysis in which the reaction environment of bond activation can be
completely decoupled from that of electrochemical charge separation. Independent
optimization of each will expose fundamentally new reactivity in
electrocatalysis that could form the bedrock of new electrosynthetic
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.