* 2102231
* New Catalytic Transformations for the Synthesis of Alkenes and Organoboron Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Gojko Lalic, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Gojko Lalic of the University of Washington is studying new reactions for the
synthesis of organic molecules. The goal of this research is to provide more
efficient access to complex molecules used in preparation of fine chemicals and
pharmaceuticals. The proposed new reactions use common starting materials and
transform them into more valuable compounds, utilizing catalysis by earth-
abundant metals, copper and nickel, and with attention to developing efficient
catalytic processes. Dr. Lalic and his group have built a number of outreach
activities around their research. They have established a strong working
relationship with their local community, by reaching out to elementary and high
school students to promote awareness of and exposure to science and technology.
A wide range of activities, including regular participation in science classes
at local high schools, are designed to reach students underrepresented in
science and promote careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will explore two
new classes of organic reactions. The first class will provide a general
strategy for regio- and diastereoselective synthesis of trisubstituted alkenes.
The approach is based on the use of a simple directing group to control
regioselectivity in the hydroalkylation of disubstituted alkynes. The second
class of reactions will explore new strategies for the synthesis and the
activation of borate complexes. Most previous studies of borate complexes have
relied on stoichiometric reactions of organometallic reagents to access the
borate complexes. Proposed are new catalytic methods for borate synthesis from
simple organoboranes and a variety of unsaturated compounds. The proposed
research will also explore transformations in which a metal catalyst both
promotes the formation of the borate complex and activates it for a subsequent
reaction. In addition to the development of new synthetic methods, the Lalic
team seeks to provide new insight into the fundamental reactivity of
organometallic complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.