* 2102591
* Planetesimal formation, giant planet migration, and stellar accretion in our solar system and beyond
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Graham Edwards, Edwards, Graham Harper
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Graham Edwards is awarded an NSF Astronomy and
Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct a program of research and
education at Dartmouth College. Edwards will perform a computational statistical
study of meteorite chemical composition to elucidate planetary formation
processes in the early Solar System. Results from this study will refine our
understanding of the history of the Solar System and inform models of extrasolar
systems. For the education component of this project, Edwards will develop a
museum outreach program to explore how scientists use meteorites to study Solar
System history and planet formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
extract meteorite chemical compositions from the largest centralized collection
of publicly available meteorite data to study (1) relationships between
meteorites and their constituent components, (2) timescales of giant planet
migration, and (3) the role of the protoplanetary disk in shaping the solar
composition. This statistical study will test whether bulk chemical clustering
improves upon standard methods of grouping meteorites into families and whether
constituent chondrites or chondrite matrices formed from a shared reservoir of
material. The project will also test whether the deficit of refractory elements
in the solar photosphere is due to their preferential incorporation in
protoplanetary bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.