* 2102472
* Harnessing the Reactivity of Acceptor-Acceptor Diazo-Derived Metal Carbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Stefan France, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Stefan France of Georgia Tech is studying the properties of an important class
of synthetic building blocks called acceptor-acceptor carbenes to determine how
to tune their reactivity to achieve predictable and controllable new bond
connections for the synthesis of value-added compounds. While other types of
carbenes with greater electron-density and stability have been carefully studied
with a variety of catalysts to support many elegant syntheses, acceptor-acceptor
carbenes have lagged behind. Dr. France and his research team are using a
combined experimental and computational approach to address this limitation by
compiling fundamental data to understand how to control and predict the
reactivity of acceptor-acceptor carbenes in synthetic processes. Different
catalysts are also being investigated to achieve different reactivity patterns
from the same carbene building blocks. These studies are helping to improve the
synthesis and preparation of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals by examining a
long-standing problem in this area of synthetic chemistry. Simultaneously, these
activities are providing interdisciplinary training for a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students at Georgia Tech and Clark Atlanta University
(an HBCU) through a computational collaboration with Dr. Seyhan Salman. Dr.
France is also participating in a program to assist graduate students with
professional development and is committed to addressing diversity issues through
participation in a variety of campus initiatives to improve recruiting and
hiring, as well as student retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acceptor-acceptor
metal carbenes have been underutilized in intermolecular C-H functionalization
chemistry due to a lack of understanding of their reactivity and stability
properties. Stefan France and his research group at Georgia Tech are combining
experimental approaches, and collaborative computational efforts in
collaboration with Seyhan Salman at Clark Atlanta University, to understand,
parametrize, and predict substrate- and catalyst-control for acceptor-acceptor
carbene C(sp3)-H insertion. In addition, Dr. France and his research team are
exploring new divergent reactivity patterns of acceptor-acceptor carbenes. This
project will serve as a launching pad into new chemical space and for developing
enabling technologies to improve access to desirable target molecules. These
activities also will provide training to both graduate and undergraduate
students on the interplay between computational and experimental organic
chemistry of relevance to catalytic organometallic
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.