* 2102497
* Collaborative Research: CAS: Graphite-Conjugated Macrocycle Electrocatalysts for Nitrate Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Elena Jakubikova, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 293,835.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Yulia Pushkar of Purdue University, Professor Jeremy Smith of Indiana
University and Associate Professor Elena Jakubikova of North Carolina State
University are studying catalysts that will use electrical energy for the
conversion of aqueous nitrate to useful or benign products such as ammonia.
Nitrate is a water pollutant that occurs largely as a result of agricultural
fertilizer use. The proposed research takes a first step to addressing this
problem through the development of robust and efficient electrocatalysts that to
convert nitrate to desirable compounds via reductive chemistry. Scientific
insights gained through these studies will likely impact the development of
other electrocatalysts for other useful electrochemical conversions. Outreach
activities include a partnership with the public radio program “A Moment of
Science” and the development of YouTube videos on the nitrogen
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines the expertise of three
research groups in synthetic, electrochemical, spectroscopic, and computational
studies on the development of environmentally relevant electrocatalysts. A
modular class of graphite-conjugated macrocyclic complexes will be characterized
by a range of physical methods, including synchrotron-based X-ray spectroscopy.
Together with experimentally calibrated electronic structure calculations, these
data will provide information on the coordination environment, structure, and
electron configuration of the metal ion. Redox properties will be characterized
by electrochemical measurements, with computational methods providing detailed
insights into the electronic structures of different oxidation states. In
addition to standard electrochemical and computational methods for mechanistic
interrogation, in situ spectroscopic characterization is expected to provide
detailed information on the nature of intermediates in the catalytic cycle.
Mechanistic investigations into materials that are selective for nitrate
reduction will provide insight that is expected to aid in the rational design of
catalysts having improved activity. Outreach activities are to including a
partnership with a public radio broadcast and the development of publicly
accessible educational videos are expected to reach a wide audience and inform
the public broadly about electrocatalysis and its utility in developing
environmentally beneficial reductive nitrogen
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.