* 2102082
* Collaborative Research: Structure Sensitive Surface Chemistry - Small Molecule Activation and Spillover
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Andrew Gellman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2024
* USD 370,605.00

In this collaborative research project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics
and Mechanisms (CSDM-A) program of the National Science Foundationâ€™s Chemistry
Division, Professors Andrew Gellman (Carnegie Mellon University) and Charles
Sykes (Tufts University) are studying the influence of the atomistic structure
of metal surfaces on the rates of catalytically relevant surface reactions. It
is well known that the rates and selectivities of chemical reactions occurring
on metal surfaces are determined by catalyst surface structure. Ideally, the
design of catalysts would identify surface structures that optimize the yield of
desired products. However, it is experimentally challenging to map reactivity
comprehensively across the many possible structures of a metal surface. Gellman
and Sykes have developed a complementary set of tools to measure surface
reaction kinetics and to image atomistic surface structure across hundreds of
different surface orientations concurrently. These methods will be used to
generate datasets that will be used by catalyst developers to design new and
improved catalytic materials. Students working on this project are gaining
valuable skills in the fields of surface chemistry, x-ray spectroscopy and
scanning probe microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gellman and Sykes are using
spherically curved Cu and Ag single crystals that expose hundreds of different
Cu(hkl) and Ag(hkl) surfaces as sample libraries for the study of surface
structure and reactivity. Gellman is using spatially resolved x-ray
photoemission spectroscopy to measure the rates of isothermal adsorption and
activation of small molecules such as O2, CO2 and CH3CH2OH on hundreds of
different Cu(hkl) and Ag(hkl) surfaces in order to identify the most active
surface orientations and the trends correlating reactivity with surface
structure. Sykes is studying the structures of these surfaces before and after
adsorption using scanning tunneling microscopy. In addition, Gellman and Sykes
are conducting similar measurements on surfaces modified by isolated atoms of
metals such as Ni, Pd, and Pt to create single atom alloy catalysts with well-
defined surface structures. This work will inform efforts to develop predictive
theoretical models for understanding structure sensitive catalytic surface
chemistry. This project also tests our current understanding of the mechanism of
spillover in catalysis. Ultimately, this project is expected to advance our
collective understanding of catalysis science and our ability to design new or
improve catalytic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.