* 2102963
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Dynamic Pricing and Procurement for Distributed Networked Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mohammadhassan Hajiesmaili, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,998.00

Many industries today feature some kind of networked platform, where consumers
may purchase resources from a network of providers. For example, mobile edge
users can form a network and rent their compute resources to consumers. In order
for these emerging businesses to survive and grow, however, they should ensure
that their distributed resources are priced properly and made available in the
proper amounts to users. Otherwise, some providers may find themselves
overloaded with users and unable to serve their demands. This collaborative
project between Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and the University of
Massachusetts Amherst (UMass) seeks to design foundational pricing, procurement,
and scheduling policies that ensure that users are distributed well across the
platform and apply these policies to the emerging application of edge
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimal dynamic pricing schemes can signal to
users which providers have resources available, while conversely dynamic
procurement allows networked providers to adjust their resources to user
demands. Scheduling schemes complement pricing and procurement solutions by
leveraging time flexibility in user demands to best allocate resources to users.
While several works have separately considered optimal pricing and scheduling
policies for networked platforms, this project is the first to develop
foundational theories for the joint formulation of dynamic pricing/procurement
and scheduling under uncertainty. This project will develop pricing,
procurement, and scheduling algorithms with theoretical performance guarantees;
combine these solutions with learning-based approaches to manage tradeoffs
between robustness and performance; and validate these solutions in edge
computing scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful development of the proposed
pricing, procurement, and scheduling solutions will make the business of edge
computing more profitable and competitive. Providers may gain insights into how
to best price their resources, while users may gain flexibility that helps lower
the cost of fulfilling their demands. Further, the theoretical tools developed
will make foundational contributions to online optimization and learning
research. In addition to these technical broader impacts, the project will
support several education and outreach activities. These will include
undergraduate research projects, integration of the research findings into
courses at the participating institutions, and presentations and interactive
sessions at workshops aimed at broadening participation in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will be maintained
in an online repository to be hosted by either UMass or CMU. These are expected
to include technical reports of the research findings, software prototypes of
the algorithms designed, and datasets and experimental results collected for the
edge computing experiments. The material in the repository will remain available
for at least two years after the project concludes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.