* 2102940
* SHF: Small: PMChecker: Tool Support for Crash-Consistent Persistent Memory Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Brian Demsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,916.00

The commercial availability of new persistent-memory technologies such as
Intel's Optane memory promises to transform how programs store and manipulate
data. A major challenge in realizing the benefits of persistent memory is
ensuring that software can survive system crashes without corrupting data that
is stored in persistent memory. Simply directly testing persistent-memory
software is not feasible: exposing persistency bugs requires a combination of a
precisely timed power failure or crash and the correct cache state. The
project’s novelties are (1) the development of a new approach to model-checking
persistent-memory programs that can find persistency bugs and scale to real
world code, (2) the development of formal correctness models that can ensure
that code correctly persists data structures, (3) the development of a tool that
can identify persistency bugs in real world code, and (4) the development of a
tool that can automatically generate the necessary instructions to persist data.
The project’s impacts are that it is creating tools that help industry build
reliable software that takes advantage of emerging persistent memory
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops appropriate notions of
correctness for persistent-memory programs borrowing ideas from work in
concurrent data structures. These notions are sufficiently strong to ensure that
persistent-memory programs correctly flush data from caches to persistent
memory. The project develops a model checker that includes an automated analysis
to check persistent-memory programs with respect to these correctness notions.
This analysis can help developers both find silent bugs in persistent-memory
programs and to localize a bug to a specific region of code. Finally, the
project builds on this analysis to enable the automated synthesis of flush
operations to assist developers in creating crash-consistent software for
persistent memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.