* 2102830
* EAGER: A high-throughput in vivo method for measuring transcription factor-DNA interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Scott Rifkin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Interactions between proteins called transcription factors and DNA lie at the
very heart of how a cell functions. These interactions are specific and physical
- proteins and DNA molecules physically interact and if a particular protein and
a DNA sequence are compatible then the interaction persists long enough for
complex molecular machinery to be recruited to that location to make new
proteins. Measuring this interaction is a crucial component in efforts to
understand disease, genetically engineer organisms, predict evolution, and
decipher how development is regulated. This project will develop a new method
for measuring and analyzing these protein-DNA interactions at a massive scale,
examining millions of interactions between DNA variants and protein variants all
at once in a single experiment. This method uses resources that are widely
available and so it should make these kinds of measurements feasible for great
number of researchers, students, and trainees, including those at institutions
with modest research infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basis of this
project is development and testing of a new platform for measuring protein-DNA
interactions. The assay is designed so that new proteins or stretches of DNA can
easily be plugged into the platform, quickly producing enormous libraries of
protein-DNA variants for analysis. Unlike existing technologies that are used to
measure these interactions, this assay simplifies the process of protein
production so that it is possible to test whether environmental conditions or
even the presence of other proteins change the strength of the binding. As a
demonstration of its potential, the method will confirm and extend previous
studies of how polymorphisms in human HoxD13 change how well it binds to its
target binding sites, and it will be used to explore how the binding preferences
of a group of closely related and co-expressed GATA-type transcription factors
diversified during the evolution of the Caenorhabditis
genus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.