* 2102993
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--High-Resolution Reconstruction of Last Millennium North American Arctic Temperatures Using Quantitative Wood Anatomy
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Kevin Anchukaitis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 471,704.00

The research team aims to use quantitative wood anatomy to develop long high-
resolution proxy records of past temperature from the Arctic North American
tree-line and apply these to environmental reconstructions over the last
millennium. The resulting high precision intra-annual information available from
quantitative wood anatomy may aid researchers to specifically target seasonal
windows of proxy climate sensitivity to better resolve both interannual climate
variability and recent trends and precisely identify the timing of extreme
events, including the cooling following volcanic eruptions. The array of
seasonal information available from these records will be used within a data
assimilation framework to produce enhanced climate field reconstructions of
temperatures and associated atmospheric circulation fields over the last
millennium for high latitude North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
Broader Impacts include promoting the career of a female dendroclimatology
doctoral student, engaging STEM K-12 teachers in fieldwork, thoughtful
engagement with indigenous communities in the study region, and improved
outreach materials at the Tree Ring lab in AZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.