* 2102437
* Investigation of Exciton-exciton and Biexcitonic Interactions in Nanomaterials using Explicitly- correlated Quasiparticle Kernel Method
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Arindam Chakraborty, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 439,975.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Arindam Chakraborty of Syracuse University
will investigate a specific class of quantum molecular interactions in
nanomaterials, specifically exciton-exciton and bi-excitonic states. Using a new
methodology to reduce the computational costs for charactering these
interactions, Dr. Chakraborty and his group will study the fundamental processes
governing these light-matter interactions as well as the resulting excited
states generated in nanomaterials. These exotic excited states are known
frontrunners for critically important technological advances in areas such as
solar energy conversion and storage, quantum computing and quantum information
processing, and the development of high-speed nano-electronics, and of ultra-
small bright light sources such as nano-lasers. Realization of the full
potential of these nanomaterials requires the ability to judiciously control the
shape, size, and chemical functionalization of nanoparticles in order to achieve
desired, precise chemical and physical properties appropriate for these
applications. The first principle-based quantum chemical calculations that
Chakraborty and his team are conducting are aimed at reaching this level of
predictive power and control. These research activities will foster workforce
development in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and in
the training of undergraduate and graduate students in cloud-based scientific
computing, curation and management of large-scale data, and in the computer-
assisted discovery of novel nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The real-space
explicitly-correlated quasiparticle kernel approach currently being developed in
the Chakraborty group aims to addresse the prohibitively high computational
effort associated with the study of large nanoparticles. Specifically, ground
electronic structure calculations will be performed using atom-centered pseudo-
potentials and electronically excited states will be described utilizing a
quasi-particle representation with an effective electron-hole Hamiltonian. Many-
body quantum mechanical correlation effects are included in the calculations by
employing a real-space formalism and using an explicitly correlated frequency-
dependent electron-hole interaction kernel operator. The method developed is
being used to answer questions about coupling between bright and dark excitonic
states, as well as effects of shape anisotropy, size distribution, lifetime of
excited states, and temperature of bi-exciton stability. The findings of these
computational studies will likely inform the design and enable the discovery of
novel materials and help to chart the course for follow-on exploratory research
in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.