* 2102480
* Strategy-Guided Syntheses of Complex Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Christopher Vanderwal, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Chemistry
Division of NSF, Professor Christopher D. Vanderwal of the Department of
Chemistry at UC Irvine (UCI) is developing innovative approaches for the
assembly of structurally complex naturally occurring molecules. The underlying
theme of the work is the strategic use of readily available molecular building
blocks to arrive at the complex architectures of the targeted natural products
in as few chemical operations as possible. In so doing, existing chemical
methods will be pushed to their limits by their use in very challenging
contexts, and new strategies for rapidly building complicated molecular
architectures are expected to be uncovered. The results of these studies will
positively impact the many areas of applied science that benefit from chemical
synthesis, including pharmaceutical development and materials science. This
grant will also permit outreach activities to middle school students from
underserved communities to engage in scientific experiments on-campus, and
simultaneously learn about the college experience. The Vanderwal group will
further engage in the mentorship of local community college students and enable
them to have their first laboratory research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The core of these research studies lie in the development of several
strategies for the rapid assembly of the complex molecular architectures of
several interesting natural products. First, the complex polycyclic alkaloid
arcutinidine, which has been synthesized via lengthy sequences by other
chemists, will be targeted via a concise and highly convergent design that seeks
to unite two equally complex pieces via a short multiple-bond-forming sequence.
Second, the dihydro-beta-agarofurans—a group of over 500 stereochemically
complex, highly oxygenated terpenoids with many interesting biological
properties—will be assembled in an efficient manner starting from a highly
oxidized B-ring, which itself will be accessed via novel applications of either
stereoselective benzene reductions or asymmetric Diels–Alder chemistry. Finally,
the potent and selective anti-pancreatic-tumor agent aleutianamine will be
synthesized by a novel intramolecular cycloaddition reaction, which will also
drive the development of new reactivity. The broader impacts of this work
include the exceptional research training for undergraduate and graduate
students. This grant also supports the UCI-LEAPS program that brings in local
middle school students for day-long experiences in university chemistry and
physics laboratories, and the UC-SCC program that supports the internship of
local community college students in chemistry labs at
UCI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.