* 2102405
* Streamers: Funneling Material from Envelopes to the Youngest Planet-forming Disks
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Dominique Segura-Cox, Segura-Cox              Dominique      M
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Dominique Segura-Cox is awarded an NSF Astronomy and
Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct a program of research and
education at the University of Texas. Segura-Cox will observationally explore
the properties of “streamers” – long, thin funnels connecting material between
the natal envelopes and disks of young protostars – and compare the observations
with simulations of mass accretion in protostars. Results from this study will
allow astronomers to understand how material is accreted onto protostars and
what role streamers play in the early stages of star and planet formation. For
the education component of this project, Segura-Cox will develop an astronomy-
themed seminar series for middle school and high school teachers in rural and
socioeconomically disadvantaged communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will conduct radio interferometric observations of asymmetric streamers to study
their chemical composition, occurrence, and from how far away they accrete
material into planet-forming disks. By measuring the chemical composition of the
streamers and comparing it to exoplanet compositions, the likelihood of streamer
material being directly incorporated into planets will be assessed. Using
ongoing surveys, the proportion of protostars with streamers will be
systematically determined to assess whether streamers are a common mass-
accretion pathway for planet-forming disks. Using follow-up observations, the
full extent of streamers from clouds to disks will be determined. Comparing
observations with simulations will permit determination of mass infall rates,
magnetic field strengths, and streamer chemical evolution with
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.