* 2102656
* Direct Calculation of Activation Energies and Entropies for Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ward Thompson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 464,950.00

Ward Thompson of the University of Kansas is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop and apply methods for determining how the rates of
dynamical processes in chemistry change with temperature. The effect of
temperature gives insight into the factors that determine the rate of a chemical
transformation. The newly developed methods will provide a way to decompose
these on a molecule-by-molecule basis. The influences of the chemical
composition and entropy on chemical timescales will also be examined. The
proposed methods will be tested in investigations of dynamics in three chemical
systems relevant to materials and biology: Water confined in nanoscale amorphous
silica pores, water in the hydration shell of proteins, and water molecules
participating in and associating with hydrogen-bonded supramolecular assemblies.
The approaches developed in the proposed work will provide new insight into
these problems by addressing important open questions about the energetic and
entropic driving forces for the dynamics. The Thompson group will also create
new course materials that improve student understanding of, and appreciation
for, dynamics in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Thompson group will develop
and apply theoretical methods for directly calculating activation energies and
entropies for dynamical processes important in chemistry. Methods will be
investigated for 1) determining the molecule-by-molecule contributions to the
activation energy to yield detailed mechanistic insight into the underlying
dynamics; 2) directly determining the composition dependence of dynamical
timescales; 3) the rigorous, direct calculation of the activation entropy along
with new molecular-level insight. These approaches are based on evaluating
derivatives with respect to temperature (and other thermodynamic variables) of
the time correlation functions from which dynamical timescales, such as rate
constants or diffusion coefficients, can be obtained. These derivatives are
themselves time correlation functions and can be evaluated straightforwardly
from the same molecular dynamics simulations. In this way, an activation energy
or entropy that is normally obtained from calculations at multiple temperatures
through an Arrhenius analysis can be determined from simulations at a single
temperature. A key advantage is that this approach enables a rigorous
decomposition of the activation energy or entropy into contributions from the
interactions and motions present in the system, providing otherwise unavailable
physical insight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.