* 2102137
* Synchronization Dynamics in Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Kenneth Showalter, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 580,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A Program
(CSDM-A) of the Chemistry Division, Kenneth Showalter and Mark Tinsley and
coworkers from West Virginia University will study complex dynamical behavior in
chemical systems to gain insights into new types of dynamical behavior in
manufactured and living systems. Developing an understanding of such behavior in
experimental studies facilitates the development of mathematical model
descriptions that are relevant to the behavior of certain living organisms as
well as synthetic dynamical systems such as computer networks. Research on new
states of synchronization and collective behavior will provide a better
understanding of dynamical behaviors pervasive in living systems. The students
engaged in this research project are gaining valuable experience in experimental
and computational methods for the investigation of dynamical behavior of
chemical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networks of coupled chemical oscillators
will be investigated in laboratory experiments and computational simulations.
Chemical oscillators exhibit relaxation oscillations similar to the oscillatory
dynamics of many cellular systems such as neurons and heart cells. Coupled
oscillators therefore offer an ideal platform for investigating biologically
relevant dynamics. An example to be investigated here is relay synchronization,
in which oscillators in a star network synchronize through a hub oscillator that
does not synchronize. This is much like the distal communication of neurons that
have seemingly unaffected neurons between them. The Showalter/Tinsley team will
also investigate extreme events, in which coupled oscillators undergo a large
amplitude oscillation after remaining inactive for unpredictably long time
spans. Studies of relay synchronization in multiplex networks, in which complex
dynamics is exhibited in layers of coupled oscillators, will be carried out.
These multiplex networks are known to exhibit chimera and solitary states, where
asynchronous or single oscillators exist in a population of otherwise
synchronized oscillators. Recent studies of time-multiplexing show that a single
oscillator can replicate to a network of identical oscillators. The team will
investigate time-multiplexing to gain insight into the dynamics of populations
of identical chemical oscillators, in which modes of synchronization are
unaffected by heterogeneity. Finally, the research team will endeavor to develop
more robust discrete photochemical oscillators by employing catalyst-loaded
tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) beads to significantly increase the length of
experiments and decrease drift in dynamical behavior. The broader impacts of
this work include potential societal benefits from an increased understanding of
cellular interactions in biological systems by detailed studies of coupled
chemical oscillators, systems that share important dynamical features with
cellular systems. This project will provide for the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in experimental and computational methods, and will
engage them in the development of computer-interfaced
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.