* 2102953
* RESEACH-PGR: Genomics of the Perennial/Annual Dichotomy in the Grass Tribe Triticeae
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jan Dvorak, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

The ability to regrow new tillers from the crown after a cycle of sexual
reproduction is the hallmark of perennial bunchgrasses. In contrast, the entire
plant senesces after a single sexual reproductive cycle and the next generation
is established from seeds in annual grasses. Since the cultivation of annual
grasses, such as wheat, barley, oats, rice, and maize, requires tilling of soil
each season, which has numerous detrimental effects on the environment including
release of heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere, it would be desirable to
replace annual cereals with perennial forms in applications in which it makes
economic sense. Based on this rationale, the goal of this project is to discover
genes controlling the perennial growth in tall wheatgrass (Lophopyrum
elongatum), which is closely related to wheat and can be used to create hybrid
wheat-wheatgrass plants. To make this study possible, the tall wheatgrass genome
will be sequenced. Expression of genes present in the genome of tall wheatgrass
will then be compared with that of wheat during one reproductive cycle to
identify genes controlling perennial growth. Finally, gene expression in genetic
stocks where each tall wheatgrass chromosome has been individually incorporated
into the wheat genome will be analyzed to identify genes playing the central
role in bringing about perennial growth in tall wheatgrass. All project outcomes
will be freely and publicly accessible through various websites and long term
repositories. The knowledge and materials developed in this project will be used
in the future to isolate these genes and to deploy them in breeding perennial
forms of wheat and other cereals, in order to reduce the impact of agriculture
on climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Post-sexual cycle regrowth (PSCR) is a
developmental marker for the polycarpic life history (PLH) in the perennial
wheatgrasses of the genus Lophopyrum (tribe Triticeae, Poaceae) that show a
caespitose or dense clumped/tufted growth habit. PSCR is absent from wheat, an
annual with a monocarpic life history (MLH). The goal of this project is to
discover key genes for perennial growth by analyzing gene expression in an
octoploid amphiploid from the cross hexaploid (2n=42) bread wheat cv. Chinese
Spring (CS) × diploid (2n=14) L. elongatum and in wheat. Each L. elongatum
chromosome was individually added to the CS genome and each L. elongatum
chromosome was individually substituted for its CS homoeologues. The L.
elongatum genome present in the octoploid amphiploid will be sequenced and genes
will be annotated. Gene expression will be compared with that in CS across one
reproductive cycle including PSCR. Gene expression in the disomic substitution
lines will be compared to identify genes with critical role for the expression
of PSCR in the L. elongatum genome. Materials developed from prior NSF support
will be used in exploratory research aiming at broadening the societal impact of
this project. Since the cultivation of annual grasses is accompanied by
undesirable ecological consequences, including poor carbon sequestration in soil
and release of heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere, the developed knowledge
will be practically important for future breeding of perennial forms of annual
wheat, oats, and other cereals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.