* 2102404
* Collaborative Research: New Approaches to Narrow-Band Electrochromics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Seth Marder, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 09/30/2021
* USD 360,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanism B
Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Electronic and Photonic Materials
program in the Division of Materials Research, Professors Seth Marder at Georgia
Tech and Colleen Scott at Mississippi State University are developing new
approaches to molecules that can be reversibly switched between vividly colored
and colorless states using an electrical stimulus. Such materials may have
applications in displays, “smart windows”, eye and sensor protection, and
optical communications. As well as potentially impacting academic and industrial
efforts relating to these applications, this work will also lead to new
knowledge relating to the coupling of bond breaking/formation and electron-
transfer processes. Further broader impacts will result from the training of
students in chemical synthesis and characterization, and in electrochemical and
optical characterization of materials, as well as through their ongoing
activities relating to broadening participation, including mentoring minority
students and early career faculty, and engaging in outreach to K-12 classrooms.

While many materials are electrochromic, very few are switchable between
essentially colorless and vividly colored states, as required for high-contrast
displays and some photonic applications. The proposed work involves covalent
linking of a metallocene “electrophore” and a chromophore based on a rhodamine
or a related structure that can be switched between a colorless ring-closed form
and a ring-opened form that is vividly colored due to a high-absorptivity narrow
absorption band. In contrast to many other electrochromic systems, the
electrochemical and optical properties can be independently tuned and optimized.
The Marder and Scott research groups will explore a variety of alternative
approaches in which the one-electron oxidation of ferrocene to ferrocenium (both
of which are very weakly absorbing relative to the open forms of the
chromophores), or the two-electron oxidation of a ruthenocene derivative, is
coupled to ring-opening or closing of the dye so that the dyes are either
anodically (i.e. oxidatively) or cathodically (i.e. reductively) coloring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.