* 2102493
* Borylative Heterocyclization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Suzanne Blum, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2024
* USD 512,891.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Suzanne A. Blum of the University of California, Irvine,
will work with graduate students to design new chemical reactions that make
molecules containing boron. These new molecules with boron are important for
applications in drug discovery and the construction of the next generation of
advanced materials. In this research, new chemical methods will be developed,
which insert boron at positions in molecules that are not currently possible.
Concurrently, fundamental knowledge will be gained about how to manipulate
chemical reactions to insert boron at desirable, but currently unobtainable,
positions in molecules. The fundamental knowledge thereby accrued will likely
contribute to chemical reaction development with boron well beyond this research
project. Additional broader impacts and societal benefits will be achieved
through the creation of a Careers in Teaching seminar and roundtable series.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Blum will work with graduate students to develop
new boron/element addition reactions. The products arising from these reactions
will be borylated organic building blocks that are useful for drug discovery and
materials synthesis. This chemistry is directed at the addition of boron/oxygen,
boron/nitrogen, and boron/sulfur to carbon–carbon bonds through borylative
heterocyclization reactions. Concurrent mechanistic studies are expected to
generate fundamental knowledge about the reactivity of intermediates in these
transformations that is suitable for developing reaction design. These studies
will bring together the diverse expertise of Professor Blum’s laboratory in
organic synthesis, organometallic chemistry, mechanistic investigation, and
reaction development to address these challenging scientific experiments. The
expansion of the Professor Blum’s successful future faculty teacher training
program at the University of California, Irvine (UCI) forms an additional
broader impact for society. The creation of a Careers in Teaching Symposium will
be uniquely enabled by this program and it will address an otherwise unmet need
for the professional development of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars
at UCI. Specifically, a seminar and roundtable series will provide graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars with networking, education, and mentorship
opportunities, including focused opportunities for participation of
traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.