* 2102817
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Social Interaction, Community Formation, and Interaction in Borderlands
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Emily Jones, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 30,300.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines how societies living on the
edges of more complexly organized groups engage with the material culture of
these groups and, by extension, with the groups themselves. Around the globe,
the expansion of complex societies into adjacent peripheral areas has resulted
in substantial, long-term impacts through processes such as colonization and
globalization. Previous research has examined these processes through a focus on
how cultural cores engage with adjacent areas. Yet, choices by inhabitants
within these peripheral areas on how to interact with one or more cultural cores
may provide key insights into identity formation in borderland regions. By
understanding how past borderland groups engaged materially with cultural cores,
this project contributes to ongoing discussions of the relationship between
social identity and cultural heritage in borderland regions. In addition to
training a doctoral student, the project will improve the display of
archaeological materials at several institutions along in the borderlands in the
Southwest and will contribute to the education of contemporary inhabitants and
culturally affiliated Indigenous communities in the area. This project will
generate data of interest to archaeologists, museums, and local communities and
will also provide innovative comparative methods and improve existing
theoretical approaches to understanding edge regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research investigates the processes of cross-cultural interaction in a
peripheral intermediate society by focusing on how settlements in the periphery
engaged with several cultural cores. The data for this project comes from ten
excavated village sites and additional surveyed sites in a borderland region.
Using physical and geochemical analysis of ceramic artifacts, radiocarbon
dating, and settlement-based architectural and mortuary analyses, the
researchers will evaluate four different models of edge regions and assess
changes over time in the study area. They will also employ Bayesian statistical
modeling to improve the radiocarbon dates and establish a robust chronology for
individual sites in the area to understand how local communities responded to
the establishment of a socio-politically complex
polity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.