* 2102626
* CAS: Oxidation in Fragment Coupling and Fragmentation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Marisa Kozlowski, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Kozlowski of the University of Pennsylvania is developing novel
methods to forge new carbon-carbon bonds, the currency of organic chemistry, and
to convert polymer waste products into value-added materials. These activities
are helping to improve synthetic technology towards the more efficient and
sustainable assembly of new materials, optimize heterogeneous catalysts for
selective reactions, and find productive uses for polymer waste streams. The
link between these projects is that the types of reactions being studied are
oxidations, which reduce the number of carbon-hydrogen bonds in a molecule and
replace them with carbon-carbon or carbon-oxygen bonds. This research program is
also creating expanded access to chemistry instruction through the design of at-
home organic chemistry experiments using non-toxic materials and Professor
Kozlowski is actively involved in developing professional support systems for
increasing diversity in STEM disciplines.

The development of novel oxidative synthetic methods are important contributions
to the goal of designing environmentally benign chemical processes. Professor
Kozlowski and her research team are investigating new oxidative methods for
complex molecule synthesis by optimizing oxidative phenol couplings for the
preparation of polyaromatic hydrocarbons and studying heterogeneous catalysts
for alkylarene cross coupling. Additional efforts are focused on developing new
biomimetic pathways for the valorization of chemical waste with the
photocatalytic use of oxygen. These studies are contributing to the goal of
designing sustainable methods by: 1) engineering reactions at non-functionalized
centers, thereby eliminating the need for complex pre-functionalized starting
materials, 2) using oxygen as the terminal oxidizing agent, 3) using less toxic
and less expensive base metals, and 4) converting waste materials to useful
chemicals. The compounds being generated in these studies are also needed in the
pharmaceutical, chemical, materials science, and agricultural industries as well
as in basic biological and chemical research endeavors. Through these
activities, Professor Kozlowski and her research team are working at the
interface of organic, computational, and materials chemistry, which provides
interdisciplinary training for a diverse group of postdoctoral researchers,
graduate, and undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.