* 2102812
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Variability, Impacts and Extremes of the ENSO-Asian Monsoon Relationship over the Common Era
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kaustubh Thirumalai, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 45,970.00

The research team aims to investigate the evolution of the El Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO)-monsoon relationship over the last 2,000 years, diagnose how
various external forcings (e.g., solar irradiance and greenhouse gases) and
internal climate feedbacks from the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and the
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) modulate the ENSO-monsoon relationship,
examine whether the recent literature documenting ENSO-monsoon relationship
changes over the instrumental period hold in the past, and generate a
statistical forecast model of the Asian Summer Monsoon (ASM).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Both the ASM and ENSO are fundamental components of the climate
system. Investigating the variation of their relationship will deepen our
understanding of teleconnections, air-sea interactions, and climate feedbacks.
The paleoclimate data will serve as a testbed for the verification of current
theories of the ASM thereby refining dynamical
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASM supplies freshwater resources for
nearly four billion people annually. Extreme events associated with the ASM
cause and/or exacerbate floods and droughts, which have far-reaching social and
economic impacts in developing countries. Large model uncertainties, however,
still exist in the model projections of the ASM. The El Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) is an important predictor of the ASM, yet the ENSO-monsoon
relationship is not stable and exhibits substantial decadal variability. The
variation of the ENSO-monsoon relationship is likely modulated by external
forcing such as greenhouse gases (GHGs) and solar irradiance but also heavily
modulated by internal modes of climate variability such as the PDO and the AMO.
Paleoclimate records can extend the temporal coverage afforded by the
instrumental era and help address such uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential Broader Impacts (B.I.) include integrating climate dynamics and
modeling to refine projections of the ASM and its hydroclimate extremes, which
impact the economic prosperity of nearly 4 billion people in Asian developing
countries. The project will broaden diverse participation in climate modeling
and climate risk research by supporting research opportunities for two assistant
professors, a postdoctoral researcher, two doctoral graduate students, several
undergraduate students including those from historically underrepresented
groups, and outreach with K-12 students and the Girl Scouts of America. Results
from this project will be disseminated to relevant management agency
stakeholders at the local, state, and federal levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.