* 2102835
* Chiroptical properties of patterned nanocrystal solids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Vivian Ferry, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2025
* USD 570,001.00

Chiral materials and objects are central to our lives. Biomolecules and
pharmaceuticals are synthesized in specific geometries to enable selective and
targeted interactions, while objects such as screws and rotors convert
rotational motion to linear force. However, there are very few examples of
chiral materials with nanoscale or mesoscale dimensions. Materials at these
length scales are particularly important for interactions with polarized light.
Chiral molecules absorb different polarization states of light to different
extents, the effect is orders of magnitude stronger in appropriately designed
nanostructures. The detection of polarized light is integral to sensors and
imaging systems, and the generation of circularly polarized light is essential
to the development of stereoscopic displays, of anti-counterfeiting security,
and of quantum optical circuits. This project focuses on the fundamentals of the
design, fabrication, and characterization of nanostructured materials to control
the absorption and emission of circularly polarized light by creating new
nanostructures comprised of light-emitting nanocrystals. The project also
advances the fields of nanopatterning and fabrication. The research conducted
will train students in photonics, nanotechnology, and materials
characterization. As part of this project, the PI will leverage online education
modalities for a senior capstone course and conduct educational studies in the
classroom. The PI will also engage K-12 students with advanced technology and
collaborate with a local visual artist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chiral
nanostructures and metasurfaces exhibit orders-of-magnitude stronger
interactions with circularly polarized light than their molecular counterparts.
Many technological applications, however, would benefit from the controlled
generation of circularly polarized photoluminescence. This project creates and
characterizes metasurfaces comprised of both plasmonic nanostructures and
tailored assemblies of semiconductor nanocrystals, where the nanocrystals are
patterned into hierarchical structures using direct-write electron beam
lithography. The experiments are complemented by full-field electromagnetic
simulations to understand the interactions between the nanocrystals and the
plasmonic nanostructures. By tailoring the position and shape of the
semiconductor nanocrystals, these multi-material metasurfaces offer both
enhanced angular control and enhanced degrees of circular polarization. The
understanding gained from these studies contributes to the development of
stereoscopic displays, of anti-counterfeiting strategies, and of photonic
circuits. Students gain experience in diverse techniques, including nanocrystal
synthesis, lithographic patterning, optical characterization, and
electromagnetic simulations. The project also studies inclusivity in
undergraduate courses and the role of exam anxiety, trains undergraduate
students in the senior capstone design course, engages K-12 students in
activities related to light polarization, and develops art installations in
collaboration with a local visual artist that allow the broader community to
experience light-matter interactions at a larger
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.