* 2102989
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Disentangling the effects of heat stress versus bleaching phenotype on coral performance
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Katie Barott, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2022
* USD 14,544.00

Coral bleaching has become increasingly common on reefs worldwide as rising sea
surface temperatures associated with climate change disrupt the coral-algal
symbiosis. This dramatic heat stress response turns the normally colorful corals
bright white, and yet during these heat stress events not all corals undergo
bleaching. This project focuses on assessing the effects of bleaching by
comparing pairs of corals side-byside on the reef during an ongoing heat wave,
where one has bleached and the other has not, despite experiencing the same
temperatures. These coral pairs have been monitored throughout three bleaching
events in the past five years, providing a unique resource to address whether
corals with consistently different bleaching susceptibilities have the capacity
to acclimate in response to disturbances through&lt;br/&gt;epigenetic changes,
or changes in gene expression not due to change in DNA bases. To address this,
the project will characterize the impacts of bleaching or not bleaching on coral
physiology, gene expression, and epigenetic patterns using coral pairs in their
natural habitat during a marine heatwave. This project also provides research
support for graduate student trainees, as well as data and materials for the
research and training of undergraduate and high school students. This project
will recruit underrepresented minority students from URI and UPenn area high
schools and university undergraduates for work on computer analysis of images
(benthic and colony photographs, brightfield and confocal micrographs) and
sequencing data. It will also support the training of an undergraduate student
at the University of Hawaiʻi in coral ecology and physiology, and the
development of her senior thesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the effects of repeated heat stress events on the performance of
Montipora capitata, a dominant reef builder throughout Hawaiʻi. It utilizes the
timely context of paired colonies of M. capitata with bleached vs. unbleached
histories that have been monitored through two past bleaching events in Hawaiʻi
(2015 and 2019) and the currently ongoing 2020 event. This system allows for the
unique opportunity to disentangle the consequences of heat stress versus
bleaching on coral performance through time, an essential feature of reef
resilience. The contrasting physiological and energetic processes these two
phenotypes undergo during a heatwave are likely to result in alterations to the
cellular environment within the animal that impacts epigenetic transcriptional
regulation. These regulatory and energetic changes, if persistent over time,
have the potential to alter coral fitness beyond the duration of the heatwave
differentially between corals with contrasting bleaching phenotypes.
Specifically, the project will: 1) quantify the effect of the 2020 heatwave on
coral physiology during bleaching and recovery, 2) generate a corresponding
archive of coral tissues and nucleic acids as a resource for future work
characterizing how bleaching phenotype alters energetics and non-genetic
inheritance, and 3) characterize how bleaching phenotype alters intra-
generational inheritance of epigenetic marks (i.e., DNA methylation) and gene
expression, and the duration of these marks and expression patterns following
heat stress. This project represents an urgent assessment of an ideal system to
test the legacy of coral bleaching phenotype on coral fitness. The results of
this project will therefore lay the foundation for intra and cross-generational
effects of bleaching vs. heat stress, which is essential for understanding coral
resilience to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.