* 2102027
* Ultracompact Spectrometers for Infrared Wavelengths
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Stephanie Law, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract Title&lt;br/&gt;Ultracompact Spectrometers for Infrared
Wavelengths&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Infrared (IR)
spectroscopy has attracted significant attention due to broad applications in
this spectral range including thermal imaging, chemical sensing, environmental
monitoring, medical imaging, security systems, atmospheric studies, and high-
speed electronics. Almost all molecules exhibit absorption resonance in the IR
wavelength region from 6 to 16 micrometers. These resonances are unique to each
molecule and are called molecular “fingerprints”, which can be used to identify
chemical species. The goal of this project is to create an ultracompact
spectrometer (UCS) which can be integrated on a chip. Unlike traditional
benchtop spectrometers, such tiny devices enable integration with size-limited
systems, such as drones, portable devices, and field-deployable devices. They
provide a low-cost and efficient method for chemical sensing and environmental
monitoring. For example, a drone containing UCSs can be used for chemical
analysis to detect environmental toxins. Field-deployable devices can be used in
a city, farm, or forest for volatile organic compound sensing. This project will
also work with the University of Delaware (UD) College of Engineering Outreach
office to create short videos explaining fundamental concepts in optics aimed at
middle schoolers. The goal of these videos is to introduce students to optics, a
subject that they do not see in middle school in Delaware, but which is
interesting and does not require advanced math to understand. The videos will be
distributed on a wide range of social media platforms, allowing us to reach a
large audience. The videos will link to additional scientific information from,
for example, the Optical Society of America as well as information on attending
UD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional IR spectroscopy systems are
expensive, bulky, and require mechanical motion. Their operation principle makes
it impossible to significantly shrink their size. This project aims to employ
novel engineered materials and advanced nanofabrication to create an
ultracompact IR spectrometer (UCS) on-a-chip. Specifically, this project will
use gradient permittivity materials such as heavily-doped indium arsenide to
perform both spectral splitting and subwavelength light confinement. By
integrating gradient permittivity materials and detector arrays on a chip, the
proposed UCS eliminates complex optical elements and shrinks the dimensions of
the design to as small as 10 micrometers. The proposed UCS is an innovative way
to collect spectral information at the nanoscale and significantly reduces the
size and cost of a spectrometer. Unique growth approaches and nano-fabrication
procedures will be developed, advancing knowledge in the field of materials
science and the integration of nano-devices. The results of this project can be
applied to a wide range of other optoelectronic devices requiring subwavelength
focusing and wavelength demultiplexing, advancing understanding across a range
of fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.