* 2102056
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Rational Design and Mechanistic Understanding of Carbon-Based Hybrid Nanostructures for Potent Microbicidal Function
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Liju Yang, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 307,779.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infections by bacterial pathogens,
especially those that are resistant to antibiotics, represent a major threat to
the public health in this country, with millions of people suffering from the
infections and a significant number of deaths each year. Thus, there are urgent
demands for alternative approaches to prevent the spread of such infections.
Nanomaterials-based approaches hold promise to serve as antibacterial agents
against multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria. This collaborative project will
develop and establish the newly discovered photoactive nanomaterials,
specifically carbon dots (CDots) and derived “hybrid dots” (with other
components), as a uniquely potent biomaterials platform for killing MDR
bacteria. CDots are of a core-shell structure, each with a nanoscale carbon
particle as the core and organic molecules as the coating on its surface
(shell). When exposed to human-friendly visible/natural or ambient light, CDots
generate radical-like species that are highly lethal to bacterial pathogens,
making them excellent bio-nanomaterials for antibacterial applications. This
project will use some new strategies to design CDots and hybrid dots to improve
and optimize the antibacterial performance, with expected broad positive impacts
to the control of MDR pathogens, and also to the training of students in the
important biomaterials field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is to further develop
and establish carbon dots (CDots) and derived hybrid nanostructures as a unique
biomaterials platform for visible/natural or ambient light-activated potent
antibacterial function. CDots may be considered as a special kind of “core-
shell” hybrid nanostructures, each with a small carbon nanoparticle core and a
thin shell of attached organic materials for the particle surface passivation.
They are strongly absorptive in the visible spectrum, and their photoexcited
state properties and processes resemble those typically found in semiconductor
quantum dots, but with unique advantages. The versatility and flexibility of
modifying the dot surface with organic moieties enable the manipulation of CDots
to enhance their optical properties and their interactions with the targeted
bacterial cells. The project team will leverage these distinctive
characteristics to design and prepare CDots and derived hybrid nanostructures
for the desired properties based on the rationales including 1) the more
effective photon harvesting across the entire visible spectrum, 2) highly
efficient photoexcited state processes responsible for the antimicrobial
activities, and 3) more targeted and stronger interactions with the bacterial
cells, thus to establish the CDots/hybrid dots as effective and efficient broad
spectrum agents for killing multidrug-resistant pathogens. The efforts will be
coupled with investigations for mechanistic understanding of these bio-
nanomaterials. The project will also have broader impacts in terms of societal
benefits and technology development, institutional research enhancement,
education and engagement of undergraduate students in research, and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.