* 2102948
* Biomechanics Study of SARS-CoV-2 Virus-Like Particles
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Saveez Saffarian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 658,500.00

SARS-CoV-2 is the causative agent of COVID-19, which has emerged as a potent
human pathogen in 2019. The virus particles after secretion are in steady state
with their environment and can be viewed as well assembled nano-machines ready
to infect their next host. The viral genome and most of the viral proteins of
SARS-CoV-2 are hidden within the lipid envelope of the virus, which forms a
sphere of diameter 130 ± 30 nm. The viral envelope is also home to multiple
copies of the spike protein S, which has a molecular weight of ~160kD and is
inserted in the membrane with a single membrane spanning helical domain. The
envelope is also underpinned by multiple copies of the M protein of SARS-CoV-2,
which is approximately 25kD with triple membrane spanning helical domains.
Together the S, M and the envelope of SARS-CoV-2 provide structural integrity
for the virus particles as the particles travel through various environments
between hosts. Utilizing a RAPID NSF award, over the past 6 months the PIs have
established the minimal system to harvest SARS-CoV-2 virus like particles (VLPs)
and identified regions in S and M proteins where genetic tags can be tolerated
without effecting VLP structures. These VLPs have similar morphology (as well as
S and M protein content) as fully infectious virions, but do not package the
genome and therefore are not infectious. The PIs will study the mechanics of
this viral pathogen. They will increase the participation of underrepresented
groups in the pursuit of basic science at University of Utah and create
opportunities for cross-disciplinary training at the university. The PIs will
also train students and communicate science with the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs preliminary data show that the S protein
can shed and re-insert back into the viral envelope, in strong contrast with
known behavior of other envelope-spanning glycoproteins from other enveloped
viruses. The SARS-CoV-2 S protein is a major antigen recognized by the immune
system. Shedding of the S protein is therefore relevant for progression of
COVID-19 disease; however the basic physics and stochastic thermodynamics view
of the S protein shedding/reinsertion needs to be understood in detail since
there are no parallel models of such behavior among other enveloped viruses. To
elucidate the mechanism of S protein shedding/reinsertion and its implication
for viral infection the PIs will: (1) Measure the S protein shedding and re-
insertion dynamics in single immobilized SARS-CoV-2 VLPs. The biologically
active form of the S protein is a protein trimer. They will utilize single
molecule fluorescence as well as force spectroscopy techniques to establish the
S protein shedding/re-insertion dynamics. In addition the PIs will investigate
the effects of S protein shedding-re-insertion on formation of trimers and also
establish chemical and physical factors which promote and inhibit S protein
shedding. (2) Model the effect of the S protein equilibrium on the viral life
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.