* 2102032
* An integrated framework for condition monitoring and fault diagnosis of electric machine drive systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jin Ye, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

This NSF project aims to design and demonstrate an innovative physics-guided
signature-based approach for condition monitoring and fault diagnosis (CMFD) of
electric machine networks. As the number of electric machines grows rapidly in
response to less carbon dioxide emissions, a large number of electric machines
are connected to form electric machine networks. However, traditional CMFD were
developed based on individual machine sensors, which requires a large number of
sensors and do not comprehensively consider fault and degradation propagation.
This limitation will be in part resolved by coordinated monitoring and analysis
of strategically-placed electrical waveform sensors in power networks. The
intellectual merits of the project include integrating high-fidelity physical
model of electric machine networks to signature-based CMFD for improved accuracy
and robustness. The broader impacts of the project include advancing the
research experiences for K-12 and undergraduate students including
underrepresented students. The research will be integrated into the
undergraduate and graduate electric power engineering curriculum to educate
future engineers who will have the skills and knowledge to meet the emerging
needs of the industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed physics-guided
signature-based approach for condition monitoring and fault diagnosis (CMFD) of
electric machine networks will advance the literature in a new direction
compared to the traditional approach based on individual machine sensors. Four
specific objectives will be pursued: (1) Assess the electrical waveform
signature due to faults and degradation that will build a technical foundation
for the proposed CMFD approach. (2) Create a high-fidelity physical model of
electric machine networks that reflects not only the fault, degradation and
nonlinearity of the machine, but also waveform propagation due to faults and
degradation. (3) Design a physics-guided signature-based method that leverages
the waveform propagation model to more effectively and efficiently identify and
locate faults or degradation source in electric machine networks. (4) Build a
semi-virtual testbed of electric machine networks to evaluate the performance of
the proposed CMFD approach. The proposed CMFD approach can be generally used in
a variety of applications, including manufacturing and industrial systems, smart
buildings, wind farms, and electrified transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.