* 2102906
* Statistical Mechanics Modeling of Critical Phenomena in Phytoplankton Living in a Cold Environment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Vijayan Asari, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2024
* USD 201,655.00

Phytoplankton are a critical component of Earth's carbon cycle and thus play an
important role in the climate system. Recent observations have shown that
climate change can be a leading factor influencing ecosystem behavior. One
specific example where environmental conditions may be related to the dynamics
of the plankton ecosystem is an unusual massive phytoplankton bloom that was
observed underneath the ice pack in the Arctic Ocean. During the Arctic melt
season, the sea ice surface undergoes a remarkable transformation to a complex
mosaic of melt ponds, snow and ice. The transition in pond fractal geometry
revolves around a critical length scale of about 100 square meters in area, as
isolated ponds grow and coalesce into larger connected structures with complex,
self-similar boundaries. Moreover, the transition from isolated sunlight
penetration associated with individual ponds to a continuous matrix of light
associated with large connected pond configurations could help trigger the
under-ice blooms and influence biological productivity and bio-geochemical
processes. This work will shed light on key concerns such as ecosystem
transformations under changing conditions of solar radiation; the melting
process and the dynamics of living matter; energy balance in the Arctic climate
system; and, the contribution of phytoplankton in the Arctic to climate
feedbacks. The PI will explore how conceptual physical models arising in
statistical mechanics can be used to efficiently characterize and quantify
Arctic phytoplankton under nonlinear dynamics. In outreach efforts, the PI will
convey to the general public the importance of rigorous and fundamental
approaches to climate and ecosystem research. The PI will prepare illustrative
material (scientific infographics) about this research that will explain a
strong interdisciplinary approach to this problem. The scientific infographics
will be made freely downloadable by the general public and educators from a
project webpage. The fundamental concepts of ecosystem modeling will be used in
a teaching context in computational and statistical physics classes. A board
game based on these principles will be created and tested in local K-12 schools.
This research will also provide funding for an undergraduate and PhD student,
providing valuable experience in theoretical applications within the broad
framework of interdisciplinary research. The PI will involve undergraduate
students who are participating in the summer research program of the University
of Dayton for minority-serving institutions to participate in this project,
which will enable them to gain skills in modeling and
teamwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will offer the universality of
statistical mechanics models for making robust, quantitative predictions about
critical transitions in phytoplankton populations where the full complexity of
local dynamics could never be modeled explicitly. The project will reveal some
universal links between recent environmental changes and complex behavior of
phytoplankton communities and increase our knowledge of phytoplankton
ecosystems, including bloom development. The methods and physical interpretation
of living matter-climate interaction discovered in this research will also be
applicable to future studies of possible organisms in polar regions of the Earth
and "extraterrestrial oceans" beneath icy surfaces. This project synthesizes
available remote sensing and fieldwork data in an innovative quantitative
framework to improve description of phytoplankton
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.