* 2102563
* CAS: Development of Bio-inspired Catalysts for Hydrolysis: Insights from Theoretical Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Rajeev Prabhakar, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 449,544.00

Rajeev Prabhakar of the University of Miami is supported by an award from the
Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry to develop bio-inspired
catalysts for hydrolysis. The selective hydrolysis of the phosphate ester, and
peptide amide bonds of bio-macromolecules is required in many critical
applications such as DNA repair, protein engineering, genomics and therapeutics.
In nature, these extremely stable bonds are hydrolyzed by highly specialized
enzymes. However, currently only a few natural enzymes have been successfully
employed for the aforementioned applications but with some deficiencies.
Therefore, the development of small molecules that can mimic the activities of
natural enzymes is of interest. However, realization of this goal is very
challenging and necessitates a rigorous integration of experiments and
theoretical calculations. In this project, Dr. Prabhakar will first derive the
guiding principles of phosphate ester, peptide and carboxylate ester hydrolysis
and then work to apply these principals to the design of efficient and specific
catalysts for such hydrolysis reactions. Additionally, Dr. Prabhakar is actively
involved in providing educational and research opportunities to members of
minority groups at the high school through undergraduate levels. These outreach
activities include the Honors and Executive Internship Program (HEIP) of the
Miami-Dade County Public Schools, the American Chemical Society's (ACS) Project
SEED (Summer Experiences for the Economically Disadvantaged) and a summer
workshop called CATCH-Computational and Theoretical Chemistry for High School
and a High School Research Journal (HRJ). The undergraduate students will be
provided research opportunities through specialized courses, a summer research
program and support from the NSF. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Rajeev Prabhakar of
the University of Miami is studying the mechanism of the hydrolysis of phosphate
ester, peptide and carboxylate ester bonds with theoretical calculations. The
results are then to be utilized for the development of efficient bio-inspired
metal-based catalysts. The catalysts developed in this project are expected to
be robust and tunable. This goal requires a deep understanding of the roles of
distinct chemical factors that govern the activities of both natural enzymes and
their existing synthetic analogues. In this proposal several state-of-the-art
theoretical and computational chemistry techniques involving molecular dynamics,
quantum mechanics (QM) and hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM)
are integrated with a wide range of experiments to design the next generation of
catalysts. In support of the broader impact of the project, Dr. Prabhakar is
actively training and engaging current and future generations of students at the
graduate, undergraduate and high school levels from socio-economic and
educationally disadvantaged families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.