* 2102120
* RESEARCH-PGR: Exploring the genetics of drought resistance with field-based phenomics and biophysical process-based modeling
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Joshua Udall, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,339,464.00

Plants require proper hydration status regardless of environmental conditions.
Despite this fundamental property of plant life, the genetic and molecular
processes responsible for regulating plant water status are not fully
understood. This lack of knowledge limits the ability to develop crops that can
thrive with less water or are able to withstand climatic extremes. This project
seeks to address this knowledge gap by combining physiological and molecular
trait data with computational approaches to reveal the mechanism(s) responsible
for controlling plant water status. Cotton, the world’s most important fiber
crop, will be used to study how gene expression relates to quantifiable changes
in key, stress-adaptive plant traits responsible for ensuring growth and
productivity under drought conditions. Using these data, a computational model
will be developed to simulate cotton growth in response to environmental and
soil water conditions so that various combinations of plant traits can be tested
in silico to predict how plants may perform under a variety of conditions. This
project will provide data and tools to help identify and quantify the genetic
mechanisms responsible for conferring drought adaptation. Information gained can
be used by the broader community for crop improvement and managing water
resources – a critical aspect as agriculture is threatened by reduced water
availability. The tools and techniques will also be integrated into
undergraduate research opportunities to help provide training and education for
the next generation of scientists to combat crop insecurity due to existential
threats posed by climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic mechanisms
that control and regulate water movement in crop plants is poorly understood,
limiting the ability to enhance crop resiliency under water limited conditions.
This knowledge gap exists because the methods for characterizing genotype-
specific drought resistance traits are time and labor intensive and do not scale
to genetically informative populations. Additionally, current methods to
quantify the functional connections between genotypic variation and altered
physiological performance on a temporal basis in response to fluctuating
environmental conditions are severely lacking. One approach to bridge this gap
is the use of biophysical process-based models (BPMs), which simulate complex
systems based on fundamental physical, chemical, and biological theory. This
project aims to address the lack of knowledge surrounding the genetic mechanisms
controlling plant water dynamics by: 1) determining the temporal dynamics of
molecular and phenotypic responses characterized by transcriptional and
biophysical mechanisms in plants grown under drought conditions; 2) utilizing
these data to develop a BPM capable of simulating genotype-specific parameters
that capture acclimation response to water limitation; and 3) uncovering the
genetic basis of drought resistance in cotton by using model-derived phenotypes
that represent the physiological processes regulating water balance in cotton.
In sum, our proposal seeks to close the genotype-to-phenotype gap for drought
resistance to improve crop resiliency while providing a paradigm for dissecting
stress-adaptive traits in crop plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.