* 2102914
* Studies of Singularities, Black Holes, and Gravitational Radiation
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* David Garfinkle, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This project will study two aspects of gravity: (1) gravitational collapse and
(2) gravitational radiation. (1) When an object’s gravity becomes strong enough
to trap light, the object becomes a black hole. Inside the black hole the object
continues to become smaller and smaller under the influence of its own gravity
until it becomes a point with infinite density and infinite gravitational field
called a singularity. This project involves working out the properties of the
singularities formed in gravitational collapse, and in particular the forces
felt by any observer who approaches the singularity. (2) Just as the electric
currents in a radio transmitter make radio waves, so moving masses make
gravitational waves. One of the most exciting recent developments in physics is
the direct detection of these gravitational waves using huge laser
interferometers as the detectors. One interesting aspect of gravitational
radiation is something called gravitational wave memory: even after the wave has
passed, there is a permanent change in the gravitational wave detector. This
project will study the causes and properties of this gravitational wave
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational collapse results in the formation of
black holes and spacetime singularities, and the emission of gravitational
radiation. This project will study all of these aspects of gravitational
collapse, and in particular will concentrate on the approach to the singularity,
gravitational wave memory, and critical behavior at the threshold of black hole
formation. The project will study gravitational collapse in asymptotically flat
spacetimes in order to test the conjecture that both strong spacelike
singularities and weak null singularities form in this case. A previous project
developed a treatment of gravitational wave memory that uses a perturbative
approach in which the Weyl tensor is the basic variable and thus has manifest
gauge invariance in first order perturbation theory. This project will use this
approach to explore the relation between memory and the properties of the wave
equation, and to generate memory waveforms using publicly available template
bank Weyl scalars. In addition, axisymmetric codes using tetrad methods will be
developed to perform simulations of critical gravitational collapse and of
Einstein-aether theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.