* 2102107
* Achiral and Chiral Nanographene Synthesis Using an Alkyne Linchpin Strategy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sean Casey, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 483,134.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Wesley Chalifoux of the University of Nevada, Reno is studying ways to make
nanographenes from small, precise, molecular building blocks. Nanographenes are
flat sheets of carbon atoms that mimic small sections of graphene. The
optoelectronic properties of nanographenes make them attractive materials in
applications such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic field-effect
transistors (OFETs), and organic solar cells. The Chalifoux research groupâ€™s
efforts to develop new ways to make these molecules are supporting the design of
next-generation devices. Dr. Chalifoux and his team of students are converting
modifiable chemical building blocks to nanographenes under mild conditions and
monitoring how specific changes in the building blocks tune the characteristics
of the nanographenes, including their three-dimensional shape and optical
properties. These activities are also supporting the engagement of high school
students in chemical research to encourage their engagement in science and to
support their progression towards successful science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wesley Chalifoux and his
research team are advancing the use of alkyne benzannulation as a mild and
versatile strategy for preparing nanographenes with tunable optical properties.
The use of high-energy alkyne-containing precursors allows for the use of mild
benzannulation conditions that support expanded functional group tolerance and
provide access to a variety of nanographene structures that cannot be achieved
using other methods. The Chalifoux group will apply this strategy to the
synthesis of highly contorted and chiral nanographene molecular scaffolds that
exhibit circularly polarized light characteristics and can be envisioned in
variety of chiroptic applications such as liquid crystal displays, chiral
sensing, holographic displays, three-dimensional displays, and other information
technologies. The development of new C-H functionalization strategies will also
be explored in combination with benzannulation to provide new and potentially
facile routes to larger nanographenes that exhibit significant red shifts in the
absorption and emission spectra. These activities are synergistically providing
training in organic synthesis and advanced analytical techniques for a diverse
cohort of graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.