* 2102019
* Cross-Scale Spatiotemporal Modeling Using an Integrated Data Framework
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yi Qiang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 286,918.00

This research project will address the challenges associated with managing
scales in space and time within a single, unified analytic framework. The choice
of scale is an important question in the analysis of geospatial data. For
example, the spatial analysis of socioeconomic variables at the state level may
mask local processes taking place at the county or community level.
Historically, spatial and temporal analysis has proceeded either separately or
in a loosely coupled research design. This project will develop and extend a
multi-scale framework for the visualization and analysis of geospatial data. The
framework will resolve fundamental issues of scale handling in data analytics,
advance knowledge about cross-scale spatio-temporal phenomena, and aid
scientists in looking more deeply into the interplay among various environmental
and social processes. New tools will be developed and made publicly available.
The utility of these tools will be tested in case studies, including an analysis
of wetland habitats in coastal Louisiana and Hawaiian rainfall patterns. The
project will support graduate students whose participation will advance their
own professional development. The collaboration between the University of Hawaii
and the University of Colorado at Boulder will increase geographic diversity and
the presence of women and underrepresented minorities in computer science, earth
science, and spatial data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will develop a theoretical framework for multi-scale data representation,
modeling, and analysis. Multi-scale analysis of spatio-temporal data is a
longstanding concern for analytic systems in many disciplines. The problem of
handling scale is epitomized in the well-known modifiable areal unit problem and
its temporal equivalent. These issues are partially due to the traditionally
held views of time as a linear sequence and space as a flat layer. This project
extends research on the Triangular Model (TM), a 2D representation of time, into
higher dimensional models. The project will test the utility of TM in analyzing
linear spatial data, refine conceptual and computational aspects of a 3D Pyramid
Model (PM) for multi-scale spatial analysis, and integrate the TM and PM into an
5D analytical framework for multi-scale spatio-temporal analyses. Topologies,
statistics, and machine learning methods will be developed on the models and
framework to support multi-scale queries, visualization, and quantitative
modeling. The questions to be answered in the project include: 1) what
additional knowledge can be gained by analyzing spatio-temporal variations,
patterns, and relationships of phenomena across in the TM and PM frameworks? and
2) in what ways can multi-scale representations of spatio-temporal data
facilitate the modeling of human-environment
interactions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.