* 2102997
* Collaborative Research: A Continuous 60,000 Year Sediment Record Documenting Abrupt to Precession-Scale Climate Change and Ecosystem Response at Fish Lake UT, Upper CO River Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrea Brunelle, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,372.00

Over the last several decades increased drought severity and wildfire intensity
around the globe has drawn attention to a need for an improved understanding of
how climate change over a human lifetime impacts people, ecosystems, and water
resources. Rapid population growth in the arid western US combined with
pervasive drought, temperature stress on forests, insect outbreaks, and
unprecedented wildfires has negatively impacted people and the economy and
focused attention on the need to improve our understanding of the controls and
long-term consequences of increased climate stress on these valuable and unique
ecosystems. This interdisciplinary project will place the 21st century drought
and extreme fire seasons in western North America into a longer-term context as
a means to identify likely future scenarios for climate change and ecosystem
response. This research will use a long and continuous sediment lake record
collected from a headwater lake in the upper Colorado River Basin to investigate
past variations in precipitation and temperature, and the impacts these changes
had on vegetation, wildfire, forest disturbance, and glaciation with special
attention paid to periods of rapid climate change that has happened in the past
over timescales relevant to people. This is possible because of the high
accumulation rate of Fish Lake sediments of about 18.5 meters over the last
60,000 years producing a 60 foot high section of mud containing things like
pollen, charcoal, bug parts, fish bones, and other fossils for researchers to
study in addition to the sediment itself and the molecular fossils it preserves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work includes X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) and CT
core scanning to identify abrupt sediment boundaries and characterize the
sediment profiles at the highest possible resolution. Changes in precipitation
and evaporation will be investigated by water isotope tracers, including leaf
wax delta-2H (long and short chain) and chironomid delta-18O. Molecular fossils
such as branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers (brGDGTs) will be used as
way to estimate past summer temperatures through time. Landscape and aquatic
ecosystem responses will be studies by using pollen, charcoal, polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), biogenic silica, and organic carbon, nitrogen and
stable isotopes. Watershed erosion and glacial activity of the Fish Lake Plateau
will be investigated in new detail with scanning XRF, grainsize, organic matter,
biogenic silica, and bulk density. Successful dating of an 11-m long core
recovered in 2014 has been demonstrated by radiometric methods, including 210Pb
and AMS 14C of terrestrial macrofossils and charcoal, by tephrochronology, and
by paleomagnetic measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.