* 2102513
* CAS: A Rethinking of Borrowing Hydrogen: from Ligand Design to New Reactions and Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Keying Ding, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 172,182.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Keying Ding of Middle Tennessee State University will study catalytic reactions
that result in the formation of carbon–carbon or carbon–heteroatom bonds. These
reactions will be mediated by new earth-abundant metal catalytic systems that
utilize the “borrowing hydrogen (BH)” pathway. This BH pathway is
environmentally friendly and atom- and process-efficient in producing value-
added chemicals while producing water as the sole byproduct. Structure-
reactivity correlations will be studied in an effort to glean critical
information on how these catalysts facilitate this chemistry at the molecular
level. The results will be used to direct catalyst development toward new and
challenging reactions. This project will offer research experiences for students
at the interface of synthetic inorganic chemistry, organic chemistry, and
catalysis. The educational activities include efforts to enhance the
participation of undergraduate students from underserved groups and low-income
or first-generation families, participation in a summer research camp, and the
integration of the funded research into teaching laboratories. The broader
impacts of the research and educational activities will assist in the creation
of a more diverse and educated workforce in the chemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Keying Ding and her research team at Middle
Tennessee State University will study new base-transition metal catalysts to
address emerging challenges in catalytic reactions that utilize the “borrowing
hydrogen” mechanistic pathway. A new family of bifunctional ligands that feature
reactive pendant arms that potentially promote hydrogen transfer reactions via
metal-ligand cooperativity, and that contain rigid ligand scaffolds to provide
stability, will be synthesized and characterized. The catalytic activities of
the base transition-metal complexes will be determined with a focus on (i)
establishing an in-depth understanding of the BH catalytic process, (ii)
eliminating the dependence on the use of excess strong base in the BH reactions,
and (iii) improving the product selectivity. New concepts and insights on the
use of earth-abundant metals in place of precious transition metals for BH and
related transformations are expected to arise from these studies to help guide
the development of future catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.