* 2102538
* CAS: Copper-Catalyzed Oxidation Reactions of Carboxylic Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jessica Hoover, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 452,865.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Jessica Hoover of West Virginia University is investigating new catalysts to
convert carboxylic acids to value-added compounds, taking advantage of the
favorable energetics associated with carbon dioxide release from such compounds.
The investigation of new reactions of carboxylic acids can help advance the use
of abundant and renewable resources as chemical feedstocks, as a good number of
carboxylic acids are available from biomass sources. Dr. Hoover and her research
team are identifying new catalysts to tune and control oxidation and
decarboxylation reactions of carboxylic acids. These activities include
developing a fundamental understanding of how the catalysts work to carefully
adapt their applications. This research program is further providing research
experiences to future West Virginia teachers to support and enrich chemistry
education in the state. Dr. Hoover is also involved in career planning
activities for both graduate and undergraduate chemistry students to support
their futures in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalyst-controlled conversion of carboxylic
acids to a variety of molecular fragments is an attractive strategy for the
synthesis of complex chemical structures because carboxylic acid starting
materials are abundant, stable and can be obtained from renewable sources.
Currently, this strategy has practical limitations because methods to convert
carboxylic acids into value-added materials are restricted to coupling reactions
of benzoic acids, in which the carboxylic acid group is replaced with a new
functional group through a combined decarboxylative and oxidative process. Dr.
Hoover and her research group are exploring new copper-catalyzed reactions that
separate the oxidation and decarboxylation steps of carboxylic acid coupling
reactions to allow the controlled divergent conversion of carboxylic acids to
compounds that are important intermediates in the synthesis of biologically
active and pharmaceutically relevant molecules. Mechanistic studies of these
systems are being used to aid in understanding the overall reaction pathway and
how reaction conditions can be adjusted to favor the oxidation and/or
decarboxylation steps. These activities are supporting the training and
development of graduate and undergraduate researchers in the interdisciplinary
fields of catalysis, organic and organometallic synthesis, and reaction
mechanism elucidation to prepare them for future careers in the chemical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.