* 2102098
* CAS-MNP: Dimetallic CO Homocoupling and Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Leslie Murray, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2024
* USD 494,766.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Leslie Murray of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida will
investigate how iron compounds are able to facilitate the formation of new
carbon-carbon bonds between carbon monoxide molecules. Carbon monoxide is a
feedstock used by chemical industry to prepare many important products. The
motivation for this study is to understand the details of a process (called the
Fischer-Tropsch (FT) synthesis) that converts carbon monoxide into lubrication
oils and fuels. While the FT synthesis has been known for nearly 100 years, some
important details of how it functions are still unclear. In particular, the
details of how two carbon monoxide molecules link together in the presence of
iron atoms has not yet been established. This project will prepare a series of
compounds that contain several iron atoms and that are capable of coupling
carbon monoxide molecules. The detail of how this coupling occurs will be
determined using both chemical and physical studies. In addition to the
scientific objective, this project includes training of graduate and
undergraduate students and outreach to K-12 students, including those from
underrepresented minority groups. To validate the outreach activities,
evaluation methods will be developed to determine the best practices associated
with a K-6 outreach program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to investigate the mechanistic details for the conversion of CO and dihydrogen
to hydrocarbons by the FT process. Such mechanistic studies can both provide
fundamental information on the FT process and point to new chemical pathways
toward CO-derived C1 and C2 ligands. The project targets the C–C bond forming
step in FT synthesis, which is not well understood, and centers on the
deoxygenative and non-deoxygenative homocoupling of CO using a diiron
siloxycarbyne compound. Specifically, CO bond scission and C–C bond formation
steps will be evaluated. Starting with Fe2(COSiR3)(CO)L and related compounds
the intermediates that form during C-O cleavage will be determined, their
reactivity studied, and the mechanism of the subsequent generation of Fe2(CCO)L
determined. In addition, the effect of functionalization of CO derived species
will be evaluated. Once again using Fe2(COSiR3)(CO), the routes for
functionalizing CO to generate C–X bonds will be targeted. In particular, the
transfer the CCO fragment from Fe2(CCO)L to organic substrates, coupling of CO
with the siloxycarbyne ligand in Fe2(COSiMe3)(CO)L, and the ability of diiron
siloxycarbyne and diiron ketenylidene species to transfer the COSiMe3 and C2O
ligands to exogenous substrates will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.