* 2102245
* Collaborative Research: CAS: Carbene-Containing Ligands on Cu and Cu3N Nanocubes: Access to Stable and Selective Electrolysis for CO2 Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jie He, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 442,454.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors He and Ung at the University of Connecticut and Professor Sun at
Brown University are designing new hybrid materials for selective
electrochemical activation of carbon dioxide (CO2). The team will utilize
synthetic polymers to coat and protect copper-based catalysts, allowing the
resulting hybrid materials to be more robust and efficient for CO2
electroreduction to yield value-added hydrocarbon products. The use of renewable
electricity to convert CO2 to useful chemical products is likely to be an
important component of sustainability. This collaborative project will involve
undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate researchers from two universities, and
will utilize each groupsâ€™ expertise in polymer, nanomaterial, organometallic,
surface science, and electrochemistry. The results obtained from this project
will be disseminated to science and engineering students through joint meetings,
courses, undergraduate research activities, and outreach activities. The PIs are
collaborating with local high schools and outreach programs in the southern New
England region to attract students into studies and potential career paths in
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professors He and Ung at the University of
Connecticut and Professor Sun at Brown University are studying new Cu-based
nanocubes functionalized with synthetic polymer ligands toward stable and
selective electroreduction of CO2. The central hypothesis of this proposal is
twofold: i) the incorporation of Cu-based nanocubes with rationally designed
synthetic polymers to prevent interparticle coalescence and surface corrosion
during electroreduction, and ii) hydrophobic polymer ligands to control the
microenvironment of nanocubes and improve the selectivity of nanocubes. Polymer
ligands terminated with N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) will be anchored on Cu,
copper nitride (Cu3N) and core-shell Cu/Cu3N nanocubes through stable NHC-Cu
bonds. Those nanocubes have maximum (100) surface exposure to efficiently
promote C-C coupling and form C2+ hydrocarbon products. Polymer NHC ligands will
balance the localized proton concentration nearby the surface of nanocubes
through control over polymer chain lengths and hydrophobicity to achieve maximum
catalytic proton-assisted CO2 reduction to C-C coupling products and minimize
proton reduction reaction. The Cu-NHC bond stability and the structural
integrity of polymer-grafted Cu and Cu3N nanocubes will be probed using in situ
spectroscopies and microscopies. The polymer chain length dependent diffusion
properties will be quantitatively measured and correlated to the catalytic
performance of Cu and Cu3N nanocubes. The successful demonstration of the active
and efficient polymer NHC-Cu nanocubes for CO2 electroreduction also allows
tackling more broadly the long-term stability issues of all other cathodic
nanocatalysts to improve the sustainability of
electroreduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.