* 2102338
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Zero-order to first-order: Hydrologic drivers of surface-subsurface storage dynamics in thawing permafrost landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Sarah Evans, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 295,705.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid water in the Arctic flows
at or near the surface above frozen ground known as permafrost. As permafrost
thaws, water flows along new paths, mobilizing previously frozen carbon. If
permafrost soils thaw and dry, carbon is released three times more readily than
if permafrost soils thaw and remain saturated, implying that water patterns
partially control carbon release. Yet, the patterns or drivers of permafrost
saturation and how they vary with climate remain poorly understood. This
research will use field measurements, remote sensing, and modeling to
investigate the dynamics, drivers, and sensitivity of hillslope saturation
patterns on the North Slope of Alaska. Results will help to create an ‘H2cOld:
Water in the Arctic’ traveling outreach activity for rural K-12 students and
communities throughout the southern Appalachians and Idaho. The project will
also train four undergraduate students and a graduate student for science
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hydrology of Arctic hillslopes underlain by
continuous permafrost is largely controlled by water tracks, seasonally
saturated zero-order features draining a third of the upland Arctic. Water
tracks can rapidly degrade into thermoerosional gullies, the most common Arctic
thermoerosional feature, altering seasonal saturation and fluxes of water,
nutrients, and sediments. Although water tracks and thermoerosional gullies are
the largest and most variable aquatic sources of permafrost carbon release,
their saturation dynamics and how these dynamics change as permafrost thaws
remain poorly understood. These two features are hypothesized to represent
endmembers of the surface network extent of Arctic hillslope hydrology with
distinct saturation patterns that are diverging as the climate warms. This
research project will test this hypothesis in paired water tracks and
thermoerosional gullies in northern Alaska via remote sensing and field
campaigns to calibrate a water-energy transport model with variable saturation
and freeze-thaw capabilities. Collectively, this work will improve predictions
of saturation-controlled carbon release from the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.