* 2102788
* Improving the 40Ar/39Ar geochronometer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 506,256.00

This project aims to significantly improve the accuracy of the 40Ar/39Ar and
K-Ar dating methods. Both of these methods are based on the natural radioactive
decay of potassium, a common element in rocks and other geological materials.
These methods are among the most important methods for dating events in Earth,
planetary and biological history because they can be applied to diverse
materials and their effective time range of applicability is the greatest of any
such method. However, despite excellent and continually improving precision,
i.e., experimental reproducibility, these methods are limited in accuracy by how
well the decay constants are known, as well as the isotope composition of
standards needed for calibration. Thus, while 40Ar/39Ar and K-Ar dating can
resolve small age differences and precisely determine rates of geological
processes, comparing their results with age data from other methods (e.g.,
radiocarbon or U-Pb) is only valid at the 1% level at best. The improvements to
be realized in this project will benefit the fields of geology, geophysics,
paleontology (including paleoanthropology), archeology, and planetary
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine measurements of 40K and
40Ar concentration in selected standards using K isotopic and concentration
measurements by Multicollector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (MC-
ICP-MS) and Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometry (TIMS), and 40Ar concentration
measurements using a purpose-built pipette system and noble gas mass
spectrometry. The 40K decay constant will be determined both by ingrowth
experiments using highly 40K-enriched potassium in strategically-designed
synthetic matrix, and by disintegration activity measurements via liquid
scintillation counting. These measurements will allow for new determinations of
the isotope composition of primary mineral standards used in 40Ar/39Ar
geochronology, and the 40K decay constant. The ingrowth-based decay constant
measurement requires an estimated ten years to accumulate sufficient 40Ar for
adequately precise measurement, hence exacting preparation of glasses as
starting material will be the focus of the present proposal. Many of the
activities will be conducted in specialized laboratories overseen by colleagues
with relevant expertise. Much of the data acquisition and sample preparation
will be conducted by a postdoctoral researcher who will be jointly supervised by
PIâ€™s Renne and Morgan. The postdoc will gain broad experience in mass
spectrometry, experimental petrology, and nuclear chemistry, and will also gain
significant experience in the 40Ar/39Ar laboratories in Berkeley and the US
Geological Survey (Denver).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.