* 2102530
* RAPID: Sparta Earthquake Surface Deformation Characterization
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Lewis Owen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 10/31/2023
* USD 29,752.00

This project will combine geoscience methods to characterize the movement of the
landscape associated with the magnitude 5.1 earthquake that shook the town of
Sparta in North Carolina on August 9, 2020. These methods will include flying
across the area undertaking a high-resolution laser imaging detection and
ranging system (LiDAR) to obtain a post-earthquake landscape survey with high
vertical accuracy. Surface geology and geophysical observations will be
integrated with LiDAR, allowing the precise location and measurement of effects
caused at or near the surface by the earthquake. The information gained from
this project will be crucial for earthquake hazard analysis and may be applied
to reduce failure of building infrastructure and lifelines and loss of life in
future earthquakes. Outreach activities with the local communities will be
undertaken to broaden understanding of geoscience and specifically earthquakes.
The Principal investigators and co-investigators will collaborate with the U.S.
Geological Survey and the North Carolina Geological Survey to integrate the
results of this study with their efforts. The project is led by a female early
career scientist, and diverse graduate students (female, Latinx and African-
Caribbean) will gain broad knowledge and experience from working on this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mw 5.1 08/09/2020 earthquake, near Sparta,
North Carolina was strongly felt in the town of Sparta (Intensity VI) and across
the Southeastern, Midwest, and Northeastern USA, with MMI–II recorded as far
away as Wilmington (NC), Atlanta (GA), Cincinnati (OH) and Washington DC. This
uncommon moderate earthquake caused a displacement (rupture) of the ground
surface, being the first time that a surface rupture was recognized in the
eastern USA, after European occupation. Moreover, it is extremely rare for M5
earthquakes to rupture the surface. Efforts to document its characteristics were
undertaken on August 9 and the weeks following. Preliminary observations suggest
that the surface deformation may be associated to re-activation of sub-surface
pre-existent discontinuities, whose tectonic activity is poorly understood. The
surface fault is expressed by a narrow zone of deformation, traceable for
approximately 2.2 kilometers along strike. Along the length of the surface
rupture, the deformation is accommodated by reverse displacement and/or
folding/flexure generating a scarp with a maximum vertical displacement of
approximately 20 centimeters and average of 8–10 centimeters. This project will
complete the characterization of the surface rupture on its entire length. The
propject will acquire a high-resolution LiDAR data, and will continue the
ongoing acquisition of terrestrial LiDAR scan survey data, high resolution
aerial imagery, and subsurface geophysical survey data. Additional geologic and
geomorphic observations will be collected, namely through geological excavations
that will target areas with potential record for paleoseismicity. This cross-
correlation of data will help answer fundamental questions on the Sparta
earthquake dynamics. This project will make a strong contribution to the
knowledge about seismic risk associated to moderate seismicity in the Eastern
United States and very likely for similar intraplate settings. This research
will provide the opportunity of understanding how deformation in the surface was
accommodated, how the surface rupture occurred and what pre-existing structures
near the surface are capable to propagate seismicity. For that, the combination
of remote data and field observations which will include sub-surface surveys
will be essential. Several studies of seismicity Mw≥6.0 correlating geological
deformation, sub-surface structures, paleoseismology, seismology and remote
sensing have been undertaken in other regions of the world; however not for a Mw
5.1 and as such this helps make this study unique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.