* 2102667
* CAS: Nickel and Cobalt Hybrid Macrocycles for Oxidative Transformations of Organic Substrates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Heather Lucas, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Heather R. Lucas and Katherine Belecki of Virginia Commonwealth University are
synthesizing and studying a family of metal-containing compounds that can
catalyze the conversion of target molecules into value-added products. Guided by
Nature, this project uses knowledge gained from biological systems and
bioinorganic model complexes to synthetically design potent and robust
transition metal oxidants. These catalysts promote the principles of green
chemistry by making use of earth-abundant metals (nickel or cobalt) held in a
strategically designed organic scaffolds, and by performing oxidation reactions
using natural oxidants like hydrogen peroxide or dioxygen. This project will
focus on how a series of changes to the chemical structure of these designer
catalysts can tune their reactivity, with an emphasis on advancing a molecular
understanding of how these catalysts work. To accomplish these goals, catalyst
variants will be synthesized and characterized, and their reactivity profiles
will be evaluated. Select metallocomplexes will also be immobilized onto
particles that are easily separated from reaction mixtures, enabling recovery
and recycling of the designer catalysts and thus further advancing the green
chemical principles that have, in part, inspired this work. This project will
provide the basis for applications including the environmentally-friendly
preparation of basic and fine chemicals or the catalytic degradation of
persistent chemical contaminants. It also has the potential to generate
fundamental knowledge that could inform the synthetic design of other bio-
inspired oxidants. Students participating in this research will receive training
not only in cutting-edge techniques but also in how to approach problem solving
with a strategic and scientifically rigorous mentality. Moreover, concepts of
bio-inspired catalysis and green chemistry are easily relatable to real-world
phenomena, and thus will be used by the PI and the co-PI to pique the natural
scientific curiosity of the broader community with a particular focus on
inspiring the next generation of scientists through ongoing STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) outreach efforts with local
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program
in the Division of Chemistry, Heather R. Lucas and Katherine Belecki of Virginia
Commonwealth University are pursuing the synthetic development,
characterization, and application of electronic variations on a new class of
hydrogen peroxide-activating transition-metal complexes that are strategically
designed to employ transient metal-(di)oxygen adducts as green oxidants of
organic molecules. This project will involve the synthesis of hybrid N4
macrocyclic ligand families containing both diamido and diamino donor atoms, the
characterization and evaluation of their metallocomplexes as effective oxidation
catalysts, and the immobilization of these catalysts for improved recyclability
and expanded windows of operability enabled by flow chemistry. Substitutions on
the aromatic ring of the N4 macrocyclic ligand scaffold will be assessed for
their contributions to tuning the reactivity of the resulting metallocomplexes.
Structural, electronic, and chemical characterization of the catalytic species
for this series of electronic analogues will be achieved through a wide range of
spectroscopic and analytical techniques. Advanced mechanistic studies will be
pursued through reaction monitoring, isotopic labelling studies, kinetic
profiling, and Hammett analyses. This catalyst family is active in oxygen atom
transfer, hydrogen atom abstraction, and C-H activation reactions, all of which
are broadly applicable in the synthesis of target molecules related to
industrial (fine chemicals, pharmaceuticals) or academic (chemical biology
probes, biomimetic model systems) applications. This project aims to deepen
fundamental understanding of metal-(di)oxygen coordination complexes, the
oxidative transformation reactions that they promote, and electron transfer
considerations between ligands and metal centers of coordination complexes.
Successful completion of these studies will provide new perspectives for the
synthetic design of bioinspired green oxidants. Moreover, harnessing metal
catalysts that incorporate earth abundant metals through energy efficient
reaction trajectories has the potential to contribute to the development of more
economical and sustainable catalytic oxidation
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.