* 2102265
* CAS: Hydrogen Evolution in Water Catalyzed by Molecular Cobalt Complexes with Pentadentate Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Xuan Zhao, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Xuan Zhao of The University of Memphis is studying hydrogen production from
water as a promising approach to generate this alternative, clean and renewable
fuel for the future. Discoveries from the proposed research will have the
potential to realize scalable hydrogen production from water using well-defined
metal catalysts. The proposed study will impact the scientific community and
society by the generation of new fundamental science, the training of graduate
and undergraduate researchers, and the dissemination of the importance of
renewable energy research. Undergraduate students in the Memphis region,
particularly underrepresented minorities, will have an opportunity to
participate in the summer research program in the PI's laboratory. In addition,
annual workshops on solar and renewable energy research will be offered to
undergraduate students in the Memphis area. This outreach activity will
introduce young researchers to challenges at the forefront of solar energy
conversion and inspire them to pursue careers in the field of renewable energy
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis
program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Xuan Zhao of The University of Memphis
is studying the basic science of hydrogen evolution reaction catalyzed by
molecular cobalt complexes with pentadentate ligands. Based on thermodynamic and
kinetic analyses, systematic ligand variations will allow the evaluation of
electronic and steric factors that contribute to catalytic activity for hydrogen
production. The proposed study will employ advanced transient spectroscopic
techniques (pulse radiolysis, laser flash photolysis and time-resolved infrared
spectroscopy) and density functional theory calculations to identify and
characterize the electronic structures of critical catalytic intermediates that
are important for Hâ€“H bond formation. In the context of future applications in
renewable energy conversion, the success of this program will lead to the
discovery of new catalysts with high efficiency and stability for aqueous
hydrogen production at wide range of pHs, including in alkaline solutions. New
ligands and metal compounds created from this program will also impact
fundamental studies in other energy-related research such as carbon dioxide
reduction, functionalization of hydrocarbons, and green chemistry
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.