* 2102918
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--ICECAP (ICE age Chemistry And Proxies) Phase-4: Studying Aerosol Transport, Forcing, and Climate Feedbacks during the Common and Last Glacial Eras
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Loretta Mickley, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 357,785.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team generally aims
to develop a more complete and quantitative understanding of (1) natural and
anthropogenic drivers of biomass burning, and (2) linkages between Northern
Hemisphere (NH) biomass burning and climate over the most recent 2,000 years and
rapid climate change during five Dansgaard-Oeschger (D-O) events of the last
glacial era. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these goals, the research team
will make new measurements on already-archived ice core samples and leverage
from existing published and unpublished ice core data as well as interpret
findings within a model framework, including simulations with both simple models
and the more detailed, 3-D ICECAP model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will develop an Arctic ice core array of biomass burning tracer deposition
spanning the last 2,000 years from thirteen ice core sites—including new
measurements on an archived ice core from the northernmost ice cap of Greenland—
to quantify how biomass burning emissions have changed over the past two
millennia. This detailed array, which incorporates ice core sites representative
of burning in Europe, North America, and Siberia, will aid in the assessment of
how biomass burning has changed regionally across the high latitude NH. In
addition, the researchers will use ICECAP, which includes an atmospheric
chemistry transport component (GEOS-Chem) and a dynamic vegetation and fire
model (LPJ-LMfire), to explore links between biomass burning, human activities,
and climate variability, as well as to assess the impact of fire emissions on
radiative forcing and chemistry-climate
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfires are a critical component of the
earth system. Biomass burning emissions play an important role in climate
through both direct and indirect radiative forcing and fire-driven land cover
change alters albedo and the hydrologic cycle. Current model simulations,
however, are hampered by uncertainties associated with natural and anthropogenic
aerosol emission sources, especially during the preindustrial era which serves
as the baseline for assessment of modern forcing. It is increasingly recognized
that humans have altered atmospheric aerosols much earlier than the commonly-
used preindustrial baseline of 1750 CE; this project will help improve model
parameterization of preindustrial aerosol transport and emissions, including
from both anthropogenic and natural sources, as well as of aerosol-climate
interactions and feedbacks across rapid climate change during the last glacial
era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.