* 2102726
* Theoretical and Computational Modeling of Supercoiling, Topology, and Active Fluctuations in Chromosomal Organization and Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Spakowitz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 501,269.00

This research program establishes new methods to analyze and predict chromosomal
organization and dynamics in living cells. Furthermore, the foundational
theoretical development in this research program is transferable to a broad
range of biological processes that are driven by non-equilibrium active forces.
In addition, the specific biological processes that the PI will tackle provide
new fundamental insight in top phenomena that are central to our understanding
of chromosomal organization and function. Reproduction and epigenetic regulation
represent two of the most critical defining features in human biology. This
research program brings quantitative physical insight into the molecular origins
of how we reproduce and how we establish and maintain our multi-cellular
programming, providing fundamental insight and predictive tools for interpreting
experimental measurements. This research program is defined by several key
deliverables that provide educational resources that impact a range of
communities. The educational program includes the establishment of LABScI
(Laboratory Activities for Broadened Scientific Instruction) to develop and
implement laboratory science and engineering teaching modules for high school
students that are being treated for childhood cancer and other illnesses. The
LABScI program engages undergraduate and graduate students to develop the
teaching modules, resulting in an exciting opportunity for students to enrich
their educational experience. The PI will partner with the School of Education
at Stanford University to expand the LACScI program and develop educational
materials that effectively integrate online education with hands-on laboratory
activities. New software development in the PI's lab aims to consolidate
computational approaches in physics-based modeling, genomic and bioinformatic
analysis, and data-science methods. Coupled to the software development is an
effort to provide educational resources that aid the implementation of these
disparate approaches. New efforts in education aim to demonstrate how to
effectively integrate physics-based and data-science approaches as complementary
tools for biological analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instructions for all
biological processes in human cells are contained within chromosomes whose total
DNA length is roughly one meter. These massive DNA polymers must be capable of
organizing and rearranging in response to cell-cycle events that are central to
biological function. The PIs existing theory of polymer dynamics provides a
starting point for describing chromosomal behavior, but a range of distinct
biophysical mechanisms contribute to the behavior in living cells that are not
currently captured within the existing theoretical models. Numerous experimental
observations demonstrate that chromosomal organization and dynamics are
dramatically influenced by enzymes that manipulate DNA twist and supercoiling,
mitigate entanglements and knots, and contribute active biological forces. This
research program will establish a theoretical and computational framework for
predicting and analyzing these critical biophysical drivers of chromosomal
behavior. In establishing theory that is transferable to a broad range of
biological processes, the PI will focus on the following three key cell-cycle
events: pairing of homologous chromosomes during meiosis, introduction of twist
and supercoiling during RNA transcription, and the establishment of chromosome
territories after cell division. Within this program, the PI will tackle one of
the prevailing challenges in establishing a physical framework for living
systems—establishing a unified predictive theory for non-equilibrium matter. In
this effort, he will develop a new theory of active-Brownian matter that
provides a clear pathway for prediction of the role of transient enzymatic
fluctuations in driving biological processes. This theoretical approach reveals
a prevailing concept—the time-dependent temperature—that serves as a
consolidating framework for capturing non-equilibrium behavior in living bio-
logical systems, and will exploit this theoretical approach in specific problems
that are central to the understanding of chromosomal
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.