* 2102548
* Collaborative Research: Probing Undiscovered Reaction Pathways in the Decomposition of Highly Energized Molecules: Isomerization, Roaming, and Proton Coupled Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Scott Reid, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Scott Reid at Marquette
University and Richard Loomis at Washington University in St. Louis,
respectively, will explore competing bimolecular reaction pathways of highly-
excited molecules. Energized reactant molecules can relax via multiple
mechanisms, including (i) direct bimolecular reactions, (ii) isomerization
(changes in molecular structure and connectivity), (iii) roaming (long-range
intermolecular interactions that lead to unexpected, secondary products), and
proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions that occur following the
initial transfer of an electron or proton from an excited reactant molecule to
the other reactant molecule. The understanding of roaming, isomerization, and
PCET processes are still at an elementary stage. Reid and Loomis hypothesize the
pathways that compete with direct bimolecular reactions are central to many
fundamental processes, and they are striving to develop a unified understanding
of the factors that dictate their efficiencies and how these pathways dictate
the properties of the products. Thus, the research teams led by Professors Reid
and Loomis are using a powerful combination of frequency- and time-resolved
experiments, together with theory, to unravel the dynamics of these processes.
The experiments will be performed in vacuum, in solvents, and in solid matrices,
and the energetics and yields of the products are characterized as a function of
how much energy is deposited into the reacting molecules. In this manner, the
research teams will characterize how these different pathways and their
efficiencies are altered by local environment and excitation. The collaborative
nature of the research project offers graduate and undergraduate students
training in an array of important skill areas, preparing them for careers in
science. The project also has a focus on broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) through a number of complementary initiatives at Marquette and Washington
University. A notable component of this program is the development of highly
practical courses for at-risk students at the onset of their graduate education.
The courses build on a principle of enhancing diversity in STEM, especially in
academia, by providing promising scientists with the tools they need to succeed
at an early stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative research
project led by Professors Scott Reid and Richard Loomis at Marquette University
and Washington University in St. Louis, respectively, is the characterization of
common features associated with isomerization, roaming, and PCET reactions on
ground, excited, and ion radical surfaces. The systems being explored fall into
two categories: (i) reaction dynamics of halons including the isomers of di-
bromoethane, di-chloroethane, and halothane and their partially deuterated
analogs, and (ii) reactions of ionized complexes of ammonia with halobenzenes.
These target systems, the halons, are environmentally important, are expected to
demonstrate the full range of reaction pathways listed above, and yet are small
enough to be tractable via high-level theoretical methods. The complementary and
overlapping skill sets and techniques in the two laboratories enable experiments
to be undertaken with high sensitivity, energy resolution, and temporal
resolution. Specifically, frequency-resolved fluorescence-based spectroscopy,
frequency- and time-resolved ion time-of-flight velocity mapped imaging
experiments, ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy, and infrared
excitation experiments will be pursued. These reaction systems were chosen, in
part, because of the ability to probe the properties of the parent molecules or
complexes and all of the product channels with high sensitivity. The selected
systems are also being investigated in detail using computational methods, with
the experimental results providing stringent tests and milestones for ongoing
development of the theory. Important challenges in this research effort include
state-specific preparation of the reactants and state-resolved detection of the
products, challenges that are to be overcome through the combined effort of the
two research groups. Student training opportunities and an emphasis on
broadening participation in STEM education and research further broaden the
impacts of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.