* 2102665
* CAS: Assessing the Applicability of Marcus Theory to Excited-state Proton Transfer and Protonic Photochemical Energy Conversion
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Shane Ardo, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 349,768.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Shane Ardo of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of California-Irvine is developing a series of
photo-acid and photo-base molecules with specifically designed proton donor and
proton acceptor groups. The goal of this research is to use these molecules to
evaluate the driving-force dependence for rate constants associated with
excited-state proton transfer, which is important for solar energy utilization.
The project lies at the interface of organic and photophysical chemistry, and is
therefore well suited to the education of scientists at all levels. This group
is also well-positioned to provide the highest level of education and training
for students underrepresented in science. Outreach activities with middle school
students that promote interest in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) and foster trust in scientists and science will also be part of the
funded project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photo-acids and photo-bases are molecules
whose acidity changes reversibly upon absorption of light. This can result in
excited-state proton transfer, with energetics described using the well-known
Förster cycle analysis. Recently, Professor Shane Ardo and his group showed that
many photo-acids and photo-bases that do not undergo excited state proton
transfer due to kinetic limitations can be re-engineered to overcome this
barrier through the introduction of proton acceptor and/or proton donor buffer
species. This allowed the research team to accurately predict excited state
acidity, and thus standard state driving force, for proton transfer. In this
project, they aim to validate their new method and then use it to quantify the
relationship between standard-state driving force and activation free energy for
proton-transfer reactions, including in the Marcus inverted region. They also
aim to leverage this fundamental understanding to design and demonstrate
photochemical protonic energy conversion systems that use light to modulate the
protonation state of two buffer species. They attempt to answer the following
critical questions: 1) Are driving-force-dependent theories for the kinetics of
electron transfer and proton transfer, e.g. Rehm–Weller, Marcus–Cohen,
Agmon–Levine, suitable to describe excited-state proton transfer reactions? 2)
Can the ground-state acidity/basicity of photo-acids/photo-bases be tuned so
that buffers and/or protic solvents serve as proton donors/acceptors for
regeneration of the ground-state conjugate base/acid of photo-acids/photo-
bases?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.