* 2102160
* RUI: Heavy-Atom Tunneling in Annulenes and Helical Polycyclic Conjugated Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* William Karney, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 202,564.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism Program of the
NSF Chemistry Division is supporting Professor William Karney and his
undergraduate research team in the Department of Chemistry at the University of
San Francisco to explore the extent of quantum mechanical tunneling by heavy
atoms in reactions of organic molecules. The project combines experiment and
theory, and will contribute to a basic understanding of what types of chemical
reactions proceed by passage through a barrier rather than over the barrier.
Passage through the barrier is known as quantum mechanical tunneling. Systems to
be studied include compounds with potential as molecular switches, and reactions
relevant to organic synthesis and biochemistry. Students on the project will
gain experience in synthesis, spectroscopy, and a wide range of computational
chemistry methods. The highly diverse student population at USF translates to
high potential for training members of underrepresented groups in science,
especially women, Latinx students, and those from the Pacific
Rim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the large atomic mass of carbon relative to
hydrogen, carbon atoms can tunnel through barriers in chemical reactions if they
travel only short distances. This project combines experiment and computations
to investigate heavy-atom tunneling in annulenes and polycyclic conjugated
hydrocarbons. Low-temperature nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy will probe
possible tunneling by all 16 carbons in the planar pi-bond shifting of
[16]annulene. Transannular electrocyclic ring closures in several annulenes will
be studied by multidimensional tunneling calculations to explore the scope of
tunneling in pericyclic reactions. Orbital-symmetry forbidden
electrocyclizations of helical polycyclic conjugated hydrocarbons, systems of
potential use as chiroptical switches, will be computationally investigated,
with a focus on tunneling and symmetry lowering due to excited-state mixing. The
work seeks to deepen our understanding of heavy-atom tunneling and to broaden
the scope of reactions studied in which tunneling plays a major role. The
project also will provide training in synthesis, spectroscopy, and high-level
computational techniques for undergraduates and includes outreach activities
with local middle school students to expose them to computational
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.