* 2102309
* Disentangling Many-Body Effects and Coupling in the Vibrational Spectra of Aqueous Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Francesco Paesani, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 789,413.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism A program of
the Division of Chemistry, Professors Francesco Paesani (University of
California â€“ San Diego) and Ryan Steele (The University of Utah) will
collaboratively investigate the manner in which charged particles, called ions,
interact with water. This hydration of ions drives numerous processes, including
biological chemistry, atmospheric chemistry, and renewable-energy chemistry. The
response of these chemical species to infrared light provides clues regarding
their behavior, but unraveling the details of this behavior from experiments
often requires large-scale computer simulations. The two research groups will
use new computer simulations to study, at the atomic level, the processes that
govern these ion-water interactions. In parallel, the investigators will be
involved in outreach and mentoring activities designed to promote science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines among students from
underrepresented groups. In particular, Professor Paesani will focus on
integrating UC San Diego and San Diego community college students in research
projects throughout the academic year. Professor Steele will focus on mentoring
high-school chemistry teachers through M.S. Program for Secondary School
Teachers at the University of Utah as well as in the integration of
computational simulations into the high school
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two research groups will combine newly
developed many-body potential energy functions with new local-mode approaches
for simulating anharmonic vibrational spectroscopy. This synergy will enable the
decomposition of the anharmonic couplings that drive unique vibrational behavior
in strong ions and provide insight to recent hydrated-ion experiments. The
impact of divalent ions on hydrogen-bonding networks will also be investigated,
along with the evolution of hydration behavior of small biomolecular ions.
Wherever possible, these investigations will be coupled with recent and
forthcoming results from experimental collaborators. Ultimately, these studies
will be used to calibrate the potential energy functions and their underlying
physics, in order to simulate both small, hydrated ions and condensed-phase
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.