* 2102459
* The Excited State Behavior of Ru(II) Photodrugs
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sherri McFarland, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 440,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism-B program is
supporting the research of Professor Sherri McFarland at the University of
Texas, Arlington to examine the excited state photophysics and redox properties
of Ru-based photosensitizers. Photosensitizers are compounds that can trap the
energy of light and use it to effect a useful chemical reaction. Examples of
this include solar energy conversion, catalysis, and photodrugs. This project
focuses on a particular class of such photosensitizers that show promise in
cancer therapy, but have many unanswered questions about their mode of action.
The work will investigate the fundamental photophysical and electrochemical
properties of oligothiophene-containing ruthenium compounds specifically, and
reveal the details of photocatalytic mechanisms in which they can participate.
It will also explore how the behavior of these photosensitizers can change as a
function of its environment, e.g., agglomeration effects and the influence of
simulated biological structures. The proposed work will train graduate and
undergraduate students in highly multidisciplinary research at the interface of
chemistry, biology, physics, and engineering. The knowledge and skills these
trainees will acquire will give them tools necessary for success as future
research scientists in cutting-edge multidisciplinary fields ranging from
photomedicine to solar energy conversion and chemical biology. The broader
impact objectives will simultaneously equip tomorrowâ€™s leaders with skills in
science communication and expose them to entrepreneurship and commercialization
as it relates to bringing scientific discoveries from the laboratory to society.
It will also provide curriculum-based research opportunities for undergraduate
students that would otherwise not have the opportunity to experience scientific
research in a real-world laboratory setting, expanding diversity in our next
generation of emerging scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project project
will examine the excited state photophysics and redox properties of
oligothiophene-containing Ru(II) complexes, compounds that have important
applications as photosensitizers in fields ranging from solar energy conversion
to photodrugs. The project also aims to develop the photophysical model(s) for
these photosensitizers in complex biological environments. We will synthesize
and characterize oligothiophene-appended Ru(II) photosensitizers, [Ru(LL)2(IP-
nT)]2+ that differ in the number of thiophene rings (nT), the types of
substituents on the thiophene rings, and the co-ligands (LL). The modifications
are designed to systematically vary redox potentials and triplet state
characteristics, and to alter the covalent and noncovalent associations typical
of oligothiophenes. Electrochemical and photophysical techniques will be used to
test hypothetical photoredox catalysis mechanisms in complex substrates, where
synthetic and cell-derived vesicles will be used to model how photosensitizer
response modulates in confined matrices, e.g., a lipid bilayer. The results will
advance the field of Ru(II)-oligothiophene photosensitization. With a
mechanistic understanding of oligothiophene-containing Ru(II) photosensitizers,
there exists the opportunity to create better next-generation photosensitizers
for photocatalytic applications. The broader impact activities are equally
focused on exposing STEM scientists to science communication and
entrepreneurship based on past translational research and commercialization
efforts related to light-molecule interactions. The training program will cover
outreach, education, and curriculum, emphasizing the process from fundamental
discovery to societal application, and provide opportunities for researchers to
improve their science communication skills. Curriculum-based research
opportunities for undergraduate STEM students will be designed and delivered to
ensure that a larger percentage of these students receive hands-on research
experience during their degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.