* 2102740
* Collaborative Research: Mapping the kinematics and dynamics of tidal ocean currents with surface drifters
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Edward Zaron, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 155,577.00

This project is concerned with quantifying and mapping diurnal and semi-diurnal
baroclinic tides, that is, internal waves in the ocean that are the result of
the loss of energy from the barotropic tides forced by the Sun and the Moon.
This work will primarily use a unique dataset of oceanic near-surface hourly
currents provided by the trajectories of surface drifting buoys from the Global
Drifter Program (GDP). The approach is guided by an analysis of tidal energetics
which distinguishes between time-mean, or phase-locked, baroclinic tides and
time-variable, or non-phase-locked, baroclinic tides. The GDP dataset is both
large enough and sufficiently accurate that it should permit quantitative
assessment of both types of baroclinic tides, and specifically test theoretical
models for the scattering of phase-locked tides into non-phase-locked tides. In
addition, the analyses will permit the mapping---for both phase-locked and non-
phase-locked tides---of dissipation rate coefficients and their associated
dynamical processes, which can be distinct based on geographical locations and
environmental conditions. Such mapping will provide much needed information for
improving the realism and physical parameterization of tidal mixing in ocean
general circulation models. The work will contribute to the goal of measuring on
a global scale upper-ocean currents which ubiquitously exhibit energetic
oscillations at tidal frequencies. Improved prediction of ocean surface currents
will have societal impacts for stakeholders ranging from the shipping industry
to seasonal climate forecasters. The project will also contribute to a climate-
themed educational program including summer camps, hands-n activites, and
enhancements to existing school field trip
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estimates of the phase-locked tides are presently
available from the analysis of satellite altimeter data,and these estimates have
led to the creation of baroclinic tide models, which this project will test and
extend using the GDP data. As tidal dynamics includes both wave scattering and
wave dissipation, testing these models will place constraints on the range of
physically plausible parameterizations for these processes on regional and
global scales. Finally, the GDP data shall be systematically compared with
outputs of a tide and mesoscale-resolving ocean global circulation model, an
exercise which will be useful for validating the model simulations as well as
providing a useful context for understanding potential biases of the GDP
observations and statistical methods applied. This project will generate new
knowledge concerning tidal currents in order to better understand tidal dynamics
and their role in the maintenance of the global thermohaline ocean circulation.
The new drifter dataset that will be utilized to investigate baroclinic tidal
phenomena is both large enough and unique (temporally, spatially and accuracy
wise) to provide a quantitative description of tidal properties. In addition,
qualitative and potentially new assessments of tidal/non-tidal interactions will
be obtained, including their seasonal and longer temporal variability. A novel
decomposition of the tidal energy budget, which separates processes primarily
affecting phase-locked and non-phase-locked tidal signals, is proposed to guide
the analysis and interpretation of the drifter observations, as well as
altimetry data and numerical simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.