* 2102394
* Development of Catalytic Cyclization/Coupling Reactions for New Chemical Space
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Ramesh Giri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Ramesh Giri of The Pennsylvania State University is developing catalysts
that convert alkenes to cyclic molecules and then link them to another
hydrocarbon fragment. In this work, close attention is paid to the use of earth-
abundant transition metal catalysts, particularly those based upon Ni and Cu.
This work is addressing the need for more efficient ways to make complex
molecules that are critical to support the discovery of new pharmaceuticals and
materials. The catalysts that Dr. Giri and his research team are studying are
used to construct two carbon-carbon bonds in a single step to rapidly access
value-added products and decrease the waste that accumulates from less efficient
iterative processes. Selectivity elements are also being incorporated into
catalyst design to control the fine structure of the complex molecules that can
be generated using this technology. The ideas, concepts, and products of this
work are being shared with local high schools through outreach activities to
foster critical thinking in chemical science through the lens of
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ramesh Giri and his research team are
developing catalysts to advance cyclization/coupling strategies for alkene
difunctionalization reactions. The three objectives of the program seek to
tackle a combination of long-standing challenges and new directions in this area
of reaction design. Beta-hydride elimination is a competing process in
cyclization/coupling reactions that has significantly limited the scope of these
transformations. The Giri group is designing new catalysts and catalyst-ligand
combinations to avoid this classic fundamental challenge. To further broaden the
scope of cyclization/coupling strategies towards accessing a broader range of
complex molecules, this research program is also testing new enamine and silyl
enol ether substrates, as well as exploring linearizable substrates with
cleavable tethers. These activities are providing training opportunities for a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students in catalysis, reaction
design, and mechanistic study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.