* 2102705
* New Approaches to Catalyst Screening and Development
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Hage, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2024
* USD 575,000.00

This research project builds on a platform being developed by the University of
Nebraska research team to exploit enzymes as catalytic reporters to facilitate
reaction discovery and catalyst optimization. This approach is termed In Situ
Enzymatic Screening. The method utilizes ‘reporting enzymes’ to provide real-
time information on the relative rates for a set of parallel
organic/organometallic reactions of interest. Parallel screening methods are of
interest to chemists in academia and industry as they enable the identification
of fundamentally new transformations of novel catalysts for targeted reactions.
There is a particular need for focused screening in process chemistry groups in
the pharmaceutical industry, where reaction optimization is critical. This
project seeks to develop new enzymatic screening tools that are applicable
across a range of temperatures and that take advantage of phosphate ester
functionality for which enzymatic screens are not yet available. The project
will also help build the future STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) workforce by training a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate
students in an interdisciplinary research environment at the chemistry/biology
interface, including elements of organic, organometallic, analytical, and
enzymatic chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will further explore and
develop an information-rich parallel screening method, termed In Situ Enzymatic
Screening (ISES), that uses enzymes as biomacromolecular sensors to provide
read-out directly to the experimentalist. This research builds upon the team's
earlier proof-of-concept studies that led to the first examples of catalytic
asymmetric allylic amination chemistry with nickel, an earth-abundant metal, and
that uncovered a useful new transformation for diversity-oriented synthesis
known as thiocyanopalladation/carbocyclization. This proposal seeks to fully
launch the ‘phosphate-ISES’ and ‘thermal-ISES’ screening platforms. The former
goal is motivated by the emergence and importance of substrates bearing dialkyl
phosphate functionalities, an important functional group both for transition
metal coordination and for specific chemistry. These new enzymatic screening
platforms have been built by expressing and testing candidates for screening
enzymes that recognize dialkyl phosphates and/or that operate at elevated
temperatures. Preliminary results point to enzymes that produce a UV/vis signal
under such conditions, enabling the screening of candidate metal-ligand
combinations at elevated temperatures or in reactions where dialkyl phosphate
functionalities are critical. These methods are being developed with specific
targeted chemistry in mind, particularly the catalytic asymmetric synthesis of
alpha-halovinyl amino acids as potential mechanism-based inhibitors for PLP
(pyridoxal phosphate) enzymes. This synthetic goal builds on recent developments
in this laboratory in which quaternary, alpha-(1’-fluoro) vinyl amino acids were
synthesized for the first time. The scientific broader impacts of this work
include opening new avenues for the catalyst discovery process and for green and
sustainable chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.