* 2102891
* Schooling through Vortex Streets; A Biological and Computational Approach to Understanding Collective Behavior in Wild Fish
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Liao, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

The ability of swarming animals to maneuver and navigate has fascinated humans
for centuries. The most economically and ecologically important fishes are
schooling fishes that swim together in the millions and migrate hundreds of
miles through turbulent ocean currents. How a school senses and moves through
its own turbulent wake and unpredictable ocean currents is vital to its success
in daily life-or-death scenarios, where individuals must quickly and cohesively
maneuver out of the jaws of large, fast-attacking predators. Because adjacent
fields such as autonomous swarm robotics are based on and inspired by the
collective behavior of biological fish schools, there is a critical need to
understand how complex wakes can facilitate or disrupt organized, cohesive
motion in schooling fishes. Insight into this phenomenon holds the key to
unlocking unknown mechanisms that could advance the fields of collective
behavior, neuroscience, evolution, movement ecology, robotics and fluid
dynamics. The hydrodynamic mechanisms underlying schooling remain largely
speculative due to the lack of a theoretical framework with which to experiment
with wild, behaving animals. To meet this challenge, this project will examine
the vortex street interactions downstream of arrays of cylinders by leveraging
both computational fluid dynamics modeling and live fish experiments. The
overall objective of the project is to define the fundamental mechanisms with
which interacting vortex streets influence the patterns of formation in
schooling fishes. The research project will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields by providing an authentic research
experience for undergraduate students and the public. This includes the long-
running NSF REU program and K-9 outreach program at the Whitney Lab for Marine
Bioscience, an established social media presence (over 10k YouTube subscribers),
and a popular science book currently being written (Princeton University
Press).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will combine computational fluid dynamic
(CFD) modeling, machine-learning motion-tracking algorithms, organismal
biomechanics, and experimental sensory neuroscience to examine how complex
hydrodynamic environments impact the collective behavior of schooling fishes
with the following aims. Aim 1: Determine the arrangement of cylinders that
generates vortex wakes that maximize attraction to fish, as well as sub-optimal
control configurations. The hypothesis is that an optimal arrangement maximizing
the coherency of the vortex street exists and it consists of a structured array
with a constant spacing for each of the two directions. Aim 2: Reveal
distribution patterns of schooling fishes, both individually and collectively,
behind experimental cylinder wakes. Here the hypothesis is that fish behavior
depends on the cylinder distribution and relevant turbulent flow. Aim 3:
Investigate the sensory biology of how fish remain in coherent schooling
formations. The PI hypothesizes that faced with complex flows, schooling fish
prioritize vision over flow sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.