* 2102653
* Gold(I) Complexes Containing Unsaturated Hydrocarbyl Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ross Widenhoefer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ross A. Widenhoefer in the
Department of Chemistry at Duke University will investigate new chemistry of
neutral gold(I) complexes. The project focuses on unsaturated hydrocarbyl
ligands including sigma-alkenyl, -allyl, -allenyl, and -propargyl ligands. One
goal of this research is to develop a meaningful understanding of the structures
and fluxional behavior of these complexes and, likewise an understanding of the
mechanisms through which these complexes undergo electrophilic deauration (loss
of gold). In doing so, these activities will provide mechanistic insight that
will serve the ever growing global community of researchers working toward (1)
the development of new and more efficient gold(I) catalyzed transformations and
(2) elucidation of the mechanisms of gold(I)-catalyzed transformations. The
proposed research activities are fully integrated into the scientific education
and training of the graduate and undergraduate student researchers, including
students from ethnic groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.
Graduate students are encouraged to augment their graduate research and
educational experience through participation in educational activities offered
through the Duke University Graduate School. Graduate students will participate
in community outreach activities in collaboration with Dr. Ben Bobay of the Duke
NMR center, directed toward providing local high school students with hands-on
exposure to modern high-field NMR spectroscopy and one-on-one instruction in the
processing, manipulation, and interpretation of NMR
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite a growing body of research in this area,
limited experimental information is available regarding the structure,
reactivity, and fluxional behavior of gold complexes containing unsaturated
hydrocarbyl ligands including sigma-alkenyl, -allyl, -allenyl, and -propargyl
ligands. The proposed research activities aim to fill these gaps and develop an
experimentally-grounded understanding of gold complexes containing unsaturated
hydrocarbyl ligands. Focus is on understanding the structure and fluxional
behavior of these complexes and the mechanisms of electrophilic deauration. The
research will address two areas of inquiry. The first area involves the
elucidation of the mechanisms for the addition of electrophiles to gold alkenyl
complexes involving direct attack on the C=C alkenyl bond by (i) validating the
pi-alpha pathway for electrophilic addition, (ii) validating the pi-beta pathway
for electrophilic addition, and (iii) modeling the transition state/intermediate
for alkyne/alkene cycloaddition. The second area involves the elucidation of the
structures, fluxional behavior and nucleophilic behavior of gold hydrocarbyl
complexes possessing beta, gamma and or gamma, delta unsaturation, specifically
targeting (i) gold sigma-allyl complexes, (ii) gold sigma-allenyl and sigma-
propargyl complexes, and (iii) gold 3-butenyl
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.