* 2102249
* NSF-BSF:Fluid-fluid interfaces with diminished surface tension and giant thermal and quantum fluctuations as novel materials for ultrasoft photonics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lev Deych, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 286,280.00

Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of materials under extreme
conditions is often where new fundamental discoveries are made and new
applications are developed. The authors of this project study the behavior of
interfaces between two different liquids in the limit of extreme softness such
that by making the material even a little bit softer will result in the
destruction of the interface by thermal oscillations. This project will study
light confined in the interior part of the spherical interface by using the
difference in refraction indexes on the opposite sides of the interface. This
novel confinement enables the researchers to study the details of the thermal
fluctuations of the ultrasoft interface with an unprecedent resolution and
accuracy using the modes of the confined light. In addition to providing
information about thermal motion of the molecules, optical excitations confined
by the interface allow researchers to optically affect its mechanical
oscillations, which will, in their turn affect the optical excitations. Such so-
called optomechanical interaction is expected to be significantly enhanced in
the ultrasoft materials and will allow studying novel optomechanical phenomena.
This international collaborative project will also contribute to educational
activities of both participating institutions (Queens College, New York and Tel-
Aviv University, Israel) by developing new courses around the themes of the
project and involving students, especially those from underrepresented groups,
in work on the project. In particular, this project will fund a research
internship opportunity for a student at Queens College’s M.S. in Photonics
program, designed to help students from underrepresented groups to enter the
labor market in photonics related industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with optomechanical properties of fluid-
in-fluid spherical droplets actuated as whispering-gallery-mode resonators. The
elasticity of the droplet-forming interface is controlled by surfactants and can
be reduced to the limit of ultimate softness such that any additional surfactant
would destruct the droplet by Brownian fluctuations. The mechanical softness of
the droplets does not affect their performance as optical resonators, which is
determined by the refractive index contrast between the material of the droplet
and the surrounding medium. The combination of mechanical softness and the
resonance enhanced sensitivity due to the formation of whispering gallery modes
enables the optical interrogation of Brownian fluctuations of the surface with
resolution exceeding that of existing Rayleigh- limited imaging techniques. The
extreme softness of the droplets results in the giant mechanical response to
resonantly enhanced optical forces allowing researchers to achieve a strength of
optomechanical coupling far exceeding that in any other available optomechanical
system. The regime of the extremely strong optomechanical coupling enables the
study of optomechanical phenomena well outside of typically available range of
parameters. For instance, in these systems one can achieve efficient cavity-
mediated cooling of the surface oscillations to the smallest phonon population
numbers despite the penalty imposed by the lower phonon frequencies. The high-
value goal of the project is to cool the capillary oscillations of the softened
droplets toward the quantum mechanical ground-state while maintaining the bath
at room temperature. The high risks of such a project will be mitigated by
testing various gas-liquid and liquid-liquid interfaces at different
temperatures, pressures, and surfactant adsorption-concentration. The
experimental efforts will be accompanied by theoretical research, with a novel
perturbation approach based on generalized theory of Mie scattering to computing
optical spectra of resonators with shapes deviating from spherical will be
developed. A theory will also be developed of sideband cooling to minimize the
phonon number at the non-resolved sideband limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.