* 2102689
* Highly Robust Transition Metal Complexes with E-Substituted Phosphines (E = Si, Ge, Sn) Grafted onto Metal-Organic Frameworks for Dehydrogenative Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Virginia Montiel-Palma, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 411,200.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Virginia Montiel-Palma of Mississippi State University is investigating
catalysts that add silicon to alkene substrates in a dehydrogenative fashion to
form valuable building blocks for pharmaceutical application, medical and dental
implants, and many everyday materials. Translating catalysts from the research
laboratory to industry is a huge challenge. Not only do catalysts often have to
be immobilized onto a solid support, but the material needs to be robust and
retain the desired properties. By using state-of-the-art methods to study how
these catalysts work at the molecular level, Dr. Montiel-Palma and her research
group are applying this fundamental insight to design new improved catalysts
that are more active and cost-efficient. Specific molecular changes are also
being made to the catalysts to determine their effect on their reactivity and
stability. In partnership with the Mississippi Migrant Education Center, Dr.
Montiel-Palma is also giving a series of informal STEM lessons and activities
for students K-12. These students are children of migratory workers with income
sources in agriculture, fisheries, and other primary activities. They constitute
one of the most vulnerable sectors of our society. Dr. Montiel-Palma is using
this activity to address scientific topics aimed at motivating these students to
finish secondary education and enrich their educational
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Virginia Montiel-Palma and her research group
will conduct a systematic study of dehydrosilylation catalysts grafted to metal-
organic framework (MOF) supports. The catalysts are being tuned at both their
pincer-like ligand sites as well as in the pore size, chemical properties, and
structural stability of the MOF. A multifaceted characterization plan is being
used to interrogate the catalytic materials and the mechanism of
dehydrosilylation using these materials. The insights gained from these
investigations are to be used to further inform structural changes in an
iterative catalyst development process. Taken together, these activities are
expected to provide a foundational profile of the catalyst system and help
design more efficient and robust dehydrosilylation systems. These studies will
be conducted with a team of graduate and undergraduate students carrying out the
synthetic, mechanistic, and computational aspects of this project utilizing
state-of-the-art technologies. These experiences will provide multi-faceted
training in support of a diverse workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.