* 2102764
* Doctoral Dissertation Award: Enhancing the Concept of Geographical Borderlands
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Patrick Livingood, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 20,020.00

The goal of this dissertation research project is to investigate the
complexities of interactions between communities living within and surrounding
environmental and cultural borderlands. Humans today are increasingly
interconnected through global flows of information, trade, and the movement of
people throughout the world. As the modern world is confronted with the blurring
of cultural and ethnic boundaries as people cross borders and renegotiate their
identities, archaeologists are discovering that cultural borders throughout
history are not as rigid as previously defined. It can be difficult to summarize
and define “cohesive” cultural units, because even within any given community,
there are nuances in how people live their lives. And often, communities located
at any border are seen as less complex or important, simply because they live in
rural zones on the edge of artificially drawn units. Archaeology, as the study
of human culture through material remains, forges a new path towards
understanding interactions between people living within and surrounding supposed
borderlands. This study conceptualizes this space as networks of community
relationships in order to understand connectedness by degrees rather than rigid
boundaries. This in turn will let researchers more accurately understand how
communities interacted in the past and in the modern world regardless of border
placement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will employ a social networks
analysis (SNA) to examine relationships between communities located within and
surrounding an environmental and seemingly cultural borderland. The researchers
analyze the Neosho people and their neighbors. Neosho communities resided on the
Ozark Plateau of northeastern Oklahoma. Like many Oklahomans today, Neosho
communities occupied the edges of two ecologically distinct regions: the Great
Plains and Eastern Woodlands. Not only did they develop technological and social
practices to deal with the unique challenges of their environment, they also
negotiated multiple cultural worlds as they came into contact with other groups
outside of this borderland area. A large regional network analysis of ceramic
manufacture and design will map out these relationships between Neosho
communities and their neighbors at two levels. The first will examine how people
decorated their pottery, where similarities in designs often correspond to
communities signaling their membership to a specific political or social group.
The second will examine how people manufactured those pots, from clay processing
to the production of the pot itself, which signals direct learning and teaching
from one person to another. In combination with data on food remains, these data
will thus examine the complexities of community relationships spanning a
borderland zone. The research team will show that multifaceted network analyses
are versatile and adaptable for studying past and contemporary borderland
interactions while also providing data on an understudied past
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.