* 2102198
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Solar CO2 Reduction by Atomically Dispersed Metal Sites on Few-Layer Carbon Nitride
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Nathaniel Deskins, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 247,080.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Gonghu Li of the University of New Hampshire, N. Aaron Deskins of Worcester
Polytechnic Institute and Anatoly Frenkel of Stony Brook University will study
new catalysts based on earth-abundant elements to recycle carbon dioxide to
produce energy-rich fuels. The catalysts will be prepared by placing isolated
metal ions on a polymeric material that can absorb sunlight and stabilize the
metal ions. The catalyst structure will be investigated using advanced
techniques at the Brookhaven National Laboratory aided by computational
modeling. This project will employ carbon dioxide as a renewable C1 feedstock
and utilize light as the only energy input for this chemical transformation.
Through this process, it is expected that solar energy will be converted into
chemical energy and stored in the form of chemical bonds. This project focuses
on fundamental research in catalysis and provides a versatile platform for
training students in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
fields. The project will also provide excellent opportunities for full
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in clean energy,
catalysis and nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Drs. Gonghu Li of the University
of New Hampshire, N. Aaron Deskins of Worcester Polytechnic Institute and
Anatoly Frenkel of Stony Brook University will study heterogeneous
photocatalysts containing molecularly defined active sites with the goal of
building a system for efficient solar fuel generation. Innovative photocatalysts
will be prepared by coordinating atomically dispersed cobalt sites on few-layer
graphitic carbon nitride, which is to serve not only as a visible-light absorber
but also a “ligand” to coordinate with and activate the cobalt centers for
catalysis. The synthesized photocatalysts will be investigated using X-ray
absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy and computational modeling, and
evaluated in their ability to catalyze the reduction of carbon dioxide to useful
chemicals and fuels. The collaborative team will focus on constructing highly
active Co-N4 moieties on carbon nitride to elucidate structure-function
relationships of such cobalt sites. Through the proposed studies, the research
team seeks to answer fundamental questions regarding the desired structure of
atomically dispersed cobalt sites on few-layer carbon nitride, the effect of
carbon-doping on photocatalytic properties, and the mechanism of carbon dioxide
reduction at such cobalt sites. The combined experimental and theoretical
approach holds promise to improve general understanding of the structures of
such catalysts and how these structures correlate with activity at the molecular
level. This project has the potential to develop active catalysts for small
molecule activation and solar energy conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.