* 2102275
* Comparison of Vibrational Coupling and Vibrational Energy Transfer Mechanisms Between Probe Pairs in Different Molecular Scaffolds to Capture Dynamic Structures via 2D IR
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Tucker, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 422,345.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Matthew Tucker and his group at the
University of Nevada-Reno are developing new pairs of vibrational probes for
measuring the structural dynamics of biological molecules, including RNA and
proteins. The vibrational labels allow the researchers to monitor motions within
these molecules with a unique combination of temporal and structural resolution
that is relevant to biological activity. The measurements reveal mechanistic
details related to ion transport across cell membranes, a process that has
important implications for homeostasis and deviations from normal steady state
conditions in human biology. Cellular ion transport often depends on acid levels
within the body. Therefore, the researchers use lasers pulses to initiate pH
jumps and then track molecular motion using the vibrational probe pairs as
labels to produce a step-by-step "molecular movie" of the molecular motions that
are responsible for the biological activity. In addition to the scientific
objectives of the project, Dr. Tucker and his research group will work to
recruit and train future scientists from diverse and underrepresented
backgrounds through participation in programs such as the American Chemical
Society SEED program for economically disadvantaged high school students and the
Upward Bound Program for first-generation college students. The Tucker group is
also working to develop a seminar series to encourage participation in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and research. The goal
of the seminar series is to show parents and students, especially those from the
Native American community, how science and technology affects the world around
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research characterizes the interactions between
unique IR (Infrared) probe pairs in order to uncover vibrational coupling
mechanisms, provide insights into thermal energy flow in molecules, and
ultimately capture structural snapshots of molecular motion via 2D IR
spectroscopy. Specifically, the research team is using 2D IR measurements to
reveal time-resolved structural information about the molecular motions involved
in the M2 Influenza proton channel and ion transport through the Kv11.1 K+
channel. In order to achieve these goals, Tucker and his team are developing
novel spectroscopic probe pairs that can be used to simultaneously measure
distances and angles within a variety of molecular scaffolds, while also
extending the vibrational lifetimes of the probe pairs in order to allow
measurements of the molecular dynamics on time scales seldom achieved with 2D IR
spectroscopy. The research team is also working to distinguish vibrational
coupling and vibrational energy transfer pathways in the probe pairs in order to
regulate the coupling mechanisms and expand distance limitations. Finally, the
team is working to combine these new spectroscopic tools with transient pH-jump
2D IR spectroscopy to investigate the reactive pathways of the pH-dependent
proton transfer and ion transport mechanisms within model water and ion
channels. The approach holds the promise of revealing structural dynamics of key
transport events related to ion gating and proton gating within model systems on
time scales ranging from single bond rotational periods (fs-ps) to the times
required for significant conformational reorganization (ns-ms) by employing both
equilibrium and transient 2D IR spectroscopy. Student training opportunities and
educational outreach activities further broaden the impact of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.