* 2102455
* Nonequilibrium Molecular Dynamics: Dynamical Consistency Across Scales
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rigoberto Hernandez, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 497,000.00

WIth support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Rigoberto Hernandez of Johns
Hopkins University and his team will work to advance the rules describing
molecular science at multiple scales. A fundamental challenge to the use of
simulation and theory to predict and design chemistry is the requirement that
such systems must be specified at atomic resolution, at the scale in which the
system functions (generally as large as beaker or a chemical refinery), and
everything in between. The coarse- graining of electrons, allowing for the
propagation of all-atom molecular dynamics has already proved to be critical in
revealing the properties of molecules and assemblies with nearly up to a billion
atoms. Professor Hernandez will develop coarse-grained representations and the
equations of motion needed to accurately describe molecular-specified solutions
and materials through the middle scales in length and time for systems ranging
from a billion to a septillion atoms. Dr. Hernandez will also advance science
generally through his leadership and mentoring of students, staff, chemistry
faculties and broader audiences through approaches increasing diversity, equity
and inclusion within the chemical enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rigoberto
Hernandez of Johns Hopkins University will work to advance understanding and
tools for propagating chemical systems that are structurally and dynamically
consistent in the sense that observables and their non-equilibrium behavior can
be accurately and precisely described at every scale. Specifically, the major
objectives of his work are to: (i) characterize far-from-equilibrium dynamics of
molecular to mesoscale systems driven by macroscale disturbances using reduced-
dimensional models; (ii) develop the theory to predict the intrinsic pathways
for nonequilibrium pathways in processes involving many particles
heterogeneously which is preserved across multiple space and time scales, and
(iii) advance the stochastic hard core (SHC) model for complex solvents,
benchmark the proposed algorithms for structural and dynamical consistency, and
develop a new framework for approximately identifying the pathways in
heterogeneous chemical systems exhibiting a hierarchy of interactions at
multiple time and length scales. Dr. Hernandez has also been involved and will
continue to be involved in efforts to (i) broaden the use of theoretical and
computational tools in chemical dynamics beyond its developers, (ii) increase
learning and appreciation of chemistry in the education of undergraduate
students and graduate students both inside and outside of the classroom, (iii)
engage the general public, and (iv) help diversify the faculty in research-
active chemistry departments through his direction of the Open Chemistry
Collaborative in Diversity Equity (OXIDE) and the Academic Leadership Training
(ALT) workshops. His research findings will be disseminated widely through peer-
reviewed publications, and postings on EveryWhereChem, and through scientific
and public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.