* 2102777
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Understanding of the effects of large planetesimal collisions on Hadean Earth mantle dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jun Korenaga, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2024
* USD 339,068.00

The evolution of the Hadean Earth (4-4.5 billion years ago) was shaped by large-
scale interplanetary collisions, characterized by impactors with diameters
ranging from 1,000 to 4,000 km. The defining characteristics of the Earth, such
as oceans, continents, life, and plate tectonics are likely to have appeared for
the first time on the Hadean eon. It thus seems inevitable that their emergence
would have been affected by these early collisions, though to what extent they
were affected remains an open question. In particular, little understood are the
effects of these collisions on the internal evolution of the Earth. Collisions
are thought to have contributed significantly to the abundance of highly iron-
loving elements (e.g., Au, Ir, Ru) in the Earth’s mantle, but the details of
their delivery through impacts are not fully understood due to complex mixing
processes that arise when a projectile collides with the early Earth. In
addition, it is not well-understood how the long-term evolution of the Earth’s
mantle could have responded to the injection of materials derived from the
impactors. This project introduces an innovative computational approach that
combines impact simulations with models that explore the long-term evolution of
the Earth’s interior to quantify the delivery of highly iron-loving elements,
their distribution in the mantle, and the total mass of late accreted materials.
These results allow for an increased understanding of the Hadean Earth surface
environment. Moreover, the connections between short-term impact dynamics and
long-term mantle dynamics may shed light on the origin of anomalies in the
mantle (such as the large low-shear-velocity provinces, which are the most
significant anomalies on the deep mantle), the dynamics of mantle plumes, and
the history of the geomagnetic field. This project also provides support for
interdisciplinary training of a graduate student, an undergraduate internship
where the Southwest Research Institute will host 1-2 geophysics major from Yale
University, and a series of movies that visualize planetesimal impacts and
mantle dynamics for education outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geophysical
evolution of Hadean Earth was controlled by large-scale collisions and mantle
dynamics, but the interplay of these processes remains largely unexplored. The
Earth’s protracted bombardment of leftover planetesimals after the Moon-forming
giant impact, called “late accretion”, is supported by the lunar cratering
record and is required to explain the abundance of as well as the chondritic
proportions of highly siderophile elements (HSEs) in the present-day mantle.
Recently, based on impact simulations with smooth-particle hydrodynamics (SPH),
the late accreted mass has been suggested to be two to five times higher than
previously thought, because the metallic cores of large differentiated
planetesimals, where the bulk of HSEs reside, are not efficiently mixed into the
mantle. Such an upward revision of late accreted mass could dramatically modify
our understanding of the Hadean Earth. This suggestion based on SPH simulations
is, however, still provisional because important complications arising from
long-term mantle dynamics are not incorporated. Thus, the delivery of HSEs,
their distribution in the mantle, and the total mass of the late accretion are
still wide-open questions, with important consequences on the Hadean Earth
surface environment. This project aims to achieve the following two major
objectives: (1) to quantify the fate of differentiated planetesimal cores during
impacts, by re-evaluating SPH simulations including the physics of
fragmentation, and (2) to understand the long-term fate of fragmented metallic
blobs by conducting systematic mantle mixing simulations. The primary goal of
this project is to determine the absolute scale of planetesimal impact history,
but achieving this goal will also help to address a wide range of important
questions, from the habitability of the early Earth to the origin of deep
geochemical reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.