* 2102425
* Unraveling Mechanisms of Strongly Correlated Dynamics in Ionic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Alexei Sokolov, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,500.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Alexei Sokolov and
Stephen Paddison of the University of Tennessee will combine experimental and
computational studies to develop a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms
controlling correlations in ion dynamics in concentrated ionic systems. These
correlations strongly influence ionic conductivity, and their mechanism remains
a mystery. Using a broad array of experimental techniques combined with high
fidelity simulations, a detailed molecular-level description of the distinct
ion-ion correlations that may enhance or suppress conductivity in liquid and
solid electrolytes is being developed. The results of these studies will likely
impact the fundamentals of a wide range of ion conducting materials and will be
important for rational design of novel electrolytes for various electrical
energy storage technologies. The students and postdoc engaged in this project
will gain valuable experience in sophisticated experimental and computational
research. The Sokolov research group is also engaged in various outreach
activities targeted at K-12 audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on synergistic experimental and computational studies of ion and charge
transport in ionic liquids, polymerized ionic liquids and organic ionic plastic
crystals. Experiments involve Broadband Dielectric Spectroscopy, neutron
scattering, and NMR will be combined with ab initio and classical atomistic
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and electronic structure calculations. The
proposed study will likely provide a comprehensive knowledge of the role of ion
size, disparity in the ion and counter-ion mobility, and electrostatic
interactions on ionic correlations. The results will also reveal specific
structure or compositions that may tune ion-ion correlations from negative
(suppressing conductivity) to positive (enhancing conductivity). This study will
help to develop design criteria for novel electrolytes that may be utilized in
solid state batteries, flow batteries and other electrochemical applications,
and provide good opportunities for the training of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.