* 2102789
* Modeling the Structural and Mechanical Properties of Tissue During Zebrafish Tailbud Elongation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2025
* USD 784,003.00

Cells need to move collectively in nearly all biological processes at the tissue
scale. One of the most significant challenges to understanding collective cell
motion is determining how single-cell motility strategies affect collective cell
behavior at the tissue level. For example, do cells actively sense the direction
of motion of their neighbors, or do cells primarily rely on cell-cell adhesion
and repulsion from their neighbors to move collectively? To understand the
mapping from single-cell properties to collective migration, the PI proposes a
combined experimental and computational approach to investigate collective cell
migration during convergent extension processes in the developing zebrafish
spinal column. Using confocal microscopy and genetic variants, the PI will
measure how alterations to cell-cell adhesion and planar cell polarity alter the
flow of cells in three dimensions. He will then simulate convergent extension
processes in the developing zebrafish spinal column using the deformable
particle (DP) model in two and three spatial dimensions in realistic boundary
conditions that are both deformable and contractile. The DP model also makes it
possible to systematically vary the cell shape, cell-cell adhesion, and single-
cell motility strategy. The PI will compare the results of the simulations to
those obtained from 3D imaging of cell motion and shape of both wildtype and
mutant zebrafish embryos. The proposed work will provide two significant
advances to our understanding of collective cell motion: (1) how can we map
single-cell properties to features of collective cell migration, and (2) what is
a sufficient degree of model complexity to capture important features of
collective cell migration? Currently, models for collective cell migration do
not model true cell deformability and realistic cell motility strategies, but
they can qualitatively capture several aspects of collective cell migration.
These proposed simulations of deformable particles in both two and three
dimensions, along with three-dimensional imaging of live tissue, will allow the
team to determine what model ingredients are required to quantitatively describe
collective cell migration. This project also includes a number of education and
outreach activities that leverage the PIs' involvement in the Integrated
Graduate Program in Physical and Engineering Biology. Initiatives will include
mentoring high school and undergraduate students in research, developing a
course module on computational modeling of cell migration during zebrafish
spinal column development, and hosting short courses aimed at improving the
presentation of scientific topics to non-scientific audiences by graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes coordinated experimental and
computational studies to understand the role of cell shape change, motility
strategy, and adhesion on collective cell motion during the convergent extension
process in the elongating tail bud of zebrafish embryos. The PI will develop
novel deformable particle (DP) model simulations in dynamic, deformable
boundaries in both two and three spatial dimensions, which can quantitatively
describe cell- and tissue-level deformation of developing zebrafish embryos and
predict the effect of changes to single-cell biophysical parameters on
collective cell motion. Complementary experiments will be performed on zebrafish
embryos with varied cell motility and cell-cell adhesion through mutations to
the planar cell polarity pathway and cadherin-mediated adhesion that enable the
predictions of the DP model to be tested
experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.