* 2102532
* Tuning Teflon-Coated Earth-Abundant Metal Complexes in Oxidative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Linda Doerrer, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 518,135.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Linda Doerrer of Boston University and Professor Kimberly Ann
Stieglitz of Roxbury Community College will study the specific conversion of
carbon-hydrogen bonds to carbon-oxygen and carbon-carbon bonds. These oxidation
reactions are widespread and critical reactions in modern chemistry. The
cheapest and most sustainable oxidant is atmospheric oxygen (O2) but oxygen also
is capable of oxidatively inactivating many catalyst systems. Almost all
catalysts that utilize O2 in these oxidation reactions contain transition metals
that enable these reactions to take place. This work will expand on current
efforts to prepare new Cu catalysts supported by fluorine-rich “Teflon-coated”
ligand systems that provide stability to the molecular catalysts. The
researchers will prepare new compounds in which clamping ligands hold metal
atoms tightly to control reactivity between O2 and the substrate. The project
will also probe oxidations using other metals besides Cu, particularly with Mn
and V, and will extend the research to Fe-containing systems. An important
thrust will be the development of catalysts that perform well in water and air
to make these hydrocarbon oxidation systems more sustainable and environmentally
friendly. The broader impacts of this work will involve undergraduate course
development, student training, and a productive collaboration between Boston
University and Roxbury Community College. Roxbury Community College delivers
instruction to a high percentage of students from underserved minority groups;
thus this collaborative effort will be directed at increasing diversity, equity,
and inclusion in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In these studies, Professors Linda Doerrer of
Boston University and Kimberly Ann Stieglitz of Roxbury Community College will
study the oxidation of C-H bonds. This work builds on prior work of the
researchers on Cu/O2 chemistry that has demonstrated the effectiveness of
fluorinated alkoxide ligands to make highly reactive species for oxidizing C-H
bonds. The nature and degree of encapsulation of redox inert counter cations,
specifically K, on the catalytic activity will be investigated. Other counter
cations of Li, Na, Rb, and Cs will also be pursued, as will an Fe-based
catalysts system which will be accessed via two complementary routes. A Bordwell
square approach will be used to generate a proposed {Mn(III)OH} reagent in situ
that will be used to probe its thermodynamic properties. Exploration of the
scope and optimization of reaction conditions with a benchtop-stable vanadium
compound capable of catalytic C-H bond oxidation will be part of a hands-on
experimental synthesis and spectroscopy class taught at Roxbury Community
College by the collaborative team. This continued collaboration brings together
expertise in transition metal complexes (Doerrer) and in organic compound
characterization (Stieglitz), and will enhance the training of underrepresented
minority students for STEM careers while exposing them to research at an R1
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.