* 2102581
* Multianalyte Fluorescence Sensing of Phosphates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Pavel Anzenbacher, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 451,932.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Pavel Anzenbacher at Bowling Green
State University seeks to understand which molecular features govern the
recognition and sensing of phosphate-related anions and their simultaneous
detection in water. Phosphate-related anions are of great importance in biology,
industry, and agriculture but their analysis in aqueous environments remains
challenging because of inefficient binding and sensing of anions in water by
artificial receptors and sensors. Most current methods focus on sensing of
phosphates in their pure form, without other competing phosphate-type anions.
This project endeavors to develop new types of supramolecular anion sensors that
show fluorescence amplification in the presence of phosphate-type anions. These
new sensors are designed to address the long-standing challenge of identifying
and quantitating phosphate anions of environmental and/or biological
significance in mixtures of closely related anions. The proposed sensors are
comprised of two components: phosphate receptors and a fluorescent dye that
changes fluorescence in the presence of phosphate. These two moieties are
connected in such a way that enables the binding of a range of phosphate anions
while producing a different fluorescence output signal. The information on
phosphate-type anion sensing will likely contribute to the development of new
inexpensive and widely applicable sensors for phosphates and phosphonates. This
project has the potential to advance knowledge required, for example, to develop
more effective environmental sensing platforms or sensing-based biotechnologies
such as the real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). This
research provides opportunities for multi-disciplinary education in organic
chemistry and photochemistry, as well as supramolecular chemistry. The
environmental sensing aspects and utility of the sensors in polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) will provide for a multi-faceted education for students and
encourage interdisciplinary thinking. Undergraduate students will be mentored by
the PI within the framework of the activities of the Center for Undergraduate
Research and Scholarship (CURS) program. CURS aims to enhance undergraduate
education through active participation in research. The PI also acts as a mentor
in the Parents Involvement with Children Nurturing Intellectual Curiosity in
Science (PICNICS) program, designed to expose high school students to research
in chemistry and stimulate their interest in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
impact of anions in biology, industry, and agriculture is broad and requires the
development of new and practical sensing concepts for such species.
Unfortunately, the binding and sensing of anions in water by artificial
receptors and sensors is inefficient. This proposal seeks to increase
understanding of the molecular features that govern the recognition and sensing
of phosphate-related anions and their simultaneous detection in water. Most
current studies describe the sensing of phosphates in their pure form, without
other competing phosphate-type anions. The project aims to address a long-
standing problem: the determination of identity and quantification of phosphate
anions of environmental and/or biological significance in the mixtures of
closely related anions. Thus, the goal of this project is to develop cross-
reactive supramolecular sensors based on receptor-dye ensembles to sense
phosphate type anions. The proposed sensors are comprised of two components: (i)
a bifunctional receptor comprising a metal binding site such as a
dipicolylamine-Zn(II), Co(II), etc. and arylboronic acid connected via a
variable-length spacer, and (ii) a fluorescent dye capable of binding both
moieties of the receptor. The principle of operation is as follows: The metal
complex of the receptors coordinates fluorophores to form a non-fluorescent
sensor ensemble. Binding of target phosphates to the receptor ejects the
fluorophore from the quenching metal site, which then forms an ester with
boronic acid. The complex of the fluorophore with boronic acid is brightly
fluorescent, resulting in a dramatic increase (turn-ON) of fluorescence.
Recorded sensing data will be processed using pattern recognition methods
(linear discriminant and principal component analysis). Quantitative analyses
will be performed using linear regression algorithms. Further studies using
artificial neural network (ANN) and support vector machines (SVM) algorithms
will be performed to improve the performance of the sensors with respect to
limits of detection, dynamic range, linearity, etc. The target anions will be
phosphorus-based eutrophication agents and herbicide phosphonates such as
glyphosate (also known as RoundUpâ„¢) in the presence of competing electrolytes.
This new sensing method will also be utilized in sensing of biological
phosphates (pyrophosphate and nucleotide triphosphates) for application in
biosensing and related technologies including PCR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.