* 2102402
* Towards a Merger of Nonadiabatic Molecular Dynamics and Spintronics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Joseph Subotnik, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Joseph Subotnik of The University of Pennsylvania is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to study how electronic spin affects nuclear relaxation and can shape
energy loss via heat production. In particular, Subotnik will develop new and
powerful algorithms that quantify exactly how molecules with nuclei and spins
relax after they have been excited by light. Subotnik will test both
theoretically and computationally which atoms move during relaxation, and will
explore the possibility that this atomic motion can lead to a promotion of spin-
selectivity for long periods of time. All of the algorithmic developments will
be released to the public in an open source fashion. This research program lies
at the cutting edge of physical chemistry and spin-chemistry, and in the long
term, research here has the potential to help create an entirely new form of
device electronics based on electronic spin (so-called spintronics) unlike
conventional devices based on electronic charge. The broader impacts include the
Subotnik group's support for bringing undergraduate researchers into the lab,
with a special emphasis on introducing members of underrepresented groups to
hands-on science. The Subotnik research team also invites these students to
participate the annual Penn Conference in Theoretical Chemistry (PCTC).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subotnik will develop a semi-classical algorithm for
quantifying how coupled nuclear-electronic systems prepared out of equilibrium
relax in the presence of spin-orbit coupling. In the presence of spin-orbit
coupling, the electronic Hamiltonian becomes complex-valued and the nature of
electronic transitions becomes very difficult for modern algorithms because (i)
the direction of momentum rescaling becomes unclear and (ii) the presence of
Berry magnetic forces can lead to novel reaction pathways. Subotnik is
constructing and benchmarking a novel, reliable surface hopping approach to
treat such conditions, both for the case of doublets (with two electronic
states) as well as for the case of singlet-triplet crossings (with four
electronic states). Furthermore, Subotnik will run simulations on reasonably
small test cases to investigate whether the presence coupled nuclear-electronic
dynamics effects (including Berry forces) may underlie recent experiments
displaying a chiral induced spin selectivity (CISS)
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.