* 2102647
* D3SC: Dynamic Effects in Ordinary Organic Reactions in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Daniel Singleton, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Daniel A. Singleton of Texas
A&amp;M University will investigate “dynamic effects” in reaction mechanisms.
These are experimental observations in reactions that can neither be predicted
nor explained using the standard models for mechanisms. The proposed research
has five aims related to dynamic effects. The first two aims would explore newly
identified forms of dynamic effects, one resulting from localized molecular
vibrations that can occur in reactions promoted by light and another that arises
from a flaw in modern statistical rate theories. A third aim is to apply newly
developed understanding of dynamic effects in solvent to reinterpret a large
classical area of chemistry, specifically 20th century carbocation chemistry. In
this broad field, it is suggested that old controversies arose from the use of
mechanistic models that were too simplified. A fourth aim is to apply a
technology that arises from a dynamic effect to learn about mechanisms that are
hidden from current chemical approaches. The overarching aim is to develop a
comprehensive chemical theory of dynamic effects by combining current theories
with machine-learning. Overall, this project will impact at a fundamental and
broad level the understanding of many classic chemical reactions, while
providing new approaches to the development and control of reactions. Student
training is a major goal of this research including with a good record of
including women and members of underrepresented groups in science as part of the
research team. Graduate and undergraduate students in the Singleton group
undertake comprehensive projects, which lead to the development of diverse
skills. These range from experimental organic chemistry and precision analytical
measurements, to quantum chemistry, coding, molecular dynamics calculations, and
machine learning. The Singleton group will also continue its program of
developing and distributing to the community computational tools that aid the
study of dynamic effects in reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
particularly investigate an indirect approach to the long-sought goal of
vibrationally promoting specific reactions in complex molecules. The idea to be
explored is that triplet photosensitizers of varying energies can provide a
controllable amount of energy to localized regions in molecules. The project
will also investigate a flaw in variational transition state theory in which the
actual reaction path departs from that expected based on the potential energy
surface, with the primary goal of identifying additional examples of reactions
subject to this flaw. The third project aim is based on the proposal that
historical controversies in carbocation chemistry have resulted from the
unconsidered intermediacy of incompletely solvated structures. This idea will be
explored within a series of prominent classical carbocation reactions. The
fourth project aim is to use a recently developed application of a dynamic
effect, “energy read-out,” to study key hidden steps in reactions involving
alkoxy radicals. This idea is notably applicable to non-adiabatic proton coupled
electron transfer (PCET) reactions where mechanisms are inaccessible through
ordinary experimental and computational methods. The final aim is to modify
transition state theory by partitioning the transition state into regions of
dynamical outcome using machine learning. This includes the development of
active-learning and precision-enhancing methods designed to ease the application
of trajectories to dynamic effects, as well as the provision of these
computational tools to the wider chemical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.