* 2102317
* Computational Methods for Modeling Reaction Dynamics in Batteries and Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Graeme Henkelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Graeme Henkelman of the University of Texas at Austin is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop computational methods to understand the
function of materials employed for the production and consumption of energy.
This research is at the atomic scale and such a fundamental understanding will
not only allow us to determine limitations of existing materials, but also
consider new materials that have the potential to make energy production and
usage more efficient. The second part of this work will incorporate tools from
computer science, including machine learning, to improve the efficiency of our
computational methods and accelerate the design of new materials. This project
is expected to have a positive impact on the scientific community by providing
these new computational tools as well as contribute to the growth and learning
of the graduate and undergraduate students who will be developing these
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Graeme Henkelman and his research
group are setting out to develop computational methods to model the reaction
dynamics in materials related to energy applications, including batteries and
catalysts. More specifically, they seek to improve the efficiency of methods
based upon transition state theory so that dynamics over experimental time
scales can be modeled using forces and energy from density functional theory
(DFT). In order to mitigate the computational expense of DFT a number of
strategies will be followed to make the calculations as efficient as possible.
First, a public kinetic database will be established with geometric information
of reaction mechanisms, which can be used to propose transition states from a
query structure to the database. Second, machine learning (ML) methods will be
used to accelerate our calculations. Instead of fitting global potential energy
surfaces, ML methods will be used to fit local energies, forces, and curvature
to accelerate DFT calculations rather than replace them. Specifically, the ML
models will: (1) provide a pre-conditioner for the optimization of minima and
saddle points; (2) suggest local minima to facilitate the search for stable
materials; (3) efficiently construct a hyperdynamics bias potential for modeling
of rare events in energy materials directly with DFT. As well as using ML
methods, this project will investigate how the choice of ML method, including
neural networks and Gaussian processes, as well as the numerous hyperparameters,
determine the shape and quality of the potential energy surface. Finally,
methodology to take trajectories of catalytic reactions will be developed to
build reaction networks, from which the overall activity of a catalyst or
battery material can be understood. A broader impact of this research to the
scientific community will be in the form of software that is freely distributed.
In addition, a team of undergraduate students will be a part of this research
and to use these tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.