* 2102648
* CAS: Promoting Selective CO2 Electroreduction by Active Site Engineering
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Anthony Shoji Hall, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 478,528.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Anthony Shoji Hall at Johns Hopkins University is studying methods to
improve the performance of catalysts to enable storing renewable energy in the
form of chemical bonds. Energy storage devices are important for curbing
catastrophic climate change. However, renewable electricity from wind and solar
is intermittent, which means that this energy must be stored for use at night or
when the wind is not blowing. The electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to chemical
fuels is a potential strategy for storing renewable electricity. Catalysts
usually exhibit variations in performance when the structure of the material is
changed. The proposed study will use experimental methods to understand how the
structure of the material influences its performance as a catalyst. Dr. Hall's
laboratory also actively engages in outreach at inner city Baltimore high
schools. This activity will allow a female minority high school student to study
in his laboratory to learn about renewable energy
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Anthony Shoji Hall at Johns Hopkins University
is studying the structure-property relationships of nano-structured materials
for electrochemical CO2 reduction. Nanomaterials exhibit a broad distribution of
sites – such as edges, corners, and terraces – which can exhibit different
reactivity. This proposal focuses on preparing catalysts with well-defined
populations of active sites by coating defect sites or terrace sites with inert
metal oxides; potentially allowing the experimentalist to unambiguously connect
catalyst structure to property. Electrochemical kinetic measurements and surface
enhanced in-situ infrared absorption spectroscopy (SEIRAS) will be used to
interrogate the reaction mechanism of catalysts with well-defined active site
structures. Knowledge obtained from these studies will be used to develop
materials that promote more efficient catalytic
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.