* 2102238
* Collaborative Research: Visible-Light-Augmented Reverse Water Gas Shift Reaction on Hybrid Plasmonic Photocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Marimuthu Andiappan, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2024
* USD 241,726.00

Photocatalysis is an attractive technology for the sustainable, solar-driven
chemical conversion of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, to value-added
fuels and chemicals. To this end, the project explores the selective
photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide by hydrogen into carbon monoxide and
water. This reaction is also known as the reverse water-gas shift reaction
(RWGS). The carbon monoxide product can be further transformed into a range of
high-value chemicals and fuels. Among the earth-abundant metal and metal oxide
materials that can serve as a catalyst for this reaction, copper-based
nanocatalysts have emerged as one of the best candidates for the RWGS reaction.
However, under conventional thermal energy-driven catalytic conditions, the
copper nanocatalysts require relatively high operating reaction temperatures and
suffer from less than desirable product selectivity. This research project aims
to develop a novel photocatalytic approach to achieving superior catalytic
activity and desired-product selectivity for the RWGS reaction. The project also
demonstrates sustainable energy concepts to local elementary and high school
students through various outreach activities, including Chemkidz events at
schools across Oklahoma, Summer Science Camp in Appalachia (West Virginia), and
National Lab Day events at the Oklahoma State University and West Virginia
University campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conventional catalytic processes,
the dissipation of thermal energy drives the transformation of reactants on the
surface of catalysts toward a variety of products. Challenges remain, however,
for designing catalysts that can drive the breakage and formation of specific
chemical bonds toward desirable products with the utmost selectivity. This
research project develops a hybrid plasmonic photocatalytic approach for this
purpose. Hybrid plasmonic photocatalysts consist of light-absorbing plasmonic
metals surrounded by catalytic metals or metal oxides. The hybrid plasmonic
photocatalytic approach offers a unique opportunity to control catalytic
activity and selectivity using photon stimuli as an additional degree of
freedom. In hybrid plasmonic photocatalysts, such as Cu core/Cu2O shell, the
electron transfer from the Cu core to the Cu2O shell can occur by Landau
damping-mediated hot-electron-transfer pathway or by chemical interface damping
(CID). Although a fundamental understanding of the Landau damping-mediated hot-
electron-transfer pathway is well established, design rules for the chemical
interface damping pathway remain unknown. This collaborative project will
develop design rules for chemical interface damping-induced electron-driven
photochemistry. These rules will then be applied to the design of core/shell,
Cu/Cu2O and Ag/Cu2O photocatalysts for the RWGS reaction. This research project
also aims to distinguish the role of chemical interface damping- and Landau
damping-mediated electron-transfer pathways in hybrid plasmonic photocatalysts
using photocatalytic rate and quantum efficiency measurements and in-situ
femtosecond transient-absorption spectroscopy. It is hypothesized that the
chemical interface damping pathway will exhibit higher quantum efficiency and
minimal local heating effects compared to the Landau damping pathway. Also,
beyond the focus on Cu/Cu2O and Ag/Cu2O core/shell photocatalysts for the RWGS
reaction, the design rules developed in this project can be applied to a wide
range of other hybrid plasmonic nanostructures for photocatalytic and
photovoltaic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.