* 2102159
* Fundamentals of Chemistry that Guide Formation of Sulfur-bridged Bi- and Multi-metallic Molecular Units
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Marcetta Darensbourg, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Marcetta Y. Darensbourg and coworkers of Texas A&amp;M University will
study molecules that inform chemists about Nature’s choice of sulfur to connect
metals in structures that perform as catalysts in biology. In contrast to the
heavy, precious/expensive metals such as platinum and rhodium that one might
find in the catalytic converter of an automobile, Nature must rely on the
natural abundance distribution of metals on earth. Consequently, earth-abundant
metals such as iron, nickel, and manganese are taken up in molecular motifs that
utilize cooperativity between metals. In addition, their strategic positioning
within a molecular environment, and timing of delivery of reactants and release
of products, renders incredible reactions that are facile at ordinary
temperatures and pressures. The importance of connections is vital to these
molecular-binding motifs. Sulfur is a key ingredient in metalloenzymes that
perform some of the most fundamental reactions of life. Examples include
catalysts that facilitate hydrogen production, carbon dioxide reduction, and
nitrogen conversion. How these molecular catalysts, imbedded in protein folds,
work remains largely a mystery that inspires chemists to search for clues in
small, well characterized molecules. This work will target connections between
nickel and iron in new synthetic molecules outfitted with “reporter” molecules
that indicate reactive centers. The Darensbourg team will analyze their
structures and properties, monitoring changes as electrons are added or removed
one by one. They will search for and characterize products of catalysis of
proton reduction or synthesis. These fundamental studies are ideal for training
graduate and undergraduate students and coworkers to recognize and appreciate
sciences that connect biology and chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Marcetta Y. Darensbourg of Texas A&amp;M University will establish a
synthetic chemistry plan that targets an improved understanding of bimetallic
constructs prevalent in redox-processing enzymes including diiron and nickel-
iron hydrogenases. The overall goal is to understand how two (or multiple)
abundant first-row metals share the burden of 2-electron transformations,
whereby obviating the need for noble metals in natural catalysis and organic
synthesis. Questions arise from the ubiquitous mediation by sulfur as a bridge
between metal complexes that have redox activity either at the metal or the
ligands, and how substrates are positioned on the reactive centers. Two
principal classic “non-innocent” redox-active ligands will be engaged for this
work, namely nitric oxide (NO) and dithiolenes. The Darensbourg group is
developing NO-containing metallodithiolate ligands as bidentate S-donors to a
transition metal Lewis acid receiver for examination of properties of the redox
levels in a diiron trinitrosyl. The team proposes to monitor the electronic and
vibrational coupling between two S-bridged iron as affected by redox level of
the diiron complex using N-15 isotopic labelling and two-dimensional infrared
spectroscopy. In addition, the effect of redox level on the observed scrambling
of the NO ligand between the two irons is expected to inform our understanding
of communications between metals in the sulfur-bridged bimetallics. The
concerted effect of two different types of delocalization ligands with a nickel-
dithiolene as receiver to the metallodithiolates will offer an opportunity to
explore inter- and/or intramolecular magnetic quenching and electronic coupling.
Studies of the properties of the new bimetallics will improve our understanding
of multimetallic bioinorganic enzyme active sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.