* 2102072
* Regulation of transcription coupled DNA repair
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Weiguo Tao, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 05/31/2024
* USD 685,032.00

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is a conserved DNA repair process that removes
bulky and/or helix-distorting lesions in damaged DNA. Transcription coupled
repair (TCR) and global genomic repair (GGR) are two pathways that constitute
NER. TCR is triggered by stalling of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) at DNA damage
sites and is dedicated to rapid removal of lesions in the transcribed strand of
actively transcribed genes. TCR in eukaryotic cells is a complicated process and
the underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely unresolved. In this project,
a variety of approaches, including yeast genetics and proteomics, will be used
to address long-standing questions about how TCR is regulated. This research on
a fundamental DNA repair pathway will yield new insights into biological
processes that maintain genome stability in the face of constant exposure to DNA
damage. The project also includes substantive educational components, including
training of graduate and undergraduate students as well as STEM outreach to
local school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three objectives.
The first will address how the RNAPII stalk, consisting of Rpb4 and Rpb7
proteins, regulates TCR. Rpb4 and Rpb7 can either repress or facilitate TCR and
directly interact with many as-yet-unidentified proteins. Rpb4 and
Rpb7-interacting proteins will be identified and their functions in TCR will be
analyzed. The second objective will examine how TCR facilitators, including
Rad26, Rpb9, Sen1 and Elf1, interplay with each other, with the TCR repressors
Spt4/Spt5, and with RNAPII to regulate transcriptional lesion bypass and TCR.
Finally, the third objective will investigate the role of the Pleckstrin
homology domain (PHD) of Tfb1, a TFIIH subunit, in TCR and GGR. Together these
studies will advance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
transcription coupled DNA repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded
by the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.