* 2102232
* Leveraging Main-Group Redox Catalysis for Enantioselective Alkene Difunctionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Scott Denmark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2025
* USD 700,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Scott E. Denmark at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
will conduct research to develop new methods for selective difunctionalizations
of alkenes. Addition to alkenes and other unsaturated compounds is among the
oldest and most reliable transformations in organic chemistry. However,
controlling reaction selectivity remains a challenge. The growing number of
complex natural products, pharmaceutical, and agrochemical compounds containing
vicinal nitrogen and oxygen atoms at stereogenic centers underscores this
critical deficiency in synthetic methodology. This proposal addresses the
challenges inherent in the design of enantioselective difunctionalization
processes through a mechanismbased approach. The research activities planned are
ideal for the intellectual and practical training of undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral coworkers. The interplay of reaction design,
development and application represent the essence of the scientific method.
Students are presented with hypotheses for the outcome of planned experiments
and they must learn to collect and interpret data to substantiate or eliminate
the hypothesis. The unifying theme of this activity is the invention of new
chemical reactions that challenge current thinking. An undergraduate intern
under the auspices of the St. Elmo Brady Summer Research Scholars Program at
UIUC will be supported. This program is a 10-week summer research experience for
underrepresented minority students (African American, Hispanic, Native
Americans) from Historically Black Colleges at the University the Illinois
Chemistry Department to encourage future enrollment in the PhD
program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Countless reactions have been
introduced to effect regio, diastereo and enantioselective functionalization of
double bonds with good generality. However, the vast majority of the existing
methods employ transition metal catalysis such as dihydroxylation and
aminohydroxylation (osmium), and diamination (palladium, copper). Despite the
undeniable utility of these methods, they are rarely employed industrially in
view of the challenges associated with metal contamination. This proposal aims
to provide an alternative approach that is rooted in Main Group redox catalysis
the advantages of which include ability to use innocent oxidants to drive the
catalytic cycle and the high affinity of Se(II) reagents for carbon-carbon
double bonds. The actionable roadmap to achieve this goal is to construct the
mechanistic/physical organic foundation for the development of generally
applicable and highly selective alkene difunctionalization. The overall
objective is divided into three Specific Aims of this project: (1) catalytic,
enantioselective syn-1,2-diamination, (2) catalytic, enantioselective
syn-1,2-oxyamination and (3) catalytic, enantioselective syn-1,2-carboamination.
For each Specific Aim, the team will: (1) carry out detailed mechanistic
(kinetic, spectroscopic, crystallographic, computational) investigations of the
catalytic reactions to learn the rules for achieving high catalytic activity
(turnover frequency and turnover number) for the target reactions (2) design
chiral catalysts that will impart high stereoselectivity and high chemical
conversion for the introduction of new stereocenters, and (3) demonstrate
generality in a variety of substrate classes that represent broadly useful
structural motifs. The project also supports an undergraduate intern under the
auspices of the St. Elmo Brady Summer Research Scholars Program at
UIUC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.