* 2102579
* Reinventing Benzannulations: Electro-, Photo-, and Radical Approaches for Fusing Benzene and Cyclopentadiene Rings into Polyaromatics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Igor Alabugin, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 579,792.00

In this project, funded jointly by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, &amp;
Mechanisms B and Chemical Synthesis Programs of the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Igor Alabugin at Florida State University will address fundamental
questions in the structure and synthesis of complex polycyclic aromatic
compounds. Molecular systems that allow precise control of atomic structure and
energy levels at the sub-nanospace can serve as components of opto-electronic
materials, energy storage devices, sensors, transistors, solar cells, functional
polymers etc. This research aims to develop efficient synthetic approaches to
complex polycyclic aromatic systems via fusions of modularly assembled
precursors into new carbon-rich graphene substructures. New concepts for the
design of complex ring synthesis drive this project. This work combines
computational and experimental components to allow training of specialists in
each area. The project will provide researchers at the undergraduate, graduate
and postdoctoral levels with an opportunity to integrate learning and discovery.
The results will be disseminated through publications and outreach activities,
including participation in public lectures, scientific symposia, giving talks at
industries, undergraduate and graduate institutions, as well as recording
educational videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal sets out to develop new
approaches to the rapid construction of functionalized polycyclic aromatics by
using the residual strain of helicenes and selectively generated high-energy
reactive intermediates such as antiaromatic species, excited states and vinyl
radicals. Furthermore, the Alabugin research team is aiming to complement
available purely hexagonal graphenic networks with selectively introduced
pentagonal fusions as a way to design negatively charged carbon-rich materials.
Professor Alabugin and his co-workers will also work to expand the scope of the
double-annulation reactions under study such that, in a one-pot operation, the
transformation effectively converts monosubstituted benzenes into pyrenes and
pyrene analogues with precisely placed functional groups and heteroatoms. If
successful, this multi-faceted transformation would open up one of the most
efficient examples of complex functional group-tolerant benzannulation
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.