* 2102506
* Stochastic Models for Non-Linear/Many-Body Dynamics in Molecular Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Eric Bittner, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,001.00

Professor Eric Bittner of the University of Houston is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry. to model dark background dynamics that contribute to
dephasing and spectral diffusion in complex semiconducting systems as revealed
in coherent multi-dimensional spectroscopy. This work aims to facilitate the
next significant breakthroughs in fundamental aspects of coherent non-linear
spectroscopy as applied to condensed-matter physics, materials science, and
ultimately, in quantum optoelectronic technologies in a broader context. The
optimal choice of materials for such novel technologies relies on a profound
understanding of correlated many-body dynamics as manifest in multi-dimensional
spectral probes. This project develops key aspects of Quantum Leap by exploiting
quantum entanglement of photons to unravel underpinning many-body correlations
and hidden-layer dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopic line-shapes reveal
a wealth of information concerning the underlying background dynamics a system
is experiencing. In this project, Bittner proposes the use of quantum stochastic
equations and Ito calculus to model dark background dynamics that contribute to
dephasing and spectral diffusion in complex semiconducting systems as revealed
in coherent multi-dimensional spectroscopy. Theoretical advances include the use
of correlated noise and non-commutative noise to model the influence of various
background environments on spectroscopic signals. Proposed applications of the
work include exciton and bi-exciton dynamics in hybrid organic/inorganic layered
semiconductors, semiconducting organic polymers, and DNA-wrapped Carbon
nanorods. The work advances the notion that exciton dynamics can be cross-
correlated via hidden-layer background processes. Bittner seeks to quantify
these as manifest in 2D coherent non-linear spectroscopic signals. The work also
advances the use of quantum entangled photons as a probe of many-body dynamics.
Previous studies suggest that entanglement can be generated via indirect
coupling of emitters to a common or correlated environment. Bittner will explore
this idea with the goal developing novel quantum spectroscopies and/or
generation of custom entanglements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.