* 2102066
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Ultrafast Observables
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Spiridoula Matsika, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 234,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
and Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods (CTMC) programs in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors Allison, Levine, and Weinacht at Stony Brook
University, and Professor Matsika at Temple University are developing new ways
to understand the information obtained from sophisticated measurements of the
dynamics of molecules. The structure and behavior of molecules are governed by
the rules of quantum mechanics. The field of quantum chemistry, which applies
the principles of quantum mechanics to molecular problems, has developed over
decades based on rigorous comparison between experiments and theory, resulting
in reliable computer codes that can be used by non-experts to calculate the
properties of molecules in their lowest-energy states. However, similar quantum
chemistry calculations are far more challenging for molecules that have been
excited, for example by absorbing energy from light, and are able to undergo
very fast chemical transformations. Part of the difficulty in developing quantum
chemistry methods for excited molecules is that the experimental measurements
are much harder to interpret, and comparisons with theory are generally much
less rigorous than for molecules in their ground state. This collaborative
research team is working to better understand the experimental observables by
studying molecules prepared in the same way using different types of
experiments, and by making direct comparisons of those observables with quantum
chemical calculations that simulate both the measurement process and the
excited-state dynamics. In addition to producing a set of benchmark measurements
for several representative molecules, the team is working toward a new paradigm
for understanding measurements of the dynamics of molecules, including a new
format for sharing data. Beyond these scientific broader impacts, the project
also provides advanced training for graduate students in a highly collaborative
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast spectroscopy offers the opportunity
to directly probe the dynamics of molecules after excitation. However, the
interpretation of data from ultrafast spectroscopy remains a challenge because
projection of high dimensional dynamics into a much lower dimensional signal is
unavoidable. In principle, a probe that projects the time-dependent molecular
wave packet onto the set of all possible states provides a complete, if
difficult to interpret, picture of the dynamics in question. The research team
led by Professors Allison, Levine, Weinacht, and Matsika is addressing this
problem by applying multiple recently developed experimental and theoretical
tools to measure and calculate the dynamics of identically prepared gas-phase
molecules. Complementary time-resolved photoelectron and visible transient
absorption probes project the molecular wave packet onto a broad swath of
Hilbert space, providing more information about the dynamics than is possible
with either method on its own. The measurements are compared with ab initio
simulations of the dynamics, from which identical projections are performed.
This rigorous comparison between measured and calculated spectra utilizing
complementary probes is enabled by recent methodological advances, including the
development of a gas-phase transient absorption spectrometer and novel ab initio
tools for efficiently computing probe signals from large molecular dynamics data
sets. These systematic studies are producing benchmark datasets on archetypal
molecular systems that present challenging problems at the vanguard of quantum
chemistry and molecular dynamics, including non-adiabatic dynamics and
intersystem crossing. The fundamental processes under investigation play an
important role across a wide range of chemical reactions that are driven by
light. Through this collaborative effort, the team is also working to develop
and disseminate a new data format for sharing both theoretical and experimental
ultrafast dynamics results based on the FAIR principle (findable, accessible,
interoperable, reusable). Graduate students working on the project learn how to
approach complex problems in chemistry based on collaborative research at the
forefront of both experiment and theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.