* 2102248
* Crystals on the Move
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Anna Gudmundsdottir, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 544,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Anna D. Gudmundsdottir of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati is analyzing how
crystals respond to external stimuli such as light and mechanical force. These
studies focus on producing motility or movement in crystalline materials using
momentum generated by releasing a gas. The mechanism is analogous to the
operation of a gasoline engine. The response of crystals to external stimuli can
be quite dramatic, as such crystals that can propel themselves over distances
much larger than their own size, twist, coil, crawl, bend, fracture, or even
shatter. Because dynamic crystals respond rapidly to external stimuli such as
light, heat, and mechanical force, they have potential for use in various smart
materials applications, such as sensors and actuators in industrial processes
and devices. The interdisciplinary nature of this research project provides
broad educational training for students. Through this research, students will
learn to solve demanding technical problems facing society. Emphasis will be
placed on building an inclusive and diverse research team to work in the
Gudmundsdottir laboratory, including high school and college undergraduate
students from groups underrepresented in science. Students will also be
presented with educational activities geared towards their professional
training.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Gudmundsdottir research team will study the
photodynamic and mechanical behavior of crystalline divinyl azide and ester
azide derivatives. Upon light exposure, these substances dissociate to form
molecular N2 gas and photoproducts. The physical properties of these crystals
will be determined by acquiring their single crystal X-ray structures, indexing
the crystals, and measuring their hardness. In addition, the solid-state
photoreactivity of these compounds will be determined by performing laser flash
photolysis of nanocrystals to characterize the transients formed within the
crystals. Further studies will determine the solid-state kinetics of these
transients and identify their photo-products. Collectively, these data will be
analyzed with an eye toward elucidating the detailed solid-state reaction
mechanisms and toward explaining how the crystal lattice controls both the
molecular reactivity and the macromolecular photodynamic behavior of divinyl
azide and ester azide derivatives. These studies of photo-mechanical response
and molecular solid-state photo-reaction mechanisms will be supported by quantum
mechanical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.