* 2102707
* CAS: Biologically Inspired Aminopyridine Complexes for CO2 Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Smaranda Marinescu, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Smaranda C. Marinescu of the University of Southern California will study the
development of biologically inspired catalytic systems for the conversion of
harmful carbon dioxide into chemical fuels. The development of clean energy
technologies as an alternative to fossil fuels is a critical need in the face of
rapid planetary warming. Solar energy has received much attention as a clean
energy source, but the focus has largely been on electricity generation. This
narrow focus does not adequately meet the need for renewable fuels for
transportation, heating, and industrial uses, which make up ~70% of energy
needs. A sustainable energy future will require a non-fossil fuel method for the
formation of chemical feedstocks, and the electrochemical reduction of abundant
small molecules such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O), using the solar-
derived electricity is a viable pathway to do so. This approach will allow for
storing of solar energy in chemical bonds in a similar way as nature
accomplishes through photosynthesis, where the energy of photons is used to
drive the reduction of CO2 to a variety of high-energy products. Inspired by
biological systems, the Marinescu group will develop molecular catalysts that
involve hydrogen-bonding networks which are capable of small molecule activation
through multiple proton and electron transfers. This project will focus on the
development of a series of biologically inspired metal complexes with pendant
amines, which will allow for understanding the effect of proton relays on multi-
electron, multi-proton reactions. The ligand framework allows for excellent
control of electronic and positioning effects, which will facilitate structure-
activity studies. Integrated into this research plan is an educational program
focused on providing research opportunities to both students and teachers from
local community colleges with a high percentage of minority students, and a
mentoring program for women at the postdoctoral level to increase the
participation of this underrepresented group in science. These outreach and
mentoring activities will impact a significant number of individuals over the
long term: teachers and generations of their students, along with researchers
from USC. Importantly, students involved in these efforts will develop a culture
of contributing to their scientific and non-scientific communities that is
expected to last beyond their formative years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Smaranda
C. Marinescu of the University of Southern California will study the effect of
pendant proton relays on the CO2 reduction with cobalt aminopyridine
macrocycles. Recent work in the Marinescu group has demonstrated that a series
of cobalt complexes with zero to four pendant secondary amines (NH) displays a
linear correlation between the rate of CO2 reduction and the number of pendant
NH moieties. Experiment and theory suggest that the pendant NH groups do not
directly transfer protons to CO2, but instead bind acid molecules from solution,
leading to the formation of a catalyst-acid adduct, held together through a
hydrogen-bonding network, that enables direct proton transfer from acid to the
activated CO2 substrate. The research goal is to understand the factors that
govern the catalytic properties of these complexes, in terms of activity and
selectivity for CO2 reduction, by characterizing and altering the electronic
environment (the primary and secondary coordination spheres) of these metal
aminopyridine macrocycles. This project focuses on the synthesis and
characterization of a variety of aminopyridine complexes with pendant hydrogen
bond donors or cationic groups to understand the effects of these moieties on
the catalyst activity and selectivity. The science education goals will focus
on: (1) organizing a summer workshop for students from Cerritos College, a
public community college with a high percentage of students from
underrepresented groups and hosting a Cerritos College student in the Marinescu
laboratory to perform undergraduate research for an 8-week period during the
summer; and (2) developing a mentoring program for women at the postdoctoral
level to increase the participation of women in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.