* 2102790
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: P2C2--Understanding Trans-Hemispheric Modes of Climate Variability: A Novel Tree-Ring Data Transect spanning the Himalaya to the Southern Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Daniel Druckenbrod, Rider University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 93,133.00

The mechanisms that govern trans-hemispheric climate linkages and those between
the tropics and higher latitudes are not well understood. This gap in knowledge
is caused by a lack of high resolution and well dates records of past climate
variability. The sparsity of the data coverage as well as the lack of common
climate oscillatory modes in the western Pacific region limits the understanding
of broader-scale climate teleconnections on interannual to decadal time scales.
This project aims to develop a new data network of temperature and hydroclimate
variability across a transect spanning from the Himalaya to the Southern Ocean
and extending back to 500-1000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project
that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s Directorate of
Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council (NERC) of
the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This
Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed
by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon
successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of
the budget and the investigators associated with its own
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will repurpose existing tree ring
samples collected from the broader monsoon Asia down to the southern middle
latitudes and use a new tracer (proxy), blue light intensity, as an indicator of
temperature and hydroclimate. This new proxy will enhance prior climate analyses
based almost entirely on the single total ring-width parameter and will be used
to model and reconstruct key modes of atmosphere-ocean variability between the
northern and southern hemispheres. Specifically, the researchers will use these
data to address the following questions: (1) What are the climatic impacts of
past volcanic events in the tropics and Southern Hemisphere? (2) How have the
Intertropical Convergence Zone and El nino Southern Oscillation varied and
interacted over the past 500-1000 years as expressed across the tropical Indo-
Pacific region? and (3) How has the Southern Annular Mode varied over the past
millennium, and how is it driven by tropical and other
forcing?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential broader impacts include an improved
understanding of past variability in the climate-sensitive yet data-sparse
Eastern Hemisphere which includes some of the most climatically vulnerable
regions of the globe. These data will be disseminated to the broader scientific
community via public repositories and at scientific conferences; and will be
included in a future iteration of the Monsoon Asia Drought Atlas. The project
will support the training of three undergraduate students at Rider university
and foster national collaborations between Columbia University and Ryder
University and international collaborations with universities in the UK, Czech
republic, Australia and New Zealand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.