* 2102609
* CAS: Designing Efficient Electrocatalysts for Selective Reduction of CO2 to Carbon-Rich Products
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Manashi Nath, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 603,670.00

With the support of Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Drs. Manashi Nath (PI) and Julia Medvedeva (co-PI) from Missouri University of
Science &amp; Technology are designing new catalysts for the electrochemical
reduction of carbon dioxide to value-added chemicals and fuels. The project aims
to design efficient electrocatalyst compositions by combining an experimental-
and computational-based approach that enhance CO2 reduction on the catalyst
surface. The project is further developing design principles for such catalysts
derived from readily available and abundant metals. This multidisciplinary
project involves undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers
collaborating on approaches involving chemistry, electrochemistry, physics, and
surface science for the discovery of new catalyst compositions. Knowledge
generated from this project, falling under the broader scope of clean energy,
will be disseminated to the scientific community at all levels employing various
mechanisms including conference presentations, public seminars, peer-reviewed
publications, and outreach activities. Specifically, demonstration experiments
and workshops will be designed for local high school and middle school students
by collaborating with a local STEM club, Kaleidoscope, which organizes after-
school STEM activities. Public awareness of carbon dioxide capture and
conversion will be accomplished through outreach activities at the St. Louis
Science Center, through Minority Introduction to Engineering (MITE) camps run by
Missouri S&amp;T, and through workshops organized during the summer for local
high school teachers. These activities will include live demonstrations of an
active CO2 electroreduction cell made by employing catalysts developed in this
research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of Chemical Catalysis
program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Manashi Nath (PI) and Dr. Julia
Medvedeva (co-PI) from Missouri University of Science &amp; Technology are
studying designing efficient catalyst composition for electroreduction of carbon
dioxide to carbon-rich reduction products comprising fuels and other value-added
chemicals. The PIs propose that CO2 reduction to longer carbon chain products is
a delicate interplay between chemical potential at the catalytically active
transition metal site and intermediate CO (carbon monoxide) adsorption
energetics on the catalyst surface. The central hypothesis of this proposal is
that high d-electron occupancy with less than a fully filled configuration of
the transition metal center along with greater covalency of the metal ligand
bond will lead to more selectivity for C2 reduction products at lower applied
potential. Specifically, it is proposed that increasing dwell time of the
intermediate CO adsorbed on the catalyst surface will lead to further subsequent
reduction of CO to carbon-rich products. The PIs aim to increase dwell time of
the CO intermediate on catalyst surface by controlling the d-electron density on
the transition metal site that has a direct effect on the metal-to-ligand back
bonding which can tune the CO adsorption energy to be within a specific range
(between weak and strong adsorption regimes). This hypothesis will be tested by
synthesizing binary, ternary, and quaternary transition metal chalcogenides
(selenides and tellurides) comprising Cu, Ni, Fe, Mn, and V, following
systematic combinatorial electrodeposition. Experimental studies will be
complemented with DFT (Density Functional Theory) calculations where CO and CO2
adsorption kinetics will be estimated on different catalytic surfaces and
correlated with their performance. Specific tasks of this project include: (i)
changing the anions across the chalcogenide series and investigating catalytic
activity as a function of electronegativity; (ii) aliovalent substitution at the
transition metal site which will lead to redistribution of the d-electron cloud
increasing redox tunability of the transition metal center as well as facilitate
multielectron transfer; (iii) nanostructuring the functional catalysts to
increase the active surface area. Major deliverable of this project will be non-
precious-metal-based CO2 electroreduction catalysts that can produce higher
hydrocarbon-based fuels with lesser expense of electrical energy. Fundamental
insights gained from this comprehensive study have the potential to illuminate
design principles used to design more efficient catalysts for carbon
capture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.