* 2102910
* Supporting A Virtual Community of Practice for Broadening Participation Knowledge Transfer
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Kelly Mack, Association of American Colleges and Universities
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,331,502.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities – Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) is committed to enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education and
research at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in order to
broaden participation in the nation's STEM workforce. Accordingly, HBCU-UP
supports the project from the Association of American Colleges and Universities
(AAC&amp;U) that undergirds a virtual community of practice for broadening
participation knowledge transfer. The project will (1) deliberately focus on
cultivating the innate thought leadership of NSF HBCU-UP principal investigators
(PIs), who are at the forefront of broadening participation success, through
evidence-based identity development; 2) use a novel knowledge transfer framework
that re-imagines and adapts the “bench to bedside” knowledge translation
processes of biomedical research to a new context, for undergraduate STEM
reform; and 3) design and upgrade the virtual platform, STEM Central, for the
stated purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this timely project goes
beyond developing a knowledge-generating platform for, and by, HBCU-UP PIs. It
also expands their capacity to disseminate research about broadening
participation to the entire STEM higher education reform community. In doing so,
AAC&amp;U will coordinate, integrate, and showcase the entire NSF HBCU-UP
investment as a means of generating the kind of culturally informed research
ideas, perspectives, and collaborations that can create a deeper understanding
of broadening participation, and what is needed to achieve and sustain it. As
such, the project will, (i) design, develop, and grow a robust knowledge-
transfer platform, for and by HBCU STEM faculty; (ii) use a knowledge-transfer
platform to facilitate the transfer of HBCU knowledge and unique ways of knowing
about broadening participation to the entire STEM higher education reform
community; (iii) test the capacity of the knowledge-transfer platform for
effectiveness through social network analysis. The project addresses the need
for virtual professional development opportunities that are specifically
tailored for HBCU-UP PIs, while providing a unique platform for them to narrow
the broadening participation knowledge gap, thereby enriching the STEM education
reform community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.