* 2102495
* Developing a Seismic Model for Investigating Layering in Cratonic Lithosphere beneath Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tolulope Olugboji, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 357,817.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lithosphere is the stiff outer
shell of our planet - it is the rigid plate of plate tectonics. In the oldest
and most stable regions of continents (cratons) the lithosphere is expected to
be cold and thick, yet we observe a wide-spread, near-constant layer internal to
the lithosphere, almost akin to the crust-mantle boundary, but expressed as a
velocity reduction. This puzzling and ubiquitous observation of ‘mid-
lithospheric layering’ has resulted in different, sometimes contradictory,
explanations (i.e., partial melt, anisotropy, chemical stratification, or short-
term rheological weakening). In this study, the investigators will develop a new
seismic model of the lithosphere useful for testing proposed models of
lithospheric layering beneath Africa. The multi-decadal investment in the
innovative AfricaArray initiative, the diversity of cratons, and a growing
number of permanent and temporary seismic networks on the continent, with
publicly available data, has opened a new vista on our ability to resolve fine-
scale lithospheric layering on the continent. Similarly, new passive-source
imaging using spectral coherence of ambient noise, machine learning, and
probabilistic analysis of converted body waves is poised to ensure maximum
utility from the archived seismic datasets. This project will engage early
career scientists, train minority Ph.D. students, and promote education and
outreach goals for recruiting under-represented undergraduate students by
designing new courses that expose students to the optimal use and management of
high-performance computing resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
address gaps in current efforts to study lithospheric layering on the continent.
The investigators will conduct analysis of all publicly available seismic data
on the continent, with sensitivity to the crust and upper mantle lithosphere,
and prepare and publishing measurements of: (1) group and phase velocity of
broad-band ambient noise and earthquake records for Love and Rayleigh surface
waves, (2) depth and sharpness of compressional and shear body wave reflectivity
of lithospheric discontinuities, (3) quantify uncertainty in phase velocity maps
and, (4) provide an updated continent-wide reference model of the African crust
and upper mantle (LithoAFR+), using a probabilistic joint inverse approach to
reporting uncertainty in each stage of measurement and model-construction (i.e.,
1-4). The expected peer-reviewed studies, when interpreted with complementary
experimental and geophysical constraints (i.e, conductivity and mineral
physics), will advance our understanding of cratonic lithospheric layering and
the geological evolution of continents. Integrated modeling, using other
geophysical constraints, will also advance the understanding of (1) the origin
of the elevated African topography, (2) the origin of orphan tremors, intra-
plate earthquakes, and volcanism, and their connection to the well-known African
superplume, (3) the broad-scale evolution of continental rifting and formation
of new ocean basins, and (4) multi-stage assembly and break up of
Gondwanaland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.