* 2102003
* I-Corps: Advanced Video Laryngoscope
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Kai Kuck, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a system that could improve access to safe airway intubation. The
smart video laryngoscope is focused on safe and consistent intubation outcomes
with less training and skills required of medical personnel. This is key to
lowering the costs of airway management and improving outcomes. Airway
intubation procedures currently require training periods of three to four years
to achieve consistently safe and high-quality outcomes. Even so, over 1 million
major complications occur in the pre-hospital, emergency room, and intensive
care units yearly. Many such complications result from first-pass attempt
intubation failures. Lives and dollars may be saved via improved intubation. For
example, U.S. military medics perform tracheostomies on the battlefield because
of the inability to safely intubate injured warriors. Reducing the skills and
knowledge needed to safely intubate patients via augmentation of the video
laryngoscope may positively impact such areas. Moreover, digital imaging is used
to perform procedures in medicine from surgery to central line placement. The
infrastructure developed in this project may be used as a template for
application in other procedures for tactical and strategic outputs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of an
automated collection and archiving system of high-fidelity data for tracheal
intubation procedures in aggregate. This data will improve intubation outcomes
through better clinical research, quality assurance, and training feedback. The
lack of data related to tracheal intubation is currently the rate-limiting step
to rapidly improving higher quality outcomes. This project is aimed at
automating the recording and archiving of video-assisted intubations and then
processing the data for both tactical and strategic uses. Tactically, the data
may be processed in real-time by an expert system, and fed back onto the video
laryngoscope display for real-time augmentation in order to provide the operator
with decision support and guidance. Strategically, the recordings may be stored
and processed to surveil intubation quality and quantity at any level ranging
from individual performance over time to departmental, medical system, or
national or worldwide performance. Currently, there is no practical way to
surveil the critical procedure at any of these levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.