* 2102844
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Evaluating the Origins of Multidecadal Variability in Late Holocene Indian Summer Monsoon Rainfall in Nepal
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Caroline Ummenhofer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 149,067.00

The research team aims to develop a replicated, 4000-year-long, precisely dated,
sub-decadally resolved, multi-proxy stalagmite reconstruction of Indian Summer
Monsoon (ISM) rainfall in Nepal and to couple this record with climate model
simulations to examine the nature and origins of multidecadal monsoon
variability during different climate states of the late Holocene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ISM supplies nearly seventy percent of South Asiaâ€™s
annual precipitation, serving as the primary water resource for agriculture and
the myriad of natural environments, including glaciers, across the region. Over
the last century and a half, ISM rainfall has been positively correlated at
multidecadal time scales with sea surface temperatures in the North Atlantic
Ocean. However, in the last twenty years, this link appears to have been broken,
with monsoon rainfall over India failing to increase despite a much warmer North
Atlantic. This shift has profound consequences for regional ecosystems and the
approximately two billion people living in South Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential Broader Impacts include a deeper understanding of a climatological
system which impacts large human population centers, capacity building and
expertise exchange with international colleagues, support of students involved
with the research, and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.