* 2102344
* RAPID: Effects of wildfires on lake productivity and oxygen deficits in the western U.S.
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Alexander Forrest, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 11/30/2022
* USD 199,949.00

Extreme wildfires now occur with increasing regularity in western North America
and other parts of the world. These wildfires generate large plumes of smoke and
ash that can travel thousands of miles and persist for weeks or longer in the
atmosphere. These “smoke storms” block sunlight and deposit ash on surfaces.
Lakes and ponds are affected by the reduced light and ash inputs from wildfires,
but much about these potential impacts is unknown. Light and nutrients are both
important factors that regulate the growth of plants and algae in aquatic
ecosystems. Rates of primary production from plants and algae in turn determine
how much food becomes available for other organisms, such as fish, and can
affect many aspects of water quality. Thus, understanding how and why aquatic
primary production is responding to wildfires is a critical research objective.
This project will help develop a predictive understanding of how aquatic
ecosystems respond to wildfire, serving the 29 National Forests, 14 National
Parks, and numerous lands managed by the states of California and Oregon. The
project will provide Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
training to undergraduate, graduate students, and post-doctoral scholars.
Presentations of the results will be given to scientists, managers, and the
general public through professional conferences and public lecture series hosted
by the Tahoe Environmental Research Center, and through other state and federal
agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will disentangle the interactive
effects of reduced solar radiation, elevated presence of smoke and increased
atmospheric deposition of particulates and ash on the ecosystem metabolism and
dissolved oxygen dynamics of small lakes. The project will make use of a network
of lakes in California and Oregon along ecologically relevant gradients.
Satellite remote sensing data will be compiled, in combination with ground-based
air quality monitoring data to quantify smoke and particulate deposition
dynamics. Several ecosystem response variables have been measured prior to the
2020 wildfire season and this project will add important short-term knowledge
about fire impacts from days to months. New measurements and instrumentation
will be added to ongoing measurements from 23 aquatic ecosystems. By studying
basic ecosystem functioning in lakes of varying size, water clarity, and
productivity, the project will ascertain the effects of smoke and ash from
wildfires. Ultimately, data from this project will help characterize the spatial
linkages of smoke and ash deposition from large regional wildfires. The
functioning of lakes will be determined through measurements of gross primary
production, ecosystem respiration, and ecosystem oxygen dynamics, including
cross-seasonal linkages between autumn and winter. This will lead to a
mechanistic understanding of how interactions among drivers of ecosystem
function affected by wildfires at landscape scales affect responses in
individual aquatic ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.