* 2102022
* Carbonylation Methodologies and Strategies for Building Complex Chemical Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Mingji Dai, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 10/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Mingji Dai of Purdue University is developing new ways to make complex
and medicinally important molecules using carbon monoxide as a one-carbon
linchpin and a palladium catalyst to form new bonds. Complex natural products
and natural product-like molecules are indispensable in drug discovery. However,
their structural complexity necessitates the development of new catalytic
synthetic methods for their synthesis. The reactions that Professor Dai and his
research group are investigating are helping to address this problem by
providing streamlined methods to access these important targets. The products of
these studies are also being shared with collaborators to investigate their
biological significance. Simultaneously, this work is being used for the
education and training of a diverse group of students and
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Dai and his research team are
investigating how to generate and intercept acyl-palladium species to design new
reactions that rapidly increase structural complexity. This new synthetic
methodology is then being applied in synthetic sequences that target challenging
natural and non-natural products with potentially desirable characteristics for
medicinal studies. In one branch of the research program, transformations
involving palladium-catalyzed tandem carbon-carbon bond cleavage and
carbonylative lactonization are being studied to synthesize fused bicyclic
lactones including complex Stemona alkaloids isolated from plants used in herbal
medicine. In a related but distinct part of the project, palladium-catalyzed
carbonylative macrolactonization is being explored to synthesize complex
macrolides and their derivatives. In the third portion of the program,
palladium-catalyzed tandem, carbonylative cyclization is being explored to
synthesize natural products that feature electrophilic moieties with the
potential for covalent protein modification. Professor Dai is also providing
valuable training to postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduate students and preparing these individuals for future careers in the
chemical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.