* 2102583
* A Hierarchy of Fragment-based Quantum Chemical Models Incorporating Machine Learning for Applications in Nanoscale Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Krishnan Raghavachari, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Krishnan Raghavachari of Indiana University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop a set of quantum chemical computational methods
incorporating machine learning for broad applications in nanoscale systems.
While many accurate methods have previously been developed in quantum chemistry
by different groups, their applicability thus far has been limited to small
molecules due to their associated prohibitive computational cost. Attaining
computational efficiency along with accuracy represents the most fundamental
obstacle for quantum chemistry today. The new methods that are being proposed by
Raghavachari aim to fill this need to treat medium-sized and large molecules
accurately, providing systematic well-tested models to the study of nanoscale
systems. The methods will combine ideas based on molecular fragmentation,
systematic error-correction, and state-of-the-art machine learning to achieve
high accuracy in conjunction with computational efficiency, with the aim of
providing new tools to solve challenging problems involving intermediate-sized
to large molecular systems and materials. Computational nanoscience, as a
rapidly expanding field, is attracting student interest, and these projects are
expected to provide an excellent training platform for the next generation of
researchers in computational chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
accomplish goals of this project, Dr. Raghavachari and coworkers will build on
two different lines of research that have been developed in the group. In the
first approach, they will develop a stepping-stone model based on Connectivity-
based Hierarchy (CBH) to provide systematic error corrections to density
functional theory (DFT) to result in accuracy comparable to coupled cluster
calculations. This will be done using a two- or three-layer model where more
accurate calculations are carried out on small fragments to correct for the DFT
errors and achieve chemical accuracy. In the second approach, Raghavachari will
develop a general computational framework that unifies the advantages of
connectivity-based fragmentation with graph network-based machine learning to
attain sub-kcal accuracy (“chemical accuracy”) in the calculated energies.
Raghavachari has proposed that node embeddings based on molecular fragments will
outperform most molecular fingerprints used traditionally in most machine
learning applications. The newly developed methods have the potential to provide
unprecedented accuracy for the treatment of complex problems involving nanoscale
systems. The resulting computational tools will be developed in a platform-
independent manner and should work with multiple quantum chemical packages, and
will be made freely available for use by other research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.