* 2102501
* Single-Conformation Spectroscopy and Dynamics on Multiple Potential Energy Surfaces: Flexible N-Heterocycle Chromophores and Complexes in Aerosols
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Nathanael Kidwell, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 352,715.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Chemistry Division, Nathanael Kidwell and his research
team at the College of William and Mary will use an array of modern laser
techniques to study the delicate balance between the shape of flexible nitrogen-
containing molecules (N-heterocycles) found in atmospheric aerosols and their
interactions with light. The shape and interactions of N-heterocycles with light
are strongly influenced by the presence of solvent molecules. Understanding the
intramolecular interactions of N-heterocycles and their intermolecular
interactions with surrounding solvent molecules reveals the different pathways
the molecules follow after absorption of solar radiation. Within aerosols,
N-heterocycles enhance light absorption and water evaporation, key properties
that are important to understand given the intricate relationships among
aerosols, clouds and climate. To disentangle the intermolecular interactions
with the solvent, the team will examine the molecular structure and absorption
processes of flexible N-heterocycles with a well-defined number of solvent
molecules. This approach will facilitate the systematic investigation of
molecular solar absorption from isolated to solvated environments to approach
the complexity of liquid aerosol particles. The unique properties of each
molecular conformation in the absence or presence of solvent molecules will be
examined with laser spectroscopic tools and compared to several theoretical
models that attempt to predict the shape and absorption outcomes. The PI is
dedicated to engaging high school students as citizen scientists by partnering
with local schools to construct an Internet-of-Things (IoT) network of Arduino
multisensors to record crowd-sourced atmospheric
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the structure,
spectroscopic signatures, and dynamical outcomes of flexible N-heterocycles and
water-solvated complexes with substituents that influence the electronic
character of the base imidazole and pyrrole units. Conformationally-flexible
heterocycles will be isolated in a supersonic jet expansion and probed using
single-conformation ultraviolet and infrared spectroscopy methods to determine
the interplay between chemical structure and the correlated photophysics. Upon
sequential water molecule addition to the heterocycle chromophores, the evolving
infrared and electronic spectra will be examined to monitor the local solvation
environment effects on the isolated molecules and to explore the topology of
extended hydrogen-bonded networks. In tandem with the single-conformation
spectroscopy experiments, stimulated emission pumping and velocity map imaging
studies will serve to report on competing photochemical channels and mechanisms.
The experimental observables will be compared simultaneously to the computed
results from multiple theoretical approaches, including electronic structure
methods, ab initio molecular dynamics and machine-learning techniques. Students
mentored in the Kidwell group will gain experience in advanced experimental
techniques and high-level theoretical methods that probe the physical properties
of N-heterocycles on multiple potential energy
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.