* 2103986
* Elements: RHAPSODY: Runtime for Heterogeneous Applications, Service Orchestration and DYnamism
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matteo Turilli, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,908.00

The end of traditional scaling paradigms coupled with innovations in machine
learning are driving unprecedented changes in the formulation of scientific
applications as well as the nature of high-performance computing (HPC) software
and application ecosystems. As a consequence, scientific applications
increasingly depend on heterogeneous components with diverse computational
characteristics and performance challenges, coordinated in agile and innovative
ways. The Runtime for Heterogeneous APplications, Service Orchestration and
DYnamism (RHAPSODY) addresses challenges arising from heterogeneity and need for
performance. It will enable the effective and efficient execution of scientific
applications at unprecedented scale and on a variety of current and upcoming HPC
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RHAPSODY is a scalable, fault-tolerant and
portable runtime system to enable scientific communities to innovate by
effectively executing applications composed of heterogeneous components on
current and upcoming computing platforms. RHAPSODY provides missing runtime
capabilities to application and middleware developers, fostering the integration
of existing software systems and, ultimately, a more efficient use of existing
resources. Together, these contributions make RHAPSODY a tool to advance
scientific discovery in multiple domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.