* 2103513
* Accomplishment Based Renewal: Intensification of the Hydrologic Cycle during the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* James Zachos, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 395,376.00

Earth has experienced just over 1°C of fossil fuel carbon dioxide-driven global
warming to date. The impacts of this warming on the global hydrologic cycle are
already evident. The projected 4-5°C of warming by 2300 under a business-as-
usual fossil fuel use scenario is predicted to further intensify the hydrologic
cycle. The resulting impacts on societies’ water security would be significant,
and likely create widespread hardship for nations across the globe, rich and
poor. Climate models, tested by their ability to replicate past changes in
climate, are an important tool to plan for and minimize those impacts. The
Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM, roughly 55 million years ago) serves as
a crucial case study to test climate models. It also provides a real-world
example of the sensitivity of the climate system to a massive carbon dioxide
input. The proposed project will use coastal sediments to develop proxy records
of water chemistry and onshore hydrology across the PETM. These new data will be
compared with climate model studies of that ancient natural climate event. The
educational Broader Impacts of the proposed project include support for a
graduate student and for undergraduate
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although considerable geologic evidence
exists for a shift in hydroclimate during the PETM, additional observations are
required to assess regional/local changes, particularly as relates to extremes
on annual or shorter time scales. To this end, this project will estimate
regional changes in coastal hydrography/chemistry along both coasts of the US
utilizing shallow marine siliciclastic sections in outcrops and cores.
Preliminary data indicate significant changes in runoff (&amp; erosion) and thus
precipitation, very likely in the amplitude of wet/dry cycles and/or heavy
precipitation events (e.g. atmospheric rivers, extratropical cyclones). Building
on prior results, in collaboration with colleagues novel isotopic and
geochemical proxies will be employed, along with traditional proxies, to
constrain local changes in coastal ocean hydrography/chemistry. The observations
will be compared against output of recently completed GCM simulations of the
PETM utilizing high resolution models including the Community Atmosphere Model.
The primary focus of the comparisons will be on changes in the seasonal cycles
of precipitation and frequency of extreme events (i.e., heavy precipitation or
droughts).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.