* 2103538
* Collaborative Research: Droplet-based selection to improve aflatoxin detoxification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Weitz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 186,224.00

Fungi are microorganisms that can grow naturally on cereals and fruits. When
fungi grow, some can produce toxins that can damage our nervous system, liver,
and urinary tract when consumed. Fungal contamination thus poses considerable
economic burdens on agriculture, as there are no cost-effective approaches to
removing the toxins they produce. Some species of bacteria called ‘detoxifiers’
have been identified that can degrade these toxins. However, naturally occurring
detoxifiers are not efficient enough to address this problem. The aim of this
research is to understand how detoxifiers degrade fungal toxins with the
ultimate goal of protecting the food supply. This goal will be achieved using a
highly novel single droplet sorting platform. Detoxifiers will be mutated from
the original strains and tested for the ability to degrade fungal toxins in the
droplet. By monitoring and sorting large numbers of droplets, detoxifier
variants will be rapidly identified that work best. These strains will be
investigated to understand the toxin degradation process. Successful completion
of this research will lead to new strategies for addressing fungal toxin
treatment. It will also lead to the development of a novel systematic method for
enriching bacterial detoxifiers for a range of applications. This project will
improve the Nation’s STEM workforce through the training of future researchers
in environmental engineering and will also increase scientific literacy through
public education and outreach on food safety and
contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand
the mechanisms bacteria use to detoxify harmful fungal toxins that contaminate
our food. A high-throughput droplet-based platform will be used to characterize
and sort bacterial cells that carry detoxification enzymes focusing on
aflatoxin—a ubiquitous, harmful toxin that contaminates many food and feed
resources. The research design exploits the natural fluorescence of aflatoxin
for high throughput sensing to create a library of detoxifier mutants. These
mutants will be screened in subsequent genomic and transcriptomic studies to
identify genes involved in the detoxification process. This collaborative
project combines quantitative biology, droplet-based sorting technology, and
genomic and transcriptomic tools to offer a streamlined strategy for uncovering
the mechanisms of aflatoxin degradation. This information is critical to develop
solutions for protecting the food supply from this toxic compound. Knowledge
gained from this research holds promise to open up new avenues for systematic
engineering of improved detoxifying strains. This project will contribute to the
training and education of interdisciplinary experts at the interface of science
and engineering, thus improving the Nation’s STEM workforce. The findings,
methods, and tools will be disseminated to the scientific community, as well as
the general public through outreach on public health and economic impact of food
contamination, thus improving scientific literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.