* 2103351
* Collaborative Research: FET: Small: Massive Scale Computing and Optimization through On-chip ParameTric Ising MAchines (OPTIMA)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Cristian Cassella, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2024
* USD 278,415.00

For decades, academia and industry have relied on deterministic algorithms and
on general-purpose von-Neumann computing architectures to solve combinatorial-
optimization (CO) problems within natural and social sciences. As Mooreâ€™s law
continues to slow down, the existing computing paradigm is reaching the limit of
maximum complexity of the CO problems it can tackle, thus becoming increasingly
inadequate to answer, in reasonable times, the fundamental questions that keep
rising in a wide range of disciplines, spanning from engineering, physics and
medicine to economics and finance. By emulating quantum systems, new computing
architectures known as Ising Machines (IMs) have been emerging. IMs offer the
unique opportunity to solve extraordinarily complex CO problems much faster than
any existing von-Neumann counterparts. Yet, to date, no IM technology can afford
a massive number of spins to handle the currently unsolvable CO problems, while
ensuring a low-power consumption, a compact form factor, a chip-scale
integration and a manufacturability en masse through the consolidated wafer-
scale fabrication processes offered by the semiconductor industry. The goal of
this project is to explore and develop a new IM, namely the first On-chip
ParameTric Ising MAchine (OPTIMA). Thanks to its unique highly reprogrammable
dynamics, triggered without requiring any special environmental conditions or
any time-consuming pre-processing steps while exclusively requiring chip-scale
components that can be monolithic integrated in favor of a massive scale
production, the development of OPTIMA will pave the way towards powerful, fast
and miniaturized quantum-inspired computing systems, accessible to everybody
from everywhere. This will allow the creation of new cyber infrastructures that
scholars, scientists, engineers and educators worldwide will be able to use in
order to address relevant technological and social challenges. The project team
is collaborating with STEM education and workforce development programs, at both
Northeastern University and the University of Florida, to organize and host on-
campus activities with students and teachers from both K-12 schools and
community colleges, as well as outreach visits to local schools to encourage and
broaden participation of underrepresented groups. The project achievements are
enriching both the undergraduate and the graduate courses that the investigators
teach on circuit theory, advanced acoustic-based technologies for communication
and sensing, micro/nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS), and quantum
engineering devices and systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OPTIMA is leveraging the
unique dynamical features governing the electrical response of a synchronized
network of coupled on-chip Electro-Acoustic-Parametric-Oscillators (EAPOs)
exploiting the uniquely combined ferroelectric and acoustic properties of
Aluminum Scandium Nitride (AlScN) micro/nano devices to create extraordinarily
low-power and highly miniaturized artificial spins, manufacturable through
complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) processes. Such unique features
allow the breaking of all the previous paradigms in the design of IMs by
simultaneously enabling &gt;106 spins, a CMOS-compatible wafer-scale
manufacturing and room-temperature operation while consuming less than 1 Watt.
Further, thanks to its highly parallelized computational flow and because the
EAPOs are operating in the Super-High-Frequency (SHF) range, OPTIMA is able to
solve even the hardest nondeterministic polynomial time (NP) CO problems in
nanosecond time scales, independently of the problem size. Finally, since OPTIMA
is manufacturable through CMOS compatible processes, it is greatly leveraging
conventional IC components built on the same silicon wafer to enable flexible
programming, based on the CO problems of interest, as well as compact read-out
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.