* 2103910
* Imaging correlations and charge order in transition metal dichalcogenide moiré systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Benjamin Feldman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The electronic properties of materials are
governed by the arrangement of atoms and electrons within them. In most cases,
this is fixed by the chemistry of the constituent atoms. However, recent
advances in the ability to isolate atomically thin crystals and stack them on
top of each other provide a route to engineer new synthetic materials. This
project investigates how adding a small twist between adjacent layers can be
used to control the positions and propagation of electrons. In particular, the
rotational misalignment causes the electrons to interact especially strongly
with each other, leading to new quantum electronic properties. The research uses
a nanoscale sensor to image the resulting electron positions, study the new
quantum states that form, and determine the degree to which they can be
controlled. The predicted states may have applications in low-power electronics,
fault-tolerant quantum computing, and high-density data storage. The project
also trains undergraduate and graduate students for careers in quantum
technology, fosters the involvement of underrepresented groups in science
through summer internships, and inspires the next generation of researchers by
developing and implementing outreach activities for high school students and
local science festivals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;Stacking van der Waals materials with similar lattice constants at
small relative twist angle can generate exceptionally flat electronic bands that
are susceptible to strong Coulomb interactions. This project aims to investigate
the plethora of many-body phases that can be realized in twisted devices
composed from semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). The
research uses a scanning single-electron transistor (SET) to measure local
electronic compressibility and to image charge distribution in moiré TMD
systems. The primary goals include: 1) measuring the energy gaps and excitations
of correlated electronic ground states; 2) imaging charge ordered phases, such
as stripes and generalized Wigner crystals and their melting; and 3) probing the
dependence of these emergent states on magnetic field, doping, and twist angle
to map out the triangular Hubbard model phase diagram. Moiré TMD systems provide
unprecedented flexibility for quantum simulation across a wide swath of Hubbard
model parameter space. As a local thermodynamic probe of electronic properties,
the SET provides unique insight into this strongly correlated materials
platform. In addition, graduate and undergraduate students gain experience in
the area of van der Waals assembly and low-temperature scanning probe
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.