* 2103000
* Collaborative Research: Glacial deep Pacific carbon storage and effects on CaCO3 preservation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Allison Jacobel, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 206,812.00

The oceans are threatened by climate change, and understanding how they will
respond to higher CO2 levels has never been more important. Past changes in the
ocean’s carbon cycle can provide data to check and improve models that help us
predict future changes. These data can also help us ‘balance’ Earth’s carbon
budget by showing where and how much carbon was stored in the ocean at times
when the Earth has been much colder. Research will be carried out by two early
career, female scientists and includes roles for college and graduate students.
This work also increases access to information about climate change by creating
activities for high school classrooms. This work advances discovery, integrates
research and education, increases the participation of underrepresented groups
in the geosciences, and fosters the inclusion of the public in fundamental
science research. This project is jointly funded by OCE-Marine Geology and
Geophysics (OCE-MGG) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of understanding
whole-ocean carbon system changes in glacial periods, and the volumetric
dominance of the Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean has been the primary locus of
most quantitative carbon cycle reconstructions. This means that longstanding
questions about Pacific carbon storage and dissolution feedbacks remain largely
unanswered. The Pacific Ocean’s carbon budget in the past will be explored using
several geochemical proxies. The B/Ca ratio of benthic foraminifera is a state-
of-the-art proxy for examining these questions, as it records the difference
between seawater’s carbonate ion concentration and its concentration at
saturation Delta[CO32-]. The research plan pairs this new proxy with classical
methods of reconstructing carbon cycle changes in the deep ocean including
planktonic foraminifera species assemblages and individual weights, calcium
carbonate fluxes, carbon isotope analysis of benthic foraminifera, and
reconstructions of organic carbon fluxes (Baxs). The multiproxy approach is
designed to constrain different carbon cycle feedbacks, and to calibrate less
expensive microscope-based techniques in an effort to harness the wealth of
existing paleoclimate datasets for quantitative reconstructions and model-data
cross validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.