* 2103125
* Collaborative Research: Discovering Precipitation Pathways in Reactive Magnesium Oxide Cements via Nanoscale Interfacial Engineering for Durable Structural Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Mohammad Javad Abdolhosseini Qomi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This collaborative research is focused on investigating and discovering
magnesium oxide-based cement materials with strong mechanical properties for
sustainable construction of civil infrastructure. Reactive magnesium oxide
cement (RMC) is one of the most promising and environmentally friendly
alternatives to ordinary Portland cement as a modern concrete binder. The
advantages of RMC include low-cost and low carbon footprint compared to
conventional cements. RMC achieves its strength by forming different magnesium
carbonate phases as binding agents by reacting with carbon dioxide and water.
However, the strength and durability properties of existing RMCs exhibit
significant variations, slowing their adoption by construction industry. This
research will address the following two technical challenges: (i) understanding
the fundamental processes that govern the formation of dense magnesium carbonate
phases using novel experimental testing and computer simulation; and (ii)
innovation of durable RMC-based composites with high strength by incorporating
corrosion-resistant micro- and macro-fibers. In this project, an outreach
program for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students will be implemented in
order to disseminate knowledge on low-carbon structural materials for the
construction industry, and train next generation students and engineers with
sustainable infrastructure engineering backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this research is to tailor the carbonation products of reactive
magnesium oxide cement by maneuvering thermodynamic and kinetic precipitation
pathways in order to achieve high-performance RMC-based composites. RMC can be
produced from low-temperature (500-1000 Â°C) calcination of either magnesite
deposits or brucite precipitates from reject brine. Thus, it is deemed a more
sustainable binder to ordinary Portland cement, whose production accounts for 7%
of the global anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions. Yet, the large specific
volume variability of the different reaction products of RMC and the
vulnerability of the embedded rebars to corrosion due to an absence or quick
loss of the passivating oxide layer hindered its widespread application in the
construction practice. To address these longstanding challenges, this research
offers a combined experimental and computational research plan with two
objectives: (i) to guide the nucleation and growth pathways via nanoscale
interfacial energy considerations with non-reactive seeds (quartz, calcite,
magnesite, and dolomite) to avoid the precipitation of low-density hydrated
magnesium carbonate phases and hence reducing the volume change by modulating
the competition between thermodynamics and kinetics driving forces, and (ii) to
employ this fundamental knowledge to develop dense RMC-based fiber-reinforced
structural composites that are less permeable and more resistant to cracking and
corrosion. This approach exploits the fundamentals of the nucleation and growth
process at the nanoscale, rather than case-by-case testing of different mix
designs and processing conditions, to achieve robust composite
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.