* 2103689
* On the Mechanism and Utility of Laser-Induced Nucleation using Microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ryan Hartman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 453,103.00

Why does shining a laser on some liquid solutions cause them to crystallize? The
reasons for this phenomenon remain a mystery. Elucidating the mechanisms by
which light can induce nucleation, the process by which molecules cluster
together and organize during the earliest stages of crystallization, is the aim
of this proposal. Understanding these mechanisms could result in “greener”
industrial processes by which a wide range of materials and chemicals that we
use every day, such as dyes and pharmaceuticals, are made, saving energy and
reducing the need for large amounts of chemical solvents. In addition to
reducing the environmental impact of manufacturing crystalline materials, laser-
induced nucleation has the potential to provide better control over crystal
shape and the arrangement of molecules in the crystals during the manufacturing
process, properties that can be optimized for a specific application of the
material. To make greener crystallization part of undergraduate and graduate
education, the project would create educational activities that train students
from diverse backgrounds to engineer solutions based on this new approach to
crystallization, making it an inherent part of basic chemical engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will design and study
microfluidic nonphotochemical, laser-induced nucleation (NPLIN) of preselected
organic molecules. Molecules that crystallize into different morphologies, into
different polymorphs, and that follow single-step versus two-step nucleation
will each be examined to understand their light-field induced nucleation
mechanisms. The three different mechanisms that will be investigated in this
work are i) the optical Kerr effect by which light can align molecules in a
disordered solute cluster and thereby induce nucleation, ii) dielectric
polarization in which light lowers the energy of slightly sub-critical solute
clusters, and iii) the absorption of light by colloidal impurity particles
resulting in the formation of nanobubbles that induce nucleation. Doing so will
require the design of high-pressure microfluidics coupled with a pulsed,
collimated laser beam, and investigations of laser-induced crystallization of
ibuprofen, carbamazepine, and glycine crystals. The use of microfluidics will
contribute a quantitative experimental methodology for NPLIN that can also
distinguish single-step nucleation from two-step nucleation. The research
discoveries will set the foundation for translating fundamental findings to
practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.