* 2103725
* Desorption/Ionization in Nanofiber SALDI Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Susan Olesik, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 457,200.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Drs. Susan Olesik and Zachary Schultz and their groups at Ohio
State University are working to improve on Surface-Assisted Laser Desorption
Ionization (SALDI) mass spectrometry, a powerful analytical method for the
detection of both small chemical species and large macromolecules (e.g.-
polymers and proteins). Insights gained in this work should enable enhanced
environmental analyses, such as monitoring trace-level amounts of pollutants in
natural waters and human disease detection through tracking disease-related
species in biological fluids at increasingly low levels. To enhance the
opportunities for historically underrepresented students in science, such as
first generation college students and racial minorities, recruitment efforts by
both research groups will allow these undergraduates to work alongside graduate
students in the respective laboratories to acquire skills in state-of-the art
laboratory science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Olesik and Schultz group are
working to improve the performance of nanofiber-based surface assisted laser
desorption/ ionization, SALDI, through fundamental studies of energy transfer
between the excitation laser and the SALDI substrate, within the substrate, and
from the substrate to the analyte molecules. The overarching goal of this work
is to markedly enhance the performance of nanofiber-based , SALDI. Often SALDI
provides significant advantages for analysis of small molecules compared to
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization, MALDI, due to the low detection
limits, improved reproducibility of signal/noise in the mass spectrum, and the
absence of a “chemical” background in the low mass range arising from ionization
of the matrix. Nanofiber-based SALDI has all the advantages of other
implementations; however, it can also often achieve strong signal/noise for
specific high molecular weight compounds. The performance of nanofiber based
SALDI will be improved through fundamental studies of energy transfer between
the excitation laser and SALDI substrate, within the substrate, and from the
substrate to the analyte molecules. This mechanistic study of how energy
transfer impacts desorption/ionization for nanofiber-based SALDI is expected to
define high performing constructs appropriate for trace detection of both low
and high molecular weight analytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.