* 2103037
* Tracking the movement and strength of the Northern Hemisphere westerlies over the last glacial cycle.
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Gisela Winckler, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 297,771.00

The westerly wind belts are a key part of the climate system. Knowing the
strength and position of the westerlies during different climate states and
across abrupt shifts in climate would provide insight into the mechanisms of
climate variability. Studying the westerlies during past warm intervals is
particularly important because modern observations of weather patterns suggest
that the westerly winds are moving poleward in response to global warming. The
proposed study will document the strength and position of the Northern
Hemisphere westerlies using sediment records of dust accumulation and upper
ocean biological productivity. Sediment cores from sites in the North Pacific
Ocean will cover the last 150,000 years. They will include the most recent
global warm interval roughly 130,000 to 115,000 years ago. The Broader Impacts
of the proposed study include support for a postdoctoral fellow. The study also
will provide opportunities for including high school students in hands-on
research through the Lamont High school Intern Program. That program builds on
existing partnerships with New York City and Rockland County high schools to
recruit students from groups underrepresented in the earth
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposed study will produce five ~150 kyr
dust, productivity, and grain size records from the North Pacific Ocean to
characterize the westerly winds during various mean climate states (peak
interglacials of MIS 5e and the Holocene as well as peak glacials of MIS 6 and
the last glacial maximum), and how they respond to abrupt climate changes during
Terminations I and II. These records will use samples from five marine sediment
cores from a recent RV Sonne research cruise to the North Pacific (SO264) that
encompass ~15° latitude. These data will fill a gap in the current picture of a
key region in the Northern Hemisphere and will serve as benchmarks for modeling
studies. These datasets will be useful to both the paleoclimate and
modern/future climate modeling fields, as they will provide constraints on the
natural variability of the westerlies to changes in potential driving mechanisms
such as ice volume and atmospheric temperature gradients, thus aiding essential
modeling of future changes in the westerly winds. Finally, the results of this
work could serve as the impetus to perform similar studies in other regions of
the world, such as the Southern Hemisphere, allowing questions related to
hemispheric synchroneity of atmospheric circulation across various climate
regimes to be addressed. The PI is the co-chair of the new Lamont LDEI Task
Force and is deeply involved in implementing diversity programs on all levels,
including active recruitment of underrepresented minorities in the Geosciences.
Interpretations and conclusions drawn from this work will be brought to the
public via non-technical settings such as the annual Lamont-Doherty Open
House.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.