* 2103637
* Structural Dynamics and Function of Proteins by NMR and Computation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Rafael Bruschweiler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2025
* USD 988,596.00

Proteins are molecular machines that play a critical biological role in the
human body. In this project, new experimental and computational methods will be
developed that combine molecular biophysics with nanoscience to observe motions
of proteins on timescales that were previously inaccessible to help decipher the
role of molecular motion in protein function and the formation of protein-ligand
and protein-protein complexes. The experimental approaches will use site-
specific relaxation properties measured by multidimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (NMR) accompanied by molecular dynamics (MD) computer
simulations. The project aims at a deeper understanding of these fundamental
processes, which will assist the development of new cures and the engineering of
proteins with new properties. This project provides interdisciplinary training
and research opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdocs at Ohio State in programs that serve significant numbers of students
from demographically underrepresented groups. The new National Gateway Ultrahigh
Field NMR Center will offer opportunities to introduce a broader public to the
discoveries and benefits of basic and applied molecular research. Title 1 high
school students from the area will visit to perform and analyze NMR experiments
of samples they synthesized in class. Conferences and workshops will be
organized to train current and future NMR users from academia and industries in
Ohio, the Midwestern region, and from across the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The realistic representation of protein structure and
dynamics at atomic detail is essential for understanding protein function.
Protein dynamics can occur on a wide range of timescales covering femtoseconds
to milliseconds and even beyond, but the timescale regime bridging nanosecond
and microsecond dynamics has been notably difficult to access by experiments.
Nanoparticle-assisted NMR spin relaxation (NASR) promises the accurate and
comprehensive measurement of protein dynamics on nanosecond to microsecond
timescales at atomic resolution. It will be developed and applied to a range of
proteins with different biophysical properties and function both for the
backbone and the side chains providing novel insights on protein dynamics
behavior on these unchartered timescales. The new data, along with experimental
database information, will also be used for the validation and systematic
improvement of MD force fields, which underlie increasingly realistic high-
performance computations for the in-silico prediction of protein properties and
function, including protein-protein and protein-ligand interactions, allostery,
and biomolecular transport. New spectral sampling and automated analysis tools
will be developed for the very rapid and routine measurement of widely used
protein dynamics parameters, which will help elucidate the intricate
relationship between protein structural dynamics and function for screening
applications. This project is funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.