* 2103942
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Convergence of Bayesian inverse methods and scientific machine learning in Earth system models through universal differentiable programming
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Patrick Heimbach, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,278,970.00

Understanding and quantifying parameter sensitivity of simulated systems, such
as the numerical models of physical systems and mathematical renderings of
neural networks, are essential in simulation-based science (SBS) and scientific
machine learning (SciML). They are the key ingredients in Bayesian inference and
neural network training. Seizing on the opportunity of emerging open-source
Earth system model development in the Julia high-level programming language,
this project is endowing these open-source models with automatic differentiation
(AD) enabled derivative information, making these converging data science and
simulation-based science tools available to a much broader research and data
science community. Enabling a general-purpose AD framework which can handle both
large-scale Earth system models as well as SciML algorithms, such as physics-
informed neural networks or neural differential equations, will enable seamless
integration of these approaches for hybrid Bayesian inversion and Bayesian
machine learning. It merges big data science, in which available data enable
model discovery with sparse data science, and the model structure is exploited
in the selection of surrogate models representing data-informed subspaces and
fulfilling conservation laws. The emerging Julia language engages a new
generation of researchers and software engineers, channeling much needed talent
into computational science approaches to climate modeling. Through dedicated
community outreach programs (e.g., Hackathons, Minisymposia, Tutorials) the
project team will be working toward increasing equity, diversity, and inclusion
across the participating disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
developing a framework for universal differentiable programming and open-source,
general-purpose AD that unifies these algorithmic frameworks within Julia
programming language. The general-purpose AD framework in Julia leverages the
composability of Julia software packages and the differentiable programming
approach that underlies many of the SciML and high-performance scientific
computing packages. Compared to most current modeling systems targeted for HPC,
Julia is ideally suited for heterogeneous parallel computing hardware (e.g.,
CUDA, ROCm, oneAPI, ARM, PowerPC, x86 64, TPUs). The project is bringing
together expertise in AD targeted at Earth system data assimilation in high
performance computing environments with SciML expertise. The project team is
working with the Julia Computing organization and package developers to ensure
sustainability of the developed frameworks. The project’s Earth system flagship
applications consist of (i) an open-source, AD-enabled ocean general circulation
model that is being developed separately as part of the Climate Modelling
Alliance (CliMA), and (2) an open-source, AD-enabled ice flow model. Each of
these application frameworks is being made available to the community for
science application, in which derivative (gradient or Hessian) information
represent key algorithmic enabling tools. These include SciML-based training of
surrogate models (data-driven and/or model-informed), parameter and state
estimation, data assimilation for model initialization, uncertainty
quantification (Hessian-based and gradient-informed MCMC) and quantitative
observing system design. Academic and industry partners are involved, who are
using the frameworks for developing efficient power grids, personalized
precision pharmacometrics, and improved EEG design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.