* 2103498
* I-Corps:  Assistive technology using cyber connections and real-time information exchange for orientation and mobility
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Zhanyang Zhang, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of portable technology solutions to allow Americans with
disabilities to interact with the environment around them to increase their
freedom and mobility. According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 26% of
Americans have a disability. Current assistive technology is limited in what it
can do because of the constrained processing powers that may be fitted in the
confines of a portable device. The proposed technology provides a means for
transferring heavy processing to cloud-based servers that can draw on sufficient
power to do the necessary work on a continual basis. The individual devices will
be combinable and customizable in order to meet the individual needs off each
user and to allow for maximum usability and value. Technologies currently exist
to aid people with disabilities to interact with their environment, however, the
uptake of these devices has been very limited. The goal of this project will be
to identify the reasons for this gap and use the data to ensure solutions meet
the needs of the disabled community. The proposed solution will create
individualized personal environmental support for the users to improve their
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of advanced technologies in 5G, the Internet of Things (IoTs) and smart city
applications. Currently, many cities have taken on smart city and urban
computing initiatives where a set of disjointed sensor networks have been
deployed in various parts of the city. These include: motion sensors, video
cameras, biological sensors, audio recorders, fire detectors, gunshot location
systems, and other monitoring tools. The proposed technology is based on a
cyber-physical system framework to bridge the physical space, cyberspace infused
and Internet of Things (IoT). For example, people with vision loss or other
special needs may have difficulties in perceiving signals directly in physical
space, but they may be able to make these connections in cyberspace. These cyber
connections and real-time information exchanges may enable and enhance their
interactions in the physical space and allow them to be more aware of the
environment around them. This project may be accomplished by integrating
existing technologies and commercialized electronics, such as a 5G network,
WIFI, GPS, computer vision and a wider range of sensor
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.