* 2103030
* Collaborative Research: Anthropogenic water management, Climate Change, and Environmental Sustainability in the Southwestern US (ACCESS)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lifeng Luo, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2024
* USD 314,999.00

There have been growing concerns about water security in the southwestern US
because of dwindling supplies and rising demands. The hydrology of the region is
changing in ways that could critically undermine water supplies, agricultural
production, power generation, and river-dependent ecosystems. Of particular
concern is the declining flows in the Colorado River, a lifeblood for over 40
million people in seven southwestern states. Frequent and prolonged droughts
have brought reservoir water levels in the Colorado River to record lows,
raising concerns about a water crisis if current trends continue. This project
examines whether future water demands in the southwestern US can be met under
projected climate and current water management practices while maintaining
environmental flow requirements, and if not, whether there are alternative
approaches to achieving sustainability. The project directly engages regional
stakeholders for participation in co-producing key aspects of the research and
ensuring deliverables that are of the greatest value for improved water resource
management. It also provides exposure to K-12 and undergraduate students
regarding one of the nationâ€™s most pressing water resource sustainability
issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses high-resolution, long-term
hydrologic simulations from a state-of-the-art hydrological modeling system to
systematically examine the complex interplay between decreased water supplies
under climate change, future demands, and the role of water management (e.g.,
reservoir operation, groundwater use, and out of basin water transfer) in
mitigating climate impacts. The specific project objectives are to (1) quantify
the future changes in water supplies and demands and examine their spatio-
temporal trends and variabilities, (2) examine the changes in surface reservoir
and groundwater storages, and quantify risks of storage depletion associated
with intensified future droughts, and (3) co-develop potential sustainability
pathways with regional stakeholders by considering tradeoffs between competing
inter-sectoral water use and environmental flow requirements, and evaluate these
pathways under a range of climate change and socio-economic growth scenarios. By
considering various climate change and water use scenarios, combined with
stakeholder-informed management options, the project holistically examines
various possible pathways for water resource sustainability in the southwestern
US. The integrated modeling framework developed in this project will provide
major advances in the ability to simulate coupled natural-human systems in
highly water-scarce regions. Project outcomes will be used in informing water
resource management and educating K-12 and college students on growing water
scarcity issues under climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.