* 2103196
* Understanding the Mobile Oriented Amorphous Fraction in Semicrystalline Ferroelectric Polymers and Its Unique Contribution to Electrostriction
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Philip Taylor, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2025
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flexible hybrid electronics are in
high demand for various applications, including the internet of things, human
performance monitoring, wearable medical sensors, energy harvesting, and soft
robotics. Among the many electroactive polymers, electrostrictive polymers
exhibit many unique and appealing attributes. This project incorporates an
integrated experimental/theoretical approach to understand the fundamental
physics of electrostriction in polar semicrystalline polymers. It is proposed
that the liquid-crystal-like oriented amorphous fraction contributes
significantly to the electrostrictive actuation. Capitalizing on this
hypothesis, a closed loop of theoretical prediction, synthesis, and property
characterization will be implemented to obtain fundamental understanding and
accelerate the discovery of new materials. In addition, this project will also
integrate education and outreach in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. This will include summer research opportunities for undergraduates
and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to the fast development of flexible
electronics, this project aims to understand the origin of electrostriction and
develop new electrostrictive polymers for better performance. Recently, a unique
component in the complex semicrystalline morphology of ferroelectric polymers,
i.e., the liquid-crystal-like oriented amorphous fraction (OAF), was identified.
Unlike the ferroelectric crystals, these highly mobile OAFs can actuate at a
much lower electric field via a field-induced conformational transformation
(i.e., mechanoelectrostriction) and the electric repulsion of aligned
ferroelectric domains. In this project, computer simulation with full-atomistic
and coarse-grained molecular dynamics will first be used to unravel both the
mechanoelectrostriction and the electric repulsion mechanisms and to understand
their theoretical limits. This information will guide the experimental
preparation of electrostrictive polymers, including both poly(vinylidene
fluoride)-based random copolymers/terpolymers and relaxor-like n-nylon
copolymers. In-situ X-ray diffraction during electric poling will be performed
to understand the complex semicrystalline morphology and differential
contributions from the crystallites and the OAFs. The experimental findings will
be fed back to the computer simulation for refinement. Through this cycle of
computer simulation, synthesis, structure/property characterization, and
feedback, enhanced electrostriction in ferroelectric polymers will be fully
understood, and new electroactive materials will be
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.