* 2103928
* Defect-Electron Interaction at Ambient Temperature in Metallic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Md Haque, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2024
* USD 220,000.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High temperature has been used to
process metallic materials since prehistoric times. The intense heat moves out
the otherwise immobile internal defects and thus improves the properties. The
same principle is used today. For example, steel processing requires
temperatures in excess of 800 C applied for many hours. This research project
aims to transform the current state-of-the-art by asking the question, can
metals be processed at room temperature? The hypothesis is that, by passing high
current - but not allowing the temperature to rise, a purely mechanical force
can be generated inside the material. This force can make the defects mobile
without raising the temperature and in a timeframe of minutes only. Accordingly,
the objective of this research is to understand how the electrons (from current
flow) interact with the defects, and how the elimination or rearrangement of
defects is different from conventional heat treatment. These experiments are
performed inside high magnification microscopes to develop fundamental insights
of the proposed process. Accomplishment of this project will give a new
alternative to the metallic processing industry, which consumes a big portion of
US energy (and carbon) footprint. The new science can also be employed in other
systems where current can be passed, like electronics. By bypassing high
temperature, this new process may impact the economy of manufacturing industry.
The immediate impact is education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students, while promoting diversity. The project involves student from middle
school to enhance awareness of the carbon economy of manufacturing, and
underlying science, to the next generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Defect and microstructural control in metals and
alloys require very high temperature (comparable to melting point) and long
times (from few hours to days). In this project, the PIs propose a non-thermal
force to achieve the same effects in minutes. Here, electrical current is passed
through the specimen, while controlling its temperature to the ambient. Whenever
the electrons collide with defects and grain boundaries, they lose the momentum
– generating the ‘electron wind force’ (EWF). The hypothesis is that the EWF
dissociates immobile and complex defects species to create very high density of
disentangled and mobile dislocations. This allows the EWF to impart high
mobility to the defects without raising the temperature. The specific objectives
of this project are to (a) provide direct evidence of defect and microstructural
control by performing fundamental experiments inside microscopes with near-
atomic resolution and (b) investigate the electron-defect interaction to predict
the evolution of various defect species (vacancies, partials, dislocations,
twins) and correlate that to the microstructural changes. The transformative
aspect of this project is the departure from centuries-old heat treatment
techniques to the proposed non-thermal process. It explores the atomic to grain
level fundamentals of defect-EWF interaction, which remain mostly unknown. The
research is integrated with undergraduate education through Senior Capstone
design course to train the next generation with emerging manufacturing
technology. A student recruitment is through the Penn State Minority/Women in
Engineering program. A unique outreach program, Print with Metals, is developed
for Middle school students. These activities are complemented by the
Manufacturing Day event to draw high and middle school students towards
engineering, and specifically next generation manufacturing
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.