* 2103499
* Non-Genetic Inheritance of Hypoxia Tolerance in Fishes: Dynamics and Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2025
* Pamela Padilla, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,150,000.00

This project will quantify the inheritance of tolerance to low oxygen in a model
fish and then determine the tolerance mechanisms, at organismal to molecular
levels, that are passed on from parents to their offspring. The investigators
will not only focus on conventional, well-studied genetic mechanisms for
inheritance, but will explore so-called “epigenetic” forms of inheritance that
may transfer parental characteristics for only a generation or two. Such
“temporary inheritance” might actually require less energy and be more
beneficial to a species than the more permanent form of genetic inheritance.
Bouts of low oxygen in rivers and lakes are predicted to increase as a result of
both short-term climate change and global warming, and these effects may be
amplified by increasing levels of human-generated pollution. Tolerance of such
low-oxygen conditions by fishes has long been recognized as vital for survival
of fish populations that experience short- or long-term periods of low oxygen,
but surprisingly little is understood about the inheritance from the parents by
the offspring of the physiology and anatomy that allows such tolerance in
fishes. The information provided by this project will allow biologists to better
predict, and perhaps even mitigate, the negative consequences of future episodes
of low oxygen in rivers and lakes. Fully integrated into the research project
are transformative, international research experiences (interactive video
courses, exchange visits, and workshops involving U.S. and Mexican universities)
for ethnically diverse undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral trainees. A
post-doctoral fellow and an undergraduate student will participate directly in
the integrative research each year, contributing to scientific training goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypoxia tolerance in fishes has long been recognized as
vital for survival of populations experiencing acute or chronic environmental
hypoxia. Increasingly frequent bouts of hypoxia are predicted as a result of
global warming, climate stochasticity, and increasing pollution, adding urgency
to developing a deeper understanding hypoxia tolerance. While we know how many
adult fishes acutely and chronically respond to hypoxia, surprisingly little is
known about the non-genetic (epigenetic) inheritance of the hypoxia-tolerant
phenotype. Consequently, this project will quantify non-genetic inheritance of
hypoxia tolerance in zebrafish as a model organism and then identify underlying
mechanisms, at organismal to molecular levels, in parents and in their progeny.
Specifically, this project will quantify non-genetically inherited traits that
allow hypoxia tolerance, determine “wash-in” and “wash-out” (i.e., the dynamics)
of hypoxia-tolerant phenotypes across multiple generations, and establish
epigenetic mechanism(s) of non-genetic inheritance in subsequent generations.
The potentially rapid appearance and disappearance of transgenerational non-
genetically inherited phenotypes makes it crucial to understand, at organismal
to molecular levels, how fish populations may cope with future hypoxia.
Additionally, a strong international training component will expand a network of
U.S. and Mexican universities. Participating students will gain enhanced
appreciation of both international collaboration and Latino and U.S. culture
through bilateral intensive workshops, interactive video coursework, and longer-
term visits by research students for laboratory-based projects in both
countries. This will provide a merged scientific and cultural experience that
creates in trainees a first-hand knowledge of the global reach of life science
research, as well as different cultural perspectives of the science
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.