* 2103509
* Elements: AMR-H: Adaptive multi-resolution high-order solver for multiphase compressible flows on heterogeneous platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sanjiva Lele, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

In the past decades, computational research has enabled high-fidelity
simulations of complex fluid dynamics problems. However, the new generation of
high performance computing architectures present significant challenges in
portability and, more importantly, parallel performance of complex science
application software. This work develops a multi-purpose computational fluid
dynamics solver for high-fidelity high-order adaptive resolution simulations. It
leverages the state-of-the-art high performance programming models, Legion and
Kokkos, which guarantees the performance portability on various existing and
upcoming high performance computing platforms. Additionally, it integrates the
commonly used numerical and physical modules, with an easy-to-use programming
interface for users. As a significant benefit, the researchers can maintain
their focus on physical modeling and not require a deep understanding of code
design for new high-performance hardware. The educational and community outreach
elements of the project will develop a growing community of computational
scientists and engineers who are educated to exploit the power of task-level
parallelism and enable a new era in high-fidelity computational
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a general computational
framework combining high-order, high accuracy, solution-adaptive discretizations
of partial differential equations (with emphasis on flows of non-ideal fluids)
tailored to the physics they represent. The discretization is optimized for high
resolving efficiency, allows optimal use of the computational degrees of freedom
and high utilization of the computer resources due to its high arithmetic
intensity and data locality. Adaptive mesh refinement in combination with high-
order multi-resolution compact scheme allows for easy pre-processing and meshing
for complex-geometry problems. Co-designing the numerical framework with new
developments in the Legion framework would allow for automated, optimized
runtime scheduling of tasks involving computational kernels and data movement
across memory hierarchies. This, combined with efficient leveraging of Kokkos,
would free the computational scientist/engineer from hardware specific
programming models and allow exascale computations on heterogeneous computers.
It will enable first of its kind simulations of compressible multiphase flow
phenomena in turbulent flow regimes for retrograde fluids on exascale
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.