* 2103582
* Manufacturing of High-Performance Lithium-Sulfur Batteries Using Microbial Nanomachines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Zhaoyang Fan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2023
* USD 287,891.00

This project contributes new knowledge related to a microbial nanomachine-based
manufacturing process for fabricating high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries.
The novelty of this potentially-scalable and environmentally-friendly process is
the use of microbial nanomachines that scavenge environmental pollutants to
produce nanoscale materials. This award supports research to investigate sulfide
oxidizing bacteria and cellulose bacteria to produce sulfur-containing
nanoparticles and nanocellulose membranes, respectively, for use in high-
performance lithium-sulfur batteries. The sulfur-containing nanoparticles are
produced by sulfide oxidizing bacteria by harvesting environmental or industrial
sulfide pollutants. The nanocellulose membrane is manufactured by cellulose
bacteria through recycling certain agriculture or industry byproducts/wastes.
The outcome of this research greatly impacts future high-performance battery
technology, which benefits the U.S. economy and society. This convergent
research involves biochemistry, material science and electrochemistry. Its
multi-disciplinary approach trains the future advanced manufacturing workforce,
fosters participation of women and underrepresented groups, and positively
impacts STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge of soluble lithium
polysulfides shuttling and other problems must be solved to develop high-
performance lithium-sulfur batteries. This calls for manufacturing processes
that produce a sulfur cathode nanostructure, which can physically trap and
chemically bind these polysulfides, and a functionalized battery separator as a
second barrier to close off the shuttling path. In nature, sulfide oxidizing
bacteria can oxidize sulfide pollutants into elemental sulfur nanoparticles and
store them in their bodies. There are also bacteria which produce high-quality
nanocellulose membranes suitable as a battery separator by harvesting
agriculture byproducts. This project studies two processes; a sulfide oxidizing
bacteria cultured to produce sulfur-containing nanoparticles used in sulfur
cathodes and a bacterial cellulose fermentation process along with its ionic
modification as the battery separator. When combined, these components work
cooperatively in solving the polysulfides shuttling and other problems faced by
the lithium-sulfur battery technology. The research involves the study of
polysulfides shuttling retardation mechanism, process development, nanostructure
control and tailoring, material characterization, and battery performance
testing. Together they advance the understanding of generating rationally-
designed nanostructures via the scalable nanomanufacturing process using
microbial nanomachines to manufacture high-performance lithium-sulfur
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.