* 2103032
* Investigating Antarctic Ice Sheet-Ocean-Carbon Cycle Interactions During the Last Deglaciation
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Peter Clark, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 772,265.00

This project investigates Antarctic ice-ocean interactions of the last 20,000
years. The Antarctic ice sheet is an important component of Earthâ€™s climate
system, as it interacts with the atmosphere, the surrounding Southern Ocean, and
the underlaying solid Earth. The ice sheet is also the largest potential
contributor to future sea-level rise and a major uncertainty in climate
projections. Climate change may trigger instabilities that may lead to fast and
irreversible collapse of parts of the ice sheet. However, little is known about
how interactions between the Antarctic ice sheet and the rest of the climate
system affect its behavior, climate, and sea level, partly because most climate
models currently do not have fully-interactive ice-sheet components. The project
team will construct a numerical climate model that includes an interactive
Antarctic ice sheet, improving computational infrastructure for research. The
model code will be made freely available to the public on a code-sharing site.
In addition, the team will synthesize paleoclimate data and compare these with
model simulations. This model-data comparison will test three scientific
hypotheses regarding past changes in deep-ocean circulation, ice sheet, carbon,
and sea level. The project will contribute to a better understanding of ice-
ocean interactions and past climate variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will test ideas that ice-ocean interactions have been important for
setting deep ocean circulation and carbon storage during the Last Glacial
Maximum and subsequent deglaciation. The new model will consist of three
existing and well-tested components: (1) an isotope-enabled climate-carbon cycle
model of intermediate complexity; (2) a model of the combined Antarctic ice
sheet, solid Earth, and sea level; and (3) an iceberg model. The coupling will
include ocean-temperature effects on basal melting of ice shelves; freshwater
fluxes from the ice sheet to the ocean; and calving, transport and melting of
icebergs. Once constructed and optimized, the model will be applied to simulate
the Last Glacial Maximum and subsequent deglaciation. Differences between model
versions with full, partial, or no coupling will be used to investigate the
effects of ice-ocean interactions on the Meridional Overturning Circulation,
deep ocean carbon storage, and ice-sheet fluctuations. Paleoclimate data
synthesis will include temperature, carbon and nitrogen isotopes, radiocarbon
ages, protactinium-thorium ratios, neodymium isotopes, carbonate ion, dissolved
oxygen, relative sea level, and terrestrial cosmogenic ages into one multi-proxy
database with a consistent updated chronology. The project will support an
early-career scientist, one graduate student, undergraduate students, and new
and ongoing national and international collaborations. Outreach activities in
collaboration with a local science museum will benefit rural communities in
Oregon by improving their climate literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.