* 2103697
* Climate Conversations: Discursive Strategies of Climate Justice Organizing
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Julia Fine, Fine, Julia Coombs
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF’s Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Corrie Grosse
at College of Saint Benedict and Saint John’s University, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist examining discursive
strategies of climate justice organizing. Previous research on climate change
communication has largely focused on non-interactive, monologic texts that aim
to inform or persuade audiences, rather than on interactive, dialogic
conversations about climate change. However, many grassroots climate
communicators and organizations currently see such climate conversations as
essential for shifting attitudes and inspiring action. The proposed study
applies an interactional sociolinguistic approach to the analysis of climate
conversations, with the aim of identifying effective discursive strategies for
advancing climate justice within and across specific sociocultural contexts in
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a participatory research
framework that combines survey, interview, and discourse-analytic methods, the
study will (a) examine how grassroots climate communicators employ climate
conversations in their organizing and (b) identify characteristics of successful
climate conversations, determining success through pre- and post-surveys of
conversational participants’ climate-related actions and views. Through fine-
grained analysis of interactional language use, this analysis will shed light on
how slow-moving, intersectional crises such as climate change are managed in
discourse. By prioritizing participation by marginalized climate justice
organizers, such as Black and Indigenous organizers, this project will help to
remedy the underrepresentation of these voices in previous research. The
analysis of successful climate conversations will empower climate communicators
to hone effective communicative strategies guided by scientific inquiry, helping
to address the problem of low perceived efficacy, which has emerged as a barrier
to climate action. Finally, the project will generate a corpus of climate
conversations that will be of use to other researchers and climate change
communication practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.