* 2103967
* Collaborative Research: Elements: SciMem: Enabling High Performance Multi-Scale Simulation on Big Memory Platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Zhen Li, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 05/31/2024
* USD 140,000.00

Increasing system scalability is crucial to improving nationâ€™s computation
capabilities for scientific applications. However, some applications often face
the scalability challenge from the perspective of memory capacity. This is
especially true in multi-scale simulations when handling massive simulation data
from different scales. The emerging big memory infrastructures have shown great
potential to increase the simulation scale and solve larger numerical problems.
However, using big memory architectures for the multi-scale simulation is
challenging, because of limited computing capability in the big memory machines
and memory heterogeneity introduced by big memory. There is a lack of a software
infrastructure that can release the full power of big memory to accelerate
multi-scale simulation. This project aims to create a capability and a software
package (named SciMem) that enables high performance multi-scale simulation on
big memory platforms. The techniques presented offer a path for general use of
this structure for a wide variety of applications having a broad impact on
science and engineering. There will be impact on the students through their
direct involvement with the project and through the integration with the
educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable high
performance multi-scale simulations on big memory platforms through more
efficient utilization of large and heterogeneous memory machines. Specifically,
it will replace computations with pre-computed and stored in memory data on a
heterogeneous computing systems. The developed tool, SciMem, will be integrated
and tested with the popular parallel molecular dynamics simulator, LAMMPS
(Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator). The developed
improvements in the use of computational resources will allow more accurate
models of complex physical phenomena to be carried out on the emerging hardware
systems. SciMem aims to bring a 10x performance improvement for certain larger-
scale multi-scale simulations widely applied in the fields of computational
chemistry and material science, e.g., quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical-
based molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.