* 2103035
* Collaborative Research: Central tropical Pacific climate variability over the last millennium
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Alyssa Atwood, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 73,206.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The project will assemble radiocarbon-dated segments of
ancient coral recovered from islands in the central equatorial Pacific to study
climate conditions during the last 1000 years. It will focus on two important
time periods, the Medieval Climate Anomaly (850-1300 ago) and the Little Ice Age
(1400-1850) to look at what factors cause El Nino conditions. Researchers will
reconstruct monthly-resolution records of seawater temperature and salinity
conditions by targeting growth bands in coral skeletons. This project supports
research training educational opportunities for several undergraduate and
graduate students. It also supports a research collaboration among two early
career scientists and others who have a strong track record of participation in
K-16 education and public outreach with an emphasis on broadening diversity and
inclusion of underrepresented communities. These efforts will continue with
guest lectures at a nearby minority-serving institution and by offering summer
research opportunities for local high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving the accuracy of future climate
projections requires a more complete understanding of internal vs. externally
forced changes in tropical Pacific climate on a broad range of timescales.
Coral-based paleoclimate records have dramatically improved our understanding of
interannual climate variability in the tropical Pacific, however, similar
insights into centennial-scale variability have thus far remained unattainable
due to (i) diagenesis, which can significantly bias coral reconstructions, and
(ii) colony-to- colony offsets in coral proxies, which introduce large
uncertainties in estimates of mean climate change from single corals. Informed
by two decades of work at Kiritimati Island (2degN, 157degW), this project will
generate ~50 new well-dated and multi-proxy records of climate variability
across the last millennium. Using a novel approach that layers paired coral
oxygen isotope and Sr/Ca measurements, with a new paleothermometer, Sr-U, this
reconstruction will provide the first set of robust, quantitative, and
independent estimates of central tropical Pacific surface temperature (SST) and
hydroclimate trends across the Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA; 900-1200CE) and
Little Ice Age (LIA; 1500-1800CE). The fidelity of these fossil coral records
will be further ensured using rigorous screening for diagenesis and a microscale
analyses to extract reliable climate information from altered corals.
Comparisons of these new reconstructions with transient climate simulations will
provide much-needed context for present-day trends and allow us to investigate
the tropical Pacificâ€™s long-term response to external forcings and climate
feedbacks. Broader impacts to this project include a dramatic improvement to our
understanding of natural climate variability in the tropical Pacific, allowing
for the better quantification of regional anthropogenic climate trends, and the
improvement of future climate projections by providing more accurate benchmarks
for climate models. As climate change continues to dominate social
consciousness, the PI will actively engage in public outreach efforts to
communicate the results of the paleoclimate research as well as more general
information about local/regional impacts of future climate change. It supports
research training and mentoring of several graduate students and summer research
experiences for high school students from a nearby school district which has a
&gt;90% underrepresented minority student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.