* 2103721
* Modulating and engineering Luttinger liquid plasmons in low dimensional materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Jonathan Fan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Carbon nanotubes are becoming an increasingly
important nanomaterials system for technological translation: over the last ten
years, research in the growth and alignment of carbon nanotubes has led to the
demonstration of advanced integrated electronic systems such as carbon nanotube
computer processors. An important complement to electronic functionality is
optical functionality, where carbon nanotubes have the potential to generate,
detect, and guide light for use in sensors and communication modules, in a
manner that seamlessly integrates with carbon nanotube-based electronic logic
devices. The proposed work will explore the ability for nanotubes to serve as
advanced optoelectronic devices at infrared wavelengths. In particular, the
fundamental limits for guiding and localizing light will be elucidated using new
computational methods and new experimental materials preparation and
characterization methods. The education goal of this project is to work with
grade school teachers to disseminate new curricula that educates and inspires
high school students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate limits of plasmon propagation and compression in
one-dimensional systems remain elusive. The related open questions include
fundamental aspects of plasmonic excitations such as their lifetimes, dynamics,
and quantum plasmonic dispersion in one-dimensional single-walled carbon
nanotubes (SWCNTs) and mixed-dimensional systems. We propose to establish new
methodologies, based on advanced materials growth and nanofabrication methods,
high-resolution optical probing, and high-performance first-principles
calculations, to elucidate the underlying physics of strongly confined one-
dimensional plasmonic systems. The study builds on our development and study of
chemical vapor deposition-grown wafer-scale SWCNTs and near-field optical
instrumentation. This project will lead to new fundamental understandings of
one-dimensional quantum plasmons, its coupling with other plasmonic systems, the
relevant correlated physics within the quantum confined Luttinger liquid regime.
We also anticipate that our newly developed experimental and theoretical methods
will broadly apply to the study of other condensed matter
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.