* 2103704
* Dynamics of Mesoscopic Systems Developed with a Tunable Individual Particle Model System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* E. Dan Dahlberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 468,682.00

Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The key piece of many advanced
technologies, such as quantum computing elements, are of a size for which we do
not have useful models to describe the relevant physics; the size is commonly
referred to as meso, that is between nano and macro. At the smallest length
scales, such as atoms, we have models to calculate how the electrons transition
between energy levels and how long they can stay in excited or high energy
states. However, as we consider more complex systems, such as quantum bits,
polymer or plastics dynamics, and biological processes, the added complexity has
limited our understanding of the dynamics of the system or how the system
transitions from one state to another or how long it can stay in an excited
state. The Principal Investigator has developed a model system consisting of
magnetic nano/mesoscale particles as small as 200 atoms on a side to develop
this important physics. In this model system, the magnetic state, the
orientation of the North and South poles (NS) can be determined by the
electrical properties of the particles measured by four wires attached to each
particle. The particles are so small that the NS orientation fluctuates from
thermal noise. Understanding how the NS directions change with time, influenced
by the thermal energy or temperature, is directly related to the outstanding
physics questions at this length scale. In addition, the nano/mesoscale
particles are an ideal model system for other outstanding physics questions
related to our understanding of mesoscale physics. The research is conducted by
both graduate students and undergraduates as part of their technical training in
economically important advanced technologies and physics. These trained students
provide the workforce needed by America’s high technology
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research explores the dynamics of mesoscale systems and other mesoscale
phenomena using a unique model system developed by the Principal Investigator’s
research group. The dynamics focus is an exploration of the Arrhenius law that
has been untested for systems with complex reversal processes and the other
focus is an investigation of stochastic resonance (SR). Both of these long
standing physics questions are within reach with the technology developed by the
Principal Investigator (PI). This consists of the manufacture of individual
magnetic particles as small as 50nm with four nonmagnetic leads attached for
four terminal resistance measurements of the anisotropic magnetoresistance.
Previous research by the PI has measured random telegraph noise (RTN) in
individual nano/mesoscale magnetic particles and how individual RTN oscillators
can combine to produce 1/f noise. For the Arrhenius studies, the average RTN
dwell times for each of the two states is measured as a function of both the
energy barrier separating the states and temperature. The energy barrier is
controlled by the application of a dc magnetic field. The data are compared to
predictive models. For the SR research a single dot exhibiting RTN is subjected
to a small ac magnetic field. The ac field is not sufficient to drive the
magnetization through the energy landscape giving rise to the RTN. The thermal
noise, however, can enable the transition between states, which is at the heart
of SR. Exploring the response of the magnetization as functions of ac field
magnitude, temperature, particle energy barriers tests the models of
SR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.