* 2103197
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Structural and Compositional Modification of Memristive Niobium Oxide Films for Neuromorphic Computing Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Matthew Sullivan, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2024
* USD 196,130.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The rapid and seemingly relentless improvement
in electronic circuitry over the last seven decades has been driven in large
part by miniaturization of the electronic components. However, adverse quantum
effects at extremely small length scales present an impending limit to shrinking
of these circuits, and many researchers have looked to biological systems for
inspiration for further improvement. Neuromorphic, or brain-inspired, computing
has the potential to enhance performance and computational speed while reducing
power consumption by mimicking the biological function of neurons. The research
team from the undergraduate-only physics departments at SUNY Brockport and
Ithaca College, along with collaborators from the U.S. Naval Research
Laboratory, are studying thin films of niobium oxide for use in neuromorphic
circuits. Thin-film niobium oxide is an ideal candidate for neuromorphic
circuits, as it is plentiful, inexpensive, non-toxic, and can mimic both the
brain’s neuronal and synaptic behaviors. This project focuses on the growth of
the thin films, incorporation of other elements (such as zinc and aluminum) in
the films, post-growth thermal annealing, and fabrication into electronic
circuit components. The research team is focusing their effort on correlating
the various material changes (e.g., oxide composition, thickness, growth
parameters) with the device’s resulting electronic behavior. Ultimately, the
project’s goal is to develop niobium oxide based electronic components that can
seamlessly integrate with the current state-of-the-art silicon-based
electronics. Undergraduate students are integral members of the research team,
and participation in this research is often attractive to members of groups
underrepresented in physics. Undergraduate student members of the research team
participate in all aspects of the research project during both the summer and
during the academic year, and present their work at regional and national
conferences. The PIs regularly present at local schools in areas with students
from underrepresented groups and include information on successes, challenges,
and opportunities in materials science and computer science to ignite interest
in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Niobium oxide is a polymorphic material that, depending on
stoichiometry, has a number of interesting and potentially useful electrical and
optical properties. Crystalline niobium dioxide (NbO2), in particular, displays
volatile memristive behavior, and is a leading candidate for architectures that
merge traditional metal-oxide-semiconductor components with brain-inspired
neuromorphic circuit elements, which are generally required to have both
synapse-like and neuron-like components. This project focuses on developing a
better understanding of NbO2, which undergoes a volatile phase transition from
high to low resistance around 800 degrees Celsius. This transition mimics the
spiking electrical behavior of neurons by abruptly changing resistance once a
temperature threshold is achieved. The research team – which consists of two
principal investigators, with specialties of materials development and electric
transport, their undergraduate research students, and collaborators from the
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory – is studying both the material deposition and
post-deposition treatment processes, as well as the optical and electrical
behavior of the resulting films. On the materials side, the research team uses
atomic layer deposition (ALD), doping, and post-growth crystallization
techniques to fabricate high-quality NbO2 in a way that is fully compatible with
existing semiconductor manufacturing processes. Specifically, the project
examines the addition of dopants during ALD to encourage crystallization with a
thermal budget compatible with low-power device operation. Following
crystallization, an ultra-high vacuum system is used to thermally cycle the
material through its phase transition while observing reflected and transmitted
optical signals to quickly establish the effect of growth conditions or dopants
on the phase transition temperature. On the device side, electrical measurements
are performed to establish the effect that material preparation and properties
have on key device operation parameters, such as the number of transitions that
can be performed before failure, the device yield, and the switching power
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.