* 2103647
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Catalytic Enhancement of Immobilized Lipases by Tunable Polymer Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 391,499.00

Methods to stabilize enzymes to improve their performance in industrial
processes have been pursued for decades. A promising approach combines enzymes
with synthetic polymers. Attaching enzymes to synthetic materials has been shown
to enhance their recyclability. This approach has also been shown to decrease
enzyme denaturation in extreme environments. However, little is understood about
why certain materials stabilize some enzymes but not others. The overall goal is
to understand and develop design rules on how to stabilize enzymes via
immobilization to complex synthetic materials. This project will also provide
multi-disciplinary training for graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students. Project results will feed into an annual data science capstone
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein stabilization can be regulated by tuning
the composition of random copolymer brushes to which the protein is attached. A
detailed understanding of the molecular basis of this approach is critical. This
understanding will be achieved by combining functional stability measurements,
single-molecule methods to quantify conformational dynamics (e.g., unfolding and
re-folding rates), and atomistic molecular dynamics simulations. Using this
approach, the hypothesis that the chemical properties of the brush layer and
enzyme surface should be well-correlated. To systematically test this
hypothesis, several closely related, but structurally diverse lipases will be
used. Single-molecule FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer and simulations will be
used to distinguish between possible mechanisms of stabilization. Mechanisms to
be evaluated via tuning the enzyme-brush interface, will include enhanced re-
folding (i.e., a chaperone-like effect) and reduced unfolding. Additionally, the
salient chemical features of the brush layer that contribute to the
stabilization of enzymes will be identified. This work will leverage a novel
algorithm to model and identify clusters of hydrophobic atoms on protein
surfaces using unsupervised machine learning. The results of this work are
expected to lead to transformational advances in industrial biocatalysis. The
impact may extend to other fields, including biosensing, bioremediation, and
smart materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.