* 2103662
* Framework: An A+ Framework for Multimessenger Astrophysics Discoveries through Real-Time Gravitational Wave Detection
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Chad Hanna, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 05/31/2026
* USD 3,397,540.00

The first direct detection of ripples in space, known as gravitational waves, by
the NSF-funded LIGO (Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory)
project in 2015 opened a new window on the universe and provided an
unprecedented ability to study distant astronomical phenomena that could
otherwise not be seen with conventional telescopes. The subsequent 2017
detection of merging neutron stars, through gravitational waves with LIGO
combined with the light detected by conventional telescopes, opened a new era
whereby scientists hope to routinely study the universe using information
analogous to both sight and sound. This project will directly enable future
detections of gravitational waves through the development of robust signal
processing software and an ecosystem of cyberinfrastructure services designed to
analyze LIGO data in real time. The program will involve a diverse group of
undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers,
computational scientists, and faculty in transformative science. This work
contributes to the national cyberinfrastructure as a core data-producing
component for astronomy and will be relied upon by thousands of scientists
globally as they progress the state of knowledge through the study of black
holes, neutron stars, fundamental physics, and the evolution of the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the goal of making new coincident
gravitational-wave and electromagnetic observations commonplace, this project
targets the development of a software framework for the real-time discovery of
gravitational waves with the world-wide network of gravitational-wave detectors
including LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA. With this project, the investigators intend to
provide a sustainable community-driven framework supporting current
gravitational-wave detectors while developing new infrastructure for the LIGO A+
upgrade in about 2025. The team will develop a real-time gravitational wave
processing framework around the following themes: 1) accelerating the pace of
discovery and dissemination of results, 2) advancing the use of machine learning
and artificial intelligence in production gravitational-wave astronomy, 3)
improving scientific robustness and reproducibility, and 4) increasing adoption
of the developed software and services. The framework will be used to create
libraries, applications and services for real-time calibrated strain data, real-
time data quality information and a quick-response gravitational-wave search for
merging neutron stars and black holes, all of which will culminate in daily
gravitational-wave discoveries released publicly. This framework will contribute
gravitational-wave discovery services operating in a high-availability mode with
the goal of greater than 99% uptime. A host of scientific metrics will be
developed into a real-time test infrastructure to ensure that gravitational-wave
alerts are accurate and robust throughout software development and release
cycles. This research will have a far-reaching impact on several scientific
disciplines with new gravitational-wave and multi-messenger astrophysics
discoveries and it will impact society through a gradual change in the shared
knowledge about the universe. Beyond these general societal impacts, the project
personnel intend to directly weave training and participation broadening
activities into their research through 1) training and broadening participation
in the research community via quarterly workshops, 2) providing professional
development opportunities for the project personnel through training seminars,
and 3) engaging and educating the next generation of scientists in the
geographic community with a summer school for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Windows on the Universe NSF Big
Idea program, the Physics at the Information Frontier (PIF) program in the
Division of Physics (PHY), and the Division of Astronomical Sciences
(AST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.