* 2103431
* Thermodynamics of Interfaces:  Theory to Atomistic Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Yuri Mishin, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2024
* USD 354,527.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research aimed at advancing the fundamental understanding of grain
boundary thermodynamics and kinetics by atomistic computer modeling. Interfaces
in crystalline materials play an essential role in many areas of science and
technology. Almost all engineering materials contain internal interfaces
separating crystalline domains (grains) with different crystallographic
orientations. These interfaces, called grain boundaries, often control the
structural stability and properties of the material. For example, the solute
elements in alloys often segregate to grain boundaries and make the alloy either
stronger or catastrophically brittle. The design of new alloys heavily relies on
the ability of researchers to understand and control grain boundary segregation
and its effect on physical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
The PI will investigate the mechanisms of grain boundary segregation and grain
boundary diffusion in Cu-Ag and Al-Mg alloy systems. The research will uncover
key relationships between the thermodynamic (segregation) and kinetic (diffusion
and migration) grain boundary properties. A diverse set of representative
boundaries will be tested to demonstrate the generality of the results across
different grain boundary types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will impact
several areas of materials science, physics, chemistry, and technology by
expanding the fundamental knowledge of interface thermodynamics and kinetics,
and by creating new capabilities for computational prediction of interface
properties. To enhance the broader impacts, the PI will organize workshops and
symposia on broad topics related to materials interfaces across different
disciplines. The PI and the students will also visit local high schools and give
popular presentations featuring computational materials science with examples
based on this project. When teaching graduate courses at Mason, the PI will
utilize this research as a source of examples for lectures, homework
assignments, and topics of term projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research aimed at advancing the fundamental understanding of grain boundary
thermodynamics and kinetics by atomistic computer modeling. Grain boundaries
often control the structural stability, mechanical behavior, and physical
properties of engineering materials. Specific goals of this project include: (1)
Discover the fundamental mechanisms of grain boundary segregation and diffusion
in alloys systems; (2) Investigate thermodynamics of grain boundary phase
transformations; (3) Uncover relationships between the thermodynamic
(segregation) and kinetic (diffusion) properties; (4) Investigate the solute
drag effect by moving grain boundaries; and (5) Investigate the dynamic phase
transformations in moving grain boundaries by direct molecular dynamics
modeling. The primary approach to achieving these goals is a tight integration
of molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo simulations, and the jump correlation
analysis. Cu-Ag and Al-Mg alloys will be chosen as model systems. A diverse set
of representative grain boundaries will be tested to demonstrate the generality
of the results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will impact several areas of
materials science, physics, chemistry, and technology by expanding the
fundamental knowledge of interface thermodynamics and kinetics, and by creating
new capabilities for computational prediction of interface properties. To
enhance the broader impacts, the PI will organize workshops and symposia on
broad topics related to materials interfaces across different disciplines. The
PI and the students will also visit local high schools and give popular
presentations featuring computational materials science with examples based on
this project. When teaching graduate courses at Mason, the PI will utilize this
research as a source of examples for lectures, homework assignments, and topics
of term projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.