* 2103208
* EDGE FGT: Bee Functional Genomics Using Engineered Symbionts
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Nancy Moran, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,389,589.00

Insects are among the most widespread and diverse animals on our planet. They
have critical roles in natural ecosystems and agriculture and have evolved
unique biomaterials and lifestyles. Scientific tools for studying the functions
of the genes responsible for these traits are well-established for only a few
types of insects, such as fruit flies. Genetic tools do not exist for millions
of other species. Honey bees and bumblebees are economically important as
widespread pollinators of food crops and are scientifically interesting due to
the complex social behaviors observed in bee colonies. Currently, there are few
effective tools for studying the functions of bee genes. This project will
develop and disseminate a toolkit that allows researchers to alter the
expression of bee genes by engineering their native symbiotic gut bacteria. This
technology will enable studies of how specific genes contribute to bee
physiology, development, and behavior. This work will contribute to
understanding bee ecology and health in ways that are expected to benefit
biodiversity and US food security in the long term. The technology for
engineering symbiotic bacteria is expected to be widely applicable to studying
other insect species. These research and outreach activities will be integrated
with education by supporting two experiential learning courses that are part of
the Freshman Research Initiative program at The University of Texas at Austin.
Supporting this program will foster the development of a diverse science and
technology workforce by involving underrepresented and first-generation college
students in genuine research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silencing the
expression of a gene by inducing an RNA interference (RNAi) response is a common
approach for performing studies of gene function in invertebrates. However,
delivering enough double-stranded RNA to achieve sufficient gene knockdown
through injection or feeding is expensive and ineffective in many insects,
including bees. In this project, a FUnctional Genomics Using Engineered
Symbionts (FUGUES) methodology will be developed and applied to honey bees (Apis
mellifera) and bumblebees (Bombus spp.). In FUGUES, microbial symbionts are
engineered to continuously produce and deliver double-stranded RNA to induce a
targeted RNAi response in their host. Newly emerged bees colonized with an
engineered bacterial symbiont exhibit reduced expression of a target gene
throughout the bee body, enabling one to ascertain the function of a bee gene
and its role in determining specific phenotypes. There are key advantages of
using FUGUES to study gene function over current techniques that generate
transgenic animals: it can be accomplished more quickly, it can be conducted in
high-throughput when coupled with insect colonization via feeding, and it can be
applied to species, such as bees, with mating systems and collective behaviors
that complicate using genome editing techniques. Improving and disseminating the
FUGUES tools created in this work will broadly enable studies of genes
underlying bee behavior, development, and physiology. These tools will likely
also be useful for studying many other insect species and other organisms that
harbor symbiotic bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.