* 2103483
* AF: Small: New Directions for Parallel Data Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Yan Gu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 531,749.00

Hardware advances in the last decade have brought multicore parallel machines to
the mainstream. Today, it becomes almost impossible to find a single-core
processor, and studying parallel algorithms on multicore processors has become
of huge practical relevance and significant theoretical interest. A very
important aspect of algorithm design is to design data structures that are
efficient and easy to use. This project aims to develop new parallel data
structures that can facilitate parallel algorithms with good theoretical
guarantees and practical performance. Also, the research team seeks to develop
library implementations of the outcoming data structures and algorithms, which
will be publicly available. The project includes an educational component that
will integrate parallel algorithms in existing undergraduate courses and develop
graduate-level courses about the theory and practice of parallel
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project aims at studying
three parallel data structures and their potential applications. The first
effort studies an efficient data structure for parallel dynamic nearest-neighbor
search, with numerous applications to hierarchical clustering problems. The
second studies a parallel priority queue with the goal of developing efficient
algorithms for the parallel single-source shortest paths (SSSP) and related
problems, both in theory and in practice. This includes unifying the existing
algorithms, providing better design for priority queues, and thereby designing
parallel SSSP algorithms that match the cost bounds of existing algorithms while
also being fast in practice. The third thrust studies an algorithmic framework
related to parallel dependence graphs, which allows for asynchrony. Dependence
graphs are data structures to capture the dependence between objects in parallel
computation. They have been shown effective for the design of various parallel
algorithms. This project plans to develop the underlying data structures for a
general framework to execute dependence graphs. The expected outcomes of this
project include a list of efficient parallel algorithms for fundamental graph
and geometric problems that are simple and efficient both theoretically and in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.