* 2103182
* Polymer-Based Capsules of Active Liquids Templated by Non-Aqueous Emulsions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Emily Pentzer, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 417,688.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists and engineers continue to
develop new materials with improved performance in applications such as
batteries, water purification, gas uptake, and so on. These novel materials
provide the foundation used to create new technologies that impact and improve
nearly every facet of modern life. Unfortunately, some of the new materials,
such as ionic liquids and eutectic solvents, are difficult to handle by
themselves, and they require containment of some kind, limiting their use in
practical systems. This research work addresses these current limitations by
developing methods to prepare capsules with cores of the specialized liquid
wrapped in polymer shells. This approach is made possible by the use of a water-
free emulsion that is composed of droplets of the active liquid dispersed in an
oil, coupled with polymerization techniques. The water-free emulsions are
critical to the development of this encapsulation system, as they allow the
specialized liquid to remain pure and unadulterated. The work addresses how the
composition of the polymer shell impacts performance properties of the capsules,
namely mechanical properties and the uptake of gaseous carbon dioxide. This
research promotes progress in the areas of composite materials with applications
in critical areas such as energy storage and gas separations. In addition to the
research, this project will support the training of undergraduate and graduate
students and development of How-To Videos. These videos are planned to be
publicly available and to show new researchers how to use scientific instruments
to characterize polymer-based materials, thereby supporting the development and
training of scientists and engineers more broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the planned research is to develop methods to prepare capsules with
cores of active liquids (e.g., ionic liquids and deep eutectic solvents) and
polymer composite shells of varied permeability, stability, and mechanical
properties. This will be accomplished by leveraging interfacial polymerizations
in non-aqueous emulsions. Alkylated graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets will be used
as particle surfactant to stabilizing Pickering emulsions, toluene or octane
will be used as the continuous phase, and ionic liquid or deep eutectic solvent
as the discontinuous phase. Aim 1 focuses on preparing capsule shells of varied
permeability and mechanical properties using telechelic oligomers as monomers,
as prepared by ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP), reversible-
addition fragmentation-chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization, and radical dead-
end polymerization (DEP). In Aim 2, the stability of the capsule shell will be
tuned by incorporation of dynamic covalent bonds; this will enable destruction
or fusion of the capsule shells. In Aim 3, the capsule shell thickness will be
minimized and the core fluid purity maximized by using reactive particle
surfactants and thiol-ene chemistry. The capsule composition, morphology,
thermal properties, permeability, and mechanical properties will be established.
An unfunded collaboration with Prof. Burcu Gurkan will reveal the relationship
between shell composition and permeability to gaseous CO2. An unfunded
collaboration with Prof. George Pharr will support evaluation of individual
capsules using micromanipulation techniques, producing force-displacement
profiles. The scientific research is complemented by support of undergraduate
and graduate researchers, as well as How-To Videos (HTVs) which demonstrate
working principles and practical considerations for techniques used to
characterize soft matter.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.