* 2103284
* Conference Support: Recruiting Students and Early Career Researchers as Participants in the Ninth NANO Conference 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Achintya Bezbaruah, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 11/30/2021
* USD 10,000.00

Nanotechnology is increasingly finding uses in agriculture, medicine, energy,
consumer products including electronics, environmental technologies,
transportation products, and packaging. Nanotechnology deals with materials
which are smaller than one-billionth of a meter at least in one dimension, and
these materials are not necessarily benign in nature. There has been an effort
by researchers and manufacturers to make nanomaterials sustainable with no or
minimal impacts on the environment and its components. The 9th SNO Conference
(November 12-13, 2020) will virtually bring together academicians, researchers,
governmental workers, policy makers and the industry to discuss the gains so far
and the opportunities and challenges in developing better and sustainable
nanotechnology. Two leading organizations, Sustainable Nanotechnology
Organization and the Nanotechnology, Occupational and Environmental Health
Committee, are jointly organizing this conference for the open exchange of ideas
and networking among people working in the areas of nano-based/nano-related
devices and processes, green and advanced materials, education, regulations,
epidemiology, fate and transport, medicine, health and safety, toxicology, risk
assessment, agriculture, and water treatment. There will be a special session on
the COVID-19 Pandemic focused on nano-scale phenomena of transmission and spread
of the virus as well as its detection, capture, and inactivation. The aims of
the conference are: (1) To provide a common platform for nanotechnology
researchers for the open exchange of ideas to identify the next steps to make
nanotechnology more sustainable; (2) To facilitate discussions on fundamental
science and mechanisms to reduce the harmful impacts of nanotechnology on the
ecosystem and (3) To create opportunities for networking among early-career
researchers, young professionals, and students. The current project is aimed at
recruiting early-career researchers, young professionals, and students from
diverse backgrounds to the conference and encourage them to get more involved in
sustainable nanotechnology related research and development, becoming the future
leaders in sustainable nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 9th NANO
Conference (November 12-13, 2020) will virtually bring together academicians,
researchers, governmental workers, policy makers and the industry to discuss the
gains so far and the opportunities and challenges in developing better and
sustainable nanotechnology. The conference will play a unique role by focusing
on sustainable nanotechnology. There are few forums which facilitate focused
discussion on this topic. Sustainability of nanomaterials from the ecosystem
perspective is the main focus of this conference. The conference will facilitate
open dialogue on sustainable nanotechnology focused on the implications and
applications. One of the major foci of the conference will be the risk
assessment and mitigation strategies as new nanotechnology devices are
developed. The special session on coronaviruses (100-200 nm in diameter) will
focus on the spread and transmission pathways which involve nanoscale transport
processes (e.g., diffusion, attachment onto droplets). The detection, capture,
and inactivation of the viruses are heavily dependent on interfacial
interactions at the nanoscale. The plenary and technical session presentations
will highlight the latest developments and opportunities. The technical sessions
on rapid nanosensing for viruses, epidemiology, fate and transport, and
nanomedicines will complement the COVID-19 session. The session on nano
agriculture will encompass the global agricultural scenario beyond the green
revolution to make agriculture more efficient, resilient, and sustainable. The
dedicated session on water treatment and remediation will cover emerging issues
on detection and removal of emerging contaminants, disinfection byproducts, and
pathogens. The nanotechnology related regulations and governance session will
include state-of-the-art and future strategies. There will be sessions to
discuss safe, responsible, and sustainable development and deployment of nano
and advanced materials including nanomedicines. The poster session will offer
interaction and networking opportunities to early-career researchers, young
professionals, and students. In addition, there will be a NanoPitch Contest for
students to help them develop the soft skill of presenting complex
nanotechnology research to a general audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.