* 2103878
* Frameworks: Collaborative Research: Integrative Cyberinfrastructure for Next-Generation Modeling Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Mark Piper, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2026
* USD 175,364.00

This project is designed to support and advance next generation,
interdisciplinary science of the complexly interacting societal and natural
processes that are critical to human life and well-being. Computational models
are powerful scientific tools for understanding these coupled social-natural
systems and forecasting their future conditions for evidenced-based planning and
policy-making. This project is led by the Network for Computational Modeling in
Social and Ecological Sciences (CoMSES.Net). CoMSES.Net's science gateway
promotes knowledge sharing among scientists and with the general public, and
enables open, online access to sophisticated computational models of social and
ecological systems. CoMSES.Net's partners in this project (the Community Surface
Dynamics Modeling System and Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of
Hydrologic Science) also enable knowledge sharing and provide open, online
repositories of models in the earth sciences. This project will enhance these
science gateways and create online educational materials to make these critical
technologies easier to find, understand, and use for scientists and non-
scientists alike. By integrating innovative technology with training and
incentives to engage in best practice standards, this project will stimulate
innovation and diversity in modeling science. It will enable researchers to
build on each other's work and combine it in new ways to address societal and
environmental challenges. The cybertools and educational programs developed in
the project will be openly accessible not just to research institutions but also
to smaller colleges, state and local governments, and a broader audience beyond
the science community. The project will give decision-makers and the data
scientists who support them access to a larger and more varied toolkit with
which to explore potential solutions to societal and environmental policy
issues. A long-term aim of the project is to support an evolving ecosystem of
diverse, reusable, and combinable models that are transparently accessible to
anyone in the world. Sustainable planetary care and management is a challenge
that confronts all of humanity, and requires knowledge, histories, methods,
perspectives, and engagement of researchers, decision-makers, and private
citizens across the country and throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop an Integrative Cyberinfrastructure Framework (ICF) to
enable innovative next-generation modeling of human and natural systems, and
build capacity in modeling science. It will support a set of activities that
integrate the human and technological components of cyberinfrastructure. 1)
Software tools will be developed that augment model codebases with modern
software development scaffolding to facilitate reuse, integration, and
validation of model code. 2) The project will provide high-throughput computing
(HTC) resources for simultaneously running numerous iterations of models needed
to capture stochastic variability, explore a parameter space, and generate
alternative scenarios; 3) Online training activities will build expertise and
capacity to make effective use of the cybertools and the HTC resources; 4) The
ICF will engage a global modeling science community to provide professional
incentives that encourage researchers to adopt best practices and catalyze
innovative science. Leveraging existing NSF investments, the ICF will be
developed and deployed by the Network for Computational Modeling in Social and
Ecological Sciences (CoMSES.Net), in partnership with the Community Surface
Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS), Consortium of Universities for the Advancement
of Hydrologic Science (CUAHSI), Open Science Grid, Big Data Hub/Spoke network,
and Science Gateways Community Institute. Computational models have emerged as
powerful scientific tools for understanding coupled social-biogeophysical
systems and generating forecasts about future conditions under a range of
climate, biogeophysical, and socioeconomic conditions. CoMSES.Net, CSDMS, and
CUASI are scientific networks, with online science gateways and code archives
that enable open access to computational models for an international community
of social, ecological, environmental, and geophysical scientists. However, the
full value of accessible, well-documented models only can be realized if their
code is also widely reproducible and reusable, with a potential for integration
with other models. In order to confront critical challenges for understanding
the coupled human and natural systems of today's world, modeling scientists also
need HTC environments for upscaling models and exploring high-dimensional
parameter spaces inherent in representing these systems. The ICF is designed to
meet these challenges. By integrating technology with intellectual capacity-
building, the ICF will stimulate innovation and diversity in modeling science by
letting creative researchers build on each other's work more readily and combine
it in new ways to address societal-environmental challenges we have not yet
perceived. The tools and training resources will be openly accessible not just
to leading research institutions but also to the many smaller colleges, state
and local governments, and a broader audience beyond science. They will provide
decision-makers and the data scientists who support them access to a much larger
and more varied toolkit with which to explore potential solution spaces to
social and environmental policy issues. The proposed ICF is also designed to
help transform scientific modeling practice, including incentives that can help
early career researchers shift from creating models to solve problems specific
to a particular project to models that are also useful for others. The project
will help support a future evolving ecosystem of diverse, reusable, and
integrable models that are transparently accessible to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, with the Division of Social and Economic Sciences in the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral &amp; Economic Sciences also contributing
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.