* 2103951
* Elements:Open-source hardware and software evaluation system for UAV
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Hyesoon Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 05/31/2024
* USD 614,000.00

The usage of Robots and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) is increasing, and they
are becoming a part of our everyday lives. In the process, robotic systems have
ceased to be solely a mechanical design problem but now include substantial
computing power as well. However, little system or architecture research has
been done for robotics workloads, especially in realistic environments. The
existing infrastructure is focused on drone flight algorithm tests, with little
flexibility to configure the computing capability. To this end, this project
develops a software-hardware co-design framework that includes an end-to-end,
vertically integrated stack that enables reconfigurable hardware to be
programmed and exposed to virtual reality environments for realistic drone
navigation problems. It will establish a flexible software-hardware
infrastructure of drones and open up exciting possibilities for more research in
academia and industry. Since drones are nowadays widely used, the research has
potential for impact across a wide range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project develops an end-to-end hardware and software
infrastructure that can evaluate the computing requirements and test out new
architectures and technologies. This includes: (1) profiling the workload for
UAVs, which include both model-based as well as learning-based workloads; (2)
developing an open-source hardware/software drone platform that can be used for
testing computing architecture/systems with a real system; (3) developing a
cyber-physical system infrastructure that can be connected with drones and
flight simulation; and (4) developing a simulation infrastructure to offload
high-end computation to other accelerators while running drone flight scenarios.
The project will advance the state of the art in implementation of processors
for robotics/UAV workloads. It will offer new opportunities in power-constrained
platforms for applications including surveillance, automotive, environment,
military, and disaster to name a few.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.