* 2103058
* EAGER: Manufacturing of Diamond Nanocrystals for Quantum Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Raj Singh, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2023
* USD 158,000.00

This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award aims at
studying the fundamental science and engineering for nanomanufacturing of
diamond crystal arrays for use in many novel applications, such as, quantum
computing, magnetic field sensing, spintronics, encryption, and nanomedicine.
Diamond nanocrystals containing nitrogen-vacancy (NV) defect centers display
properties that can be controlled by microwave, optical signal, electric and
magnetic fields thereby making them useful for a myriad of quantum applications.
To function as components of quantum devices, each nanometer or micrometer size
diamond single crystal should preferably contain only one type of NV defect
center and, when arranged into isolated diamond single crystal arrays, achieve
the greatest sensitivity and individual addressability. This project develops
approaches to manufacture diamond single crystal arrays containing NV defect
centers that are preferentially oriented along a single crystallographic
direction. In addition, the project provides education and training to graduate
and undergraduate students towards workforce development and careers in academia
or industry. The research findings are disseminated to the scientific community
and expected to have significant impacts on several national initiatives such as
advanced manufacturing, nanotechnology, quantum information sciences,
optoelectronics, medicine, and national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
state-of-the-art in quantum technology employs diamond thin films or bulk
crystals containing NV defects that are unsuited for wide-spread use because the
NV defects are randomly distributed and cannot be individually addressed for
many of the novel quantum applications. The objective of the project is to
demonstrate proof-of-concept for manufacturing of epitaxial diamond single
crystal arrays with enhanced preferred orientation of the NV defect centers. The
scientific justifications for the overall program are based on three
transformative hypotheses that include (1) bias-enhanced nucleation for creating
an array of epitaxial diamond nuclei on patterned single crystal silicon
substrates followed by the growth of the diamond crystals; (2) role of substrate
orientations promoting preferential orientation of the NV defect centers along
&lt;111&gt; crystallographic direction based on planar atom density; and (3)
application of electric and/or magnetic fields during manufacturing by Microwave
Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (MPECVD) for additional preferential
alignment of the NV defect centers. The project advances the fundamental
understanding of the roles of in situ doping by nitrogen, diamond nucleation and
growth mechanisms, substrate orientation, and applied electric and/or magnetic
fields on the NV defect centers. The quality of the diamond nanocrystals is
determined by quantitative characterization of spin state addressability based
on changes in optical emission upon exposure of the nanocrystals to microwave
and laser pumping using optically detected magnetic
resonance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.