* 2103965
* Phase Competition and Domain Textures in the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Cory Dean, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2025
* USD 304,980.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a fundamental
physics phenomenon called fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE), which is
observed in semiconductor multilayer structures. The investigation is performed
on unique ultra-high purity semiconductors exposed to high magnetic fields using
novel high sensitivity optical technique. This combination of low-disorder
semiconductors and novel measurement methods enables detection of extremely
small signals of excitation modes that accompany interactions between electrons
in these materials. Traditional methods of magneto-transport measurements are
insufficient for detecting these excitations that occur in the bulk of these
materials. Studies of these low-lying excitations provide important insights on
fundamental interactions in electronic systems with subsequent impacts on the
development of quantum computation technology. The project provides training in
cutting-edge science to graduate and undergraduate students as well as
postdoctoral researchers. Outreach activities are planned to attract diverse
group including women and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed in this project experimentally probes low-
lying excitations in the bulk electron fluids of the fractional quantum Hall
effect (FQHE) to understand physics of strong electron correlation in
topologically protected electron fluids. While much of the correlation physics
in the FQHE is understood in terms of composite fermion quasiparticles, more
recent theories introduced an internal geometrical degree of freedom that
impacts orbital motion in the large magnetic field due to intra-Landau electron
Coulomb interactions. These interactions result in novel effects that uniquely
manifest on the dispersions of low-lying excitations. The bulk of the FQHE
fluids is known to be disordered in which domains of FQHE fluid coexist with
domains of other phases of the two-dimensional (2D) electron fluid. Optical
methods will be used to identify large domains of FQHE fluid in which the low-
lying excitations have momentum dispersions that are like those of a uniform
system. The low-lying modes are studied by advanced resonant inelastic light
scattering methods developed in the group of the PI. At Landau level filling
nu=1/3 the measurements will be focused on identification chiral gravitons of
angular momentum L=-2 predicted by geometrical theories. Much of the proposed
research efforts will be focused on the FQHE states of the second Landau level
that is host to intriguing FQHE states at Landau level filling factors 5/2 and
7/3. In tilted magnetic field emergent nematic phases and their competition with
FQHE phases in the bulk will be studied by optical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.