* 2103478
* EAGER: Electrocatalysis Modulated by Bifunctional Organic Monolayer: CO2 Reduction to C2
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Zhiyong Gu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/29/2024
* USD 284,482.00

This Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) provides proof-of-
concept data for a novel technology supporting our nationâ€™s transition to clean
energy. Part of the clean energy equation involves the capture and conversion of
carbon dioxide (CO2) produced from the combustion of fossil resources. The
project further supports progress towards low carbon emission chemical
manufacturing by exploring electrochemical conversion of CO2 to small building-
block molecules used widely in the manufacture of a broad range of chemical and
fuel products. The study focuses on novel catalyst designs that promote highly
localized electric fields, thus potentially enabling more efficient energy
utilization and greater CO2 conversion efficiency than obtained with
conventional catalyst designs. The project also incorporates clean-energy
related educational and outreach activities targeted at both pre-college and
college level students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A high electric field can
rearrange the electronic orbitals of chemical species and alter the electronic
interactions between adsorbates and catalytic surfaces. This influences the
thermodynamics, kinetics, and mechanisms of (electro)catalytic reactions. The
project investigates the effects of local electric fields and exposed-surface
sites on the CO2 electroreduction reaction (CO2RR) to C2 products. The concept
is investigated using a combination of atomic-scale simulations, electrocatalyst
synthesis, spectroscopic characterization, and electrocatalytic performance
testing. The catalyst is prepared from a bifunctional thiol-based monolayer
(e.g., -S-CnH2n-NH2) immobilized onto a Cu nanowire (NW) array. This catalytic
structure enhances local electric fields due to opposing charges in the head and
tail functional groups of the monolayer. Surface coverage of thiol molecules is
simultaneously tuned to expose Cu step and defect sites. Effectiveness of the
combined approach for accelerating CO2RR-to-C2 will be evaluated by (1) deriving
relationships between thiol composition/structure and local field strength, (2)
determining the thiol surface coverage effects on exposed Cu sites, and (3)
investigating the performance and stability of the bifunctional organic
monolayer modified Cu NWs under reaction conditions. In parallel with the
research, the investigators will involve both graduate students and
undergraduate students in their research, and participate in the Immersive
Scholar Program at UMass Lowell to promote undergraduate research, including
women and underrepresented minorities. The investigators will also convey the
importance of clean energy technology and modular electrocatalysis into outreach
activities for K-9 students and distribution via various educational
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.