* 2103038
* CAREER: Quality of Experience and Network Management in the Encrypted Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Zubair Shafiq, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2024
* USD 497,658.00

While encryption is essential for security and privacy, it limits the ability of
content providers (e.g. Netflix and YouTube) and mobile network operators (e.g.
AT&amp;T and Verizon) to effectively and efficiently deliver content to users.
First, encryption limits the ability of content providers to maintain effective
control over modern applications such as augmented reality or virtual reality
(AR/VR) video streaming. Second, encryption limits the ability of mobile network
operators to efficiently share the scarce radio spectrum among their many users.
These issues can significantly degrade users' Quality of Experience (or QoE).
The goal of this project is to improve QoE of modern applications in the
increasingly encrypted Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate implicit and explicit cooperation between network operators and
content providers for QoE and network management in the encrypted Internet.
First, the project will investigate implicit cooperation between network
operators and content providers through machine learning based analysis of
encrypted traffic. Second, the project will investigate in-band and out-of-band
protocols and API frameworks for explicit information exchange between network
operators and content providers. The project investigates a spectrum of
innovative approaches for cooperative QoE and network management, ranging from
clean slate approaches to the ones that are backward compatible and
incrementally deployable. The proposed research will help improve Internet
experience of modern high-throughput low-delay applications such as AR/VR video
streaming, especially for users in underserved areas with poor Internet
connectivity. The project will also engage undergraduates and under-represented
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.