* 2103019
* CAREER: Mechanism of Cytochrome P450 Alkene Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/16/2020,04/30/2022
* Thomas Makris, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 04/30/2022
* USD 55,847.00

CAREER: Mechanism of Cytochrome P450 Alkene
Biosynthesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER award, the Chemistry of Life
Processes in the Chemistry Division of NSF is funding Dr. Thomas Makris from the
University of South Carolina to study the mechanism of OleT, a recently
discovered enzyme that is involved in the synthesis of hydrocarbons. The
biocatalytic production of hydrocarbons provides a potential route to
sustainably produce fuels that are compatible within the existing energy
infrastructure. The atypical reaction catalyzed by OleT consumes hydrogen
peroxide, a toxic reactive oxygen species, and transforms biologically abundant
fatty acids into alkenes without any additional input of energy. The goal of
this research is to understand both the chemistry of this reaction, and the
molecular details which promote it. Additional broader impacts of this research
are in its active involvement of undergraduate and high school students, and the
community at large, in an ongoing protein engineering initiative that introduces
this hydrocarbon producing capacity into a related enzyme. The award also
supports research for undergraduates from the home institution, and abroad,
through a collaborative exchange with a liberal arts college for women, and
provides the first research opportunities to high-school students from
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cytochromes P450 are a
ubiquitously expressed superfamily of thiolate-ligated heme enzymes that
catalyze a diverse set of physiologically important chemical reactions.
Cytochrome P450 enzymes typically insert oxygen atoms into organic substrates
using a ferryl intermediate known as Compound I. OleT forms Compound I, but
instead catalyzes a fundamentally different reaction that does not involve
oxygen insertion. The origins for this unusual metal-oxo reprogramming are being
probed by biochemical, kinetics, spectroscopic and structural methods. These
methodologies evaluate the individual contributions of electronic structure,
secondary coordination sphere, and substrate positioning on promoting the
carbon-carbon scission reaction. Dr. Makris has devised an innovative
educational plan, termed Fats to Fuels, that is well integrated into the
proposed studies of OleT. In this plan, undergraduate students and the local
community are engaged in learning how fats can be converted to hydrocarbon fuel
sources. This research has the potential to impact society with respect to
developing new hydrocarbon sources as alternatives to fossil fuels.