* 2103405
* CRII: CNS: Towards Robust RAN Slicing: Theories, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tu Nguyen, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 190,971.00

With the rapid growth of new services and Internet applications, traditional
cellular networks are now faced with a major challenge of supporting diverse
applications. To address the various application demands, Radio Access Network
(RAN) slicing has become one of the most promising architectural technologies
for the forthcoming 5G era. RAN slicing allows the physical infrastructure
resources to be shared across many RAN slices, with each slice built on top of
the underlying physical RAN (substrate) is a separate logical network, which
provides a set of services. Each RAN slice is constituted by various virtual
network functions (VNFs) distributed geographically in numerous substrate nodes.
Failures may occasionally arise from substrate. RAN configuration schemes for
the network are imperative to relieve VNFs from substrate node failures
(remapping/re-embedding VNFs onto live substrate nodes). This project aims to
explore a new scheme and algorithms to enhance the robustness of RAN slicing by
addressing the RAN configuration issue for slice recovery in a unified
framework, referred to as RS-configuration. This project will build a
theoretical and computational scheme that formalizes this insight and provides
efficient and practical techniques for RAN slice recovery by mapping VNFs
efficiently in the RAN slicing. This research program will also be integrated
with education to develop new courses and a new series of case-study class
modules in an advanced networking course as well as the design and analysis of
algorithm courses at Kennesaw State University. Outreach programs through the
university will be utilized to ensure the dissemination of the results. The PI
will also release the implementation of the proposed scheme and algorithms in
public domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
optimization models and methods for 1) establishing the theoretical foundation
for using RS-configuration to construct a VNF mapping plan for RAN slice
recovery optimization; 2) developing a new scheme and algorithms needed to map
VNFs efficiently and finally 3) applying our theoretical and algorithmic
development to investigate the robustness of RAN slicing and trade-offs between
RAN slice recovery and RAN configuration in the RAN-related networking
environment. Methodologies will be developed in the context of mathematical
programing and graph theory that will help obtain more efficient and fast
solutions performing within reasonable bounds of computational complexity.
Hence, this research on new scheme and algorithms for RAN slicing will provide
the computational basis towards building a robust RAN slicing and contribute to
the development of new networking technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.