* 2103958
* Elements: Cyberinfrastructure for spin and charge transport calculation of partially disordered alloys
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Widom, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 482,252.00

Metallic alloys are ubiquitous in high technology, in industry, and even in our
households. Alloys, which form when two or more chemical species are combined to
create a single metallic phase, offer the chance to improve upon the properties
of pure metallic elements. Some of the properties that can be altered through
alloying include mechanical strength, magnetism, melting temperature, and
oxidation resistance. This project focuses on the property of electrical
conductivity, by developing computer codes to evaluate the quantum mechanical
scattering of electrons off of atoms. To accurately predict the scattering we
must know where the atoms are located, and in an alloy that means understanding
how the different chemical species arrange in space. Often these arrangements
are random, but even if the elements are randomly distributed, there will be
correlations in the positions of certain species relative to others as a result
of chemical bonding preferences. The code will contain features that enable it
to predict these correlations and reveal how the correlations influence the
conductivity. In addition to developing computer codes, this project will
develop a user base of scientists interested and able to run the code and to
contribute to its further development. Outreach to high school students and
their teachers will enhance the pipeline of prospective scientists. Inclusion of
scattering theory in college and graduate level courses taught by the PIs will
prepare Physics and Materials Science students to understand and apply the
codes. Presentations at scientific society conferences will inform the existing
community of the capabilities, while workshops and webinars and webinars will
provide specific training for active users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic
density functional theory (DFT) has flourished as a practical tool for
calculating energies, forces and electronic structure; its use is now widespread
both in basic science and in engineering. Charge and spin transport calculation
is a capability that has not yet reached the broader user community, partly
because codes that incorporate these effects are not widely available and partly
because these properties are highly sensitive to the degree of crystalline
order. Basic knowledge of the degree of order is often lacking, as it can be
temperature dependent, and thermal effects are not captured by most DFT codes.
To address this need, a code will be developed that is easy to use (capable of
running on a desktop computer), that can predict the degree of chemical order or
disorder as a function of temperature, and that can calculate the resulting
charge and spin conductivities. This will be achieved by building upon
innovations in electronic structure calculation, coupled with methods of
statistical mechanics to address thermal disorder. Specifically, we will modify
the Coherent Potential Approximation (CPA) to incorporate the effects of short
range order by unifying the resulting total energies with the Cluster Variation
Method (CVM) to predict temperature dependent disorder. The modified CPA will
express the total energy as a function of interatomic correlation functions,
while the CVM will express the entropy in the same terms, allowing the
determination of correlations that balance the energy against the entropy. This
approach to density functional theory employs multiple scattering as implemented
in the public domain code MuST. This method determines the electronic Green’s
functions, and consequently it integrates naturally with the Kubo and Greenwood
formulas for charge and spin conductivity. This internally consistent
combination of approximations will achieve both high accuracy and high
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering, with the Division of Materials Research in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences also contributing
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.