* 2103534
* The Geometry of Measures and Analytic Properties of Associated Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Benjamin Jaye, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2024
* USD 93,899.00

This project concerns a study of the some of the mathematics behind two basic
physical questions. The first question considered is to what extent can the
geometry of a body be determined from information about a force field associated
to the body (for instance its gravitational field)? Such inverse problems in
potential theory have a rich history, but the mathematical tools needed to
answer this question are currently underdeveloped. The investigation will focus
especially on what can be said if one only knows that the field has bounded
magnitude, which is of particular interest in applications. A second question to
be explored is how, and to what degree of accuracy, can one determine the
asymptotic (or long term) behavior of a random function that evolves with time,
based on certain empirical measurements?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the principal investigator proposes to research several questions
concerning the relationship between the geometrical properties of a measure and
the regularity properties of an associated operator. The primary question of
interest is the following: What can be deduced about a measure from the
knowledge that singular integral operator associated to it has good regularity
properties? Under these circumstances, can the measure have a fractal structure,
or must its support be contained in (a countable number of) Lipschitz sub-
manifolds of appropriate dimension? Attempts to solve this problem has led to
theory which has found recent applications in the calculus of variations, the
study of free boundary problems, and the geometry of harmonic measure. The
principal investigator intends to further develop tools that serve as a bridge
from the analytic condition on the singular integral operator to the geometric
structure of the measure. A second topic of research concerns understanding the
long-term behavior of a stationary Gaussian process given information about its
spectral measure, building upon recent work involving the principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.