* 2103082
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Development of a 700,000 Year Record of Tropical Precipitation, Evaporation, and Temperature from Lake Junin Sediments and Regional Speleothems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Josef Werne, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 397,549.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influence of increasing global
temperatures on people and ecosystems varies across the world. In tropical
regions, the impact is felt mostly in terms of water availability. Deposits
preserved in caves and lakes provide key insights into how tropical environments
responded to past climate change. This study will build a 700 thousand year-long
record from cave deposits and lake sediments in Peru to understand how a
changing global climate affects precipitation, temperature and humidity in the
upper reaches of the Amazon Basin. The findings from this work will apply to
understanding the impacts of climate change in this region and extend globally,
as the Amazon is home to the world’s largest rainforest and an important
regulator of the global carbon cycle. This project will integrate researchers at
three research universities and one undergraduate liberal arts college.
Undergraduate students will interface with graduate students through all aspects
of the proposed work, and a postdoctoral fellow will be based at the liberal
arts institution and will work with teams at the research universities. In
addition, scientists will collaborate with faculty and students in Peru to
establish a monitoring program for regional caves, lakes and precipitation, and
on a public outreach program aimed at climate change education led by community
members. Researchers will expand participation of underrepresented minority
students in the Earth sciences through development of a hands-on hydrology and
climate change module as part of the University of Michigan Earth Camp, an
experiential learning program for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will combine analyses of a suite of
paleoclimate proxies using both the 700,000 year-long Lake Junín sediment record
and deposits from nearby caves, to produce a near-continuous, composite record
of precipitation-evaporation balance and temperature for the upper Amazon Basin
for the last 700,000 years. The National Science Foundation and the
International Continental Drilling Program funded the successful collection of
the Lake Junín drill core in 2015, and the cave deposits were collected in 2019
using university funds. Researchers will combine the well-dated Lake Junín drill
core with a composite speleothem (cave) record dated by precise U-Th
geochronology, and will use these archives to build records of precipitation,
evaporation, and temperature, that will enable synthesis of our new data with
existing records to investigate coupled climate systems in the Amazon Basin
(monsoon strength and Atlantic meridional overturning circulation), climate
sensitivity under different boundary&lt;br/&gt;conditions, and hydrologic change
during periods of large and rapid changes in forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.