* 2103515
* CAREER: Secondary Amine Selective Petasis (SASP) Bioconjugation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Monika Raj, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 314,281.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Monika Raj from Auburn University to develop a chemical
method that can selectively label a specific site on a biomolecule in the
presence of sea of other similar sites. In this case, the specifically labeled
site is known to "turn on" or "turn off" very important functions inside the
cell which are responsible for cell growth, as well as the transfer of
information from one cell to another. The proposal aims to use the new chemical
labeling method to better understand the biological significance of the reactive
sites, that is how they control cellular function. Dr. Raj develops methods
based on innovative applications of classical chemical reactions for visualizing
biomolecules and tagging them with dye. This project also supports continued
efforts toward increasing diversity in science fields by allowing graduate and
undergraduate students from underrepresented minorities to gain training in both
organic chemistry and biochemistry. Outreach activities engage high school
students (especially women and underrepresented minorities) and expose them to
basic concepts of science through fun experimentation, ultimately encouraging
them to pursue studies and academic careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical strategies that can target a particular
functional group at a single site in the presence of reactive amino acid side
chains on protein surfaces are limited. Even more rare are organic reactions
that can proceed under conditions mild enough to label biomolecules. To address
these challenges, this research project develops a new multicomponent
bioconjugation method based on the classical organic Petasis reaction for
selective labeling of proteins containing secondary amines. This method is
employed for labeling mono-methyl lysine containing posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) on proteins with various cargoes. The dysregulation of
these mono methyl lysine PTMs has been linked to a variety of different
biological malfunctions, yet the chemical methods for selective detection of
mono methyl lysine PTMs are still lacking. This research provides a highly
selective chemical tool that can effectively detect mono methyl lysine PTMs
which, are present not only on histone proteins but also on other proteins and
dictate various protein-protein interactions and functions. Thus, the proposed
research has a great potential to further our understanding of how these PTMs
regulate various cellular signaling processes and how the PTMs themselves are
regulated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.