* 2103673
* OP: Quantum Light Matter Interaction with van der Waals Exciton-Polaritons
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Arka Majumdar, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Quantum Information Science and
Technologies can revolutionize modern society: by enabling extremely fast
computing and ultra-secure communication, to unlocking new materials, such as
high-temperature superconductors, that can transform day-to-day transportation,
or create new chemical processes transforming agriculture. Light is an
advantageous choice for building quantum technology, as it is easy to control
and detect single packets of light, also known as photons. Unfortunately,
photons do not easily interact with each other, which poses a serious bottleneck
for controlling one stream of photons with another. The ability to control a
signal is at the heart of any computing technology. Hence, current attempts to
build quantum computer using light is limited to only simple operation.
Developing more complex interaction between photons can dramatically enhance the
computer’s capability. This project aims to demonstrate precisely such
interactions between photons mediated by electrons. The key technology has two
components: a device to store light in a small volume for a long time, and an
artificial atom-like medium, also known as an exciton. Such medium is already at
the heart of many day-to-day technologies, including solar cells, and light
emitting diodes. Integrating such atom-like medium with light-storing devices
leads to strong interaction between photons. On the nanometer scale, this effect
can happen at the single photon level, which is needed for quantum computing.
Moreover, the large size reduction of the light-storing devices allows hundreds
of them to be made on a single square-millimeter chip, allowing integrated
circuits for light, akin to integrated circuits that are at the heart of today’s
electronics. This project will develop a platform to help scientists better
understand effects like high-temperature superconductivity. Furthermore, this
project will improve the training and education of undergraduate and high school
students, with a strong emphasis on including women and minority communities, in
scientific research in quantum technologies. Through the PI’s active involvement
with the Optical Society of America and industrial laboratories, the scientific
results will be disseminated to a wider scientific audience via seminars,
workshops, peer-reviewed publications, and conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;The research aims to
develop a quantum optical platform to understand and engineer light matter
interaction at the most fundamental level, where single photons start
interacting with each other via single quanta of materials known as excitons.
This platform is made of strongly coupled hybrid particles called exciton-
polaritons, which are part-matter and part-light, and thus inherit the best of
both worlds. While photons provide the ability to couple spatially separated
nodes, the excitons provide the ability for the polaritons to interact with each
other. The key to creating this strongly interacting exciton-polariton system is
the merging of atomically thin van der Waals materials, such as transition metal
dichalcogenides with an extremely large exciton binding energy, and ultra-small
mode-volume nanophotonic resonators and resonator arrays. Combining optical and
electrical techniques as well as quantum optical modelling, the project probes
coherent light matter interaction in van der Waals materials to provide deep
insights into the nature of atomically thin exciton-polaritons, and polariton
condensates. The ability to control polaritons provides an excellent opportunity
to synthesize complex quantum Hamiltonians, which are impossible to solve using
classical computers. The resulting strongly correlated two-dimensional polariton
may prove critical for new capabilities in quantum nanophotonic technologies
that exploit the spin-valley physics or generate new physics, such as exciton-
mediated superconductivity. Combining numerical simulation, device fabrication,
and optical characterization, three research aims are pursued: (1) develop a
robust exciton-polariton platform; (2) realize single photon nonlinear optics
for quantum many-body simulations; and (3) explore new states of quantum
materials using exciton-polaritons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.