* 2103550
* Structural Extreme Events Reconnaissance (StEER): Data to Knowledge Framework for Coordinated Reconnaissance following Natural Hazard Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ian Robertson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,659,926.00

Natural hazard events, such as earthquakes, hurricanes, and tornadoes, can claim
irreplaceable lives and cause billions of dollars in damage to communities
nationwide, with cascading impacts on the U.S. economy as well as the security
and well-being of its citizenry. Unfortunately, these losses are only mounting.
Reducing the toll of disasters depends critically upon engineers systematically
documenting hazard impacts on the built environment and ensuring the resulting
knowledge swiftly informs new regulatory policies and construction practices
guiding more resilient recovery and rebuilding. This award will expand the role
of the Structural Extreme Events Reconnaissance (StEER) Network in these efforts
to learn from natural disasters. This project will streamline the network’s core
operations, supporting volunteer engineers as they collect and process valuable
post-disaster data. In parallel, this project will develop new protocols for
more efficient data collection and processing as well as knowledge dissemination
to constituencies in research, policy, and practice. These protocols will
broaden the participation of the research community, including undergraduate
students, while building their capacity for high-quality forensic data. The
research community will further benefit from the resulting Science Plan that
ensures post-disaster observations inform future research and its translation
into policy and practice. By more effectively utilizing the opportunity to not
only learn but act upon the knowledge gained in the study of disasters, this
project will help communities to become more resilient and sustainable. This
project will contribute to the National Science Foundation (NSF) roles in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop new protocols that enhance the StEER network’s efficiency, achieved
through the outputs of six interconnected objectives, beginning with: (1) a
tiered, regional data collection model for more agile field responses, (2) a
workflow that unifies structural assessments across hazards and building
typologies, (3) new capacities for automated data collection and synthesis, and
(4) a damage quantification scheme offering more objective evaluations of
performance compatible with established rating systems. Outputs of these four
objectives will enhance the network’s core operations to lessen data
collection/processing demands, increase efficiency, and reduce latency. This in
turn will enable the network’s members to direct more energy toward in-depth
forensic evaluations, feeding this learning into new dissemination conduits,
formed through the addition of (5) a constituent-focused reconnaissance
engagement and communications hub. This is coupled with (6) observation-driven
science planning that links the network’s findings to research and technology
transfer opportunities. In total, this will result in a more coherent natural
hazards engineering research agenda and ultimately will help translate next-
generation mitigation strategies into practice. Project data will be archived
and made publicly available in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-
ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.