* 2103051
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Speleothem Constraints on Seasonal Hydroclimate Variability in Mainland Southeast Asia since the Late Pleistocene
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Griffiths, William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 74,606.00

This project aims to characterize the Asian summer and winter monsoon
circulation and local hydroclimate across Mainland Southeast Asia (MESA) during
the last ~45 thousand years using a suite of speleothem records from caves that
extend across a critical geographical divide between Laos and Vietnam, two
countries with very distinct seasonal rainfall climatologies. The overarching
goal of this work is to explore the dynamic response of summer and winter Asian
monsoon variability to changing external drivers, such as insolation, and
internal climate variability which will contribute to improved understanding of
large-scale hydrological variability in a vulnerable region. Specifically, the
researchers will develop a new set of past climate records utilizing multiple
environmental tracers (Carbon and Oxygen isotopes, trace elements such as
Magnesium/Calcium, radiocarbon) in precisely dated speleothems spanning at least
the last ~45 thousand years. Additionally, a detailed cave monitoring program
will aid the interpretation of data obtained from the speleothems. The results
will be integrated with other regional and global records of past climate
variability and state-of-the-art climate model simulations to diagnose the
dominant mechanisms driving hydroclimate variability on sub-decadal to
millennial timescales in the MESA region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will address the following specific objectives: (1) Determine the summer and
fall/winter response of MSEA hydroclimate to orbital and millennial-scale
forcing, (2) Determine the response of MSEA hydroclimate to decadal to
multidecadal scale sea surface temperature variability, and (3) Synthesize data
with other available records to elucidate the spatiotemporal patterns of MSEA
hydroclimate, which, combined with paleoclimate model analyses, will allow us
investigation of the dynamical mechanisms underlying summer and fall/winter
monsoon variability. Speleothem oxygen isotope records from three study sites
will serve as a proxy for summer monsoon intensity, dominated by the degree of
upstream rainout over the Indian Ocean and trace element measurements will
provide robust evidence for past variations in local water balance at each cave
site, with Laos sites recording summer rainfall and Vietnam sites recording
fall/winter rainfall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include
a better understanding of the monsoon dynamics and related hydroclimate in a
vulnerable region by generating quantitative and well-dated multi-millennial
climate records from speleothems. The project will provide scientific training,
mentorship and professional development for several undergraduate (including
summer research experience) and one graduate (Ph.D.) students, as well as one
postdoctoral researcher at three universities including two minority serving
institutions. Additionally, the project will support an early career scientist.
The results of the project will be part of ongoing and newly developed public
outreach activities both in The US and the study region (Laos/Vietnam) involving
students and postdocs. The project will also foster international and
transdisciplinary collaborations including with local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.