* 2103991
* Frameworks: An Interoperable Software Ecosystem for Many-Body Electronic Structure Calculations
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Steven Louie, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2025
* USD 3,856,970.00

The development of advanced materials is a key driver of progress in areas of
national strategic importance, such as energy generation, storage, and
distribution, wireless communications, and quantum technologies. For example the
operation of solar panels, solid-state batteries, touch screens, flat-panel
displays, and quantum computer prototypes critically relies on the properties
and functionalities of advanced materials down to the scale of individual atoms.
Further improving the performance of these materials, as well as designing brand
new materials with novel functionalities, requires a detailed understanding of
how macroscopic properties, such as the ability to carry electricity, to absorb
and emit light, and to store chemical energy, emerge from the elemental
composition and the atomic structure of each compound. In this context,
simulating materials behavior by solving the fundamental equations of quantum
mechanics on supercomputers has become an indispensable complement to
experimental research. Today there exists an abundance of high-performance
computing software to investigate and predict the properties of materials in
their lowest energy state, or ground state. These tools are primarily based on
density functional theory, an incredibly successful conceptual paradigm that
allows us to find approximate yet accurate solutions of the Schr√∂dinger equation
of quantum mechanics for entire materials. While these methods are essential for
predicting structural and energetic properties such as thermodynamic phase
diagrams, they are not suitable to describe more advanced functional properties
such as light-matter interactions, charge transport under electric and magnetic
fields, and macroscopic quantum phenomena such as superconductivity. The current
project fills this gap by developing a comprehensive software ecosystem to
compute and predict functional properties of materials beyond what is currently
possible with density functional theory. The cyberinfrastructure supported by
this grant will enable the rational design of advanced functional materials at
the atomic scale, and will underpin the development of next-generation materials
for energy, computing, and quantum technologies. The research program will be
tightly integrated with educational activities to promote scientific research in
diverse communities. To this end, webinars, schools and hackathons for users and
developers will be organized annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this
project is to create an interoperable software ecosystem to model and design
materials at the atomic scale using many-body field-theoretic approaches. Many-
body electronic structure methods define a gold standard for accuracy,
reliability, and predictive power, but the widespread adoption of these methods
in academia and in industry is hindered by the complexity of the underlying
theories and algorithms, as well as the lack of broad interoperability and
shared data standards. The project expands and combines the complementary
strengths of three software packages, EPW, BerkeleyGW, and SternheimerGW, into a
user-centric, containerized simulation laboratory with shared data formats and
built-in compatibility layers for major density-functional theory codes. This
cyberinfrastructure advances understanding of the interplay between electronic
and lattice degrees of freedom in advanced materials, and expands the range of
properties that can be calculated with predictive accuracy, including: finite-
temperature quasiparticle band structures; light absorption and emission
spectra; excitons, polarons, and their couplings; superconductivity; carrier
transport; and driven quantum systems. Furthermore, this cyberinfrastructure
will accelerate future software development by distributing curated, reusable,
and interoperable open-source code, and by providing a platform to develop and
test new algorithms and software for many-body electronic structure methods.
Central to the proposed effort is the training of a diverse, inclusive, and
globally competitive STEM workforce cutting across data-driven materials
research and cyberinfrastructure development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division
of Materials Research within the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.