* 2103730
* In situ TEM mechanical molding of intermetallic nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Judy Cha, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 09/30/2022
* USD 264,121.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale manufacturing of
nanostructures with controlled shapes and high sample quality will be
transformative for many applications, such as sensing, catalysis, plasmonic and
electronic applications, yet still challenging to achieve. Recently,
thermomechanical molding, in which bulk feedstocks are pressed onto a mold with
nano-sized pores, has shown the ability to fabricate large arrays of single-
crystalline nanowires with well-controlled diameters and lengths, thus having
broad implications for the many applications listed above. However, how these
nanowires are formed during thermomechanical molding is not well understood,
severely limiting the broad applicability of this technique. This project aims
to fundamentally understand the molding process at the atomic scale by the use
of in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to directly observe in real-
time the formation of nanowires of metallic systems during thermomechanical
molding. Such new knowledge will help to improve the thermomechanical molding
technique by providing the underlying science during processing in order to
better select the processing conditions needed to control the dimensions and
aspect ratios of these manufactured nanowires and be applicable to a broader
class of materials that can be thermomechanically molded, and allow for more
facile production of large quantities of nanoscale materials. Additionally, the
project will provide research opportunities to undergraduate students to perform
research in nanoscale metallic systems, thus preparing them for career
opportunities in advanced nanomanufacturing. The in situ TEM movies will be
shared with K-12 students and the general public in order to educate and engage
the public in nano- science and manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale thermomechanical molding, in which bulk
feedstocks are pressed onto a mold with nanoscale channels at a fraction of the
melting temperature, has recently demonstrated the capability to produce large
arrays of single-crystalline nanowires of ordered phases. This project aims to
understand the diffusion process of the thermomechanical molding by atomic scale
structure characterization using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), both ex
situ and in situ, with various intermetallic and solid-solution systems. The
process of recrystallization, the mechanism in which a single-crystalline
nanowire is extruded out from a polycrystalline bulk feedstock, will be examined
in detail to explain diffusion dynamics that are tightly regulated by lowering
of the Gibbs free energy, which depends quite sensitively to the stoichiometry
of the intermetallics or solid solution. In situ TEM provides real-time
information on the diffusion mechanism that could also demonstrate the exclusion
of common dislocation slips and grain boundary movements. In summary, the
project will provide atomic scale information on nanoscale solid diffusion
processes of intermetallics and solid solutions, which is currently largely
unexplored. Such direct visualization of solid diffusion in confined channels
will also help to establish a better understanding of creep behaviors at the
nanoscale. This new knowledge will help develop thermomechanically molding as a
more facile and tailored production method of nanoscale materials for a broad
range of technical applications. For outreach, the in situ TEM movies obtained
under the project will be used as visual tools to educate K-12 students and
general public about the fundamental aspects of atomic motions and their
relevance to nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.