* 2103565
* SBIR Phase I: Horizontal genomic transfer technology: Bioengineering DNA sequences for the creation of a non-viral targeted cancer cell specific gene therapy platform
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Stephen Chang, KODIKAZ THERAPEUTIC SOLUTIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,831.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve clinical outcomes for cancer
treatment. Horizontal genomic transfer (HGT) has the potential to deliver a
variety of lethal payloads to tumors with high specificity. The proposed
platform will enable better cancer therapies with lower side effects. To
accelerate translation, this project proposes the development of a high-
throughput platform to enable the evaluation of the specificity, lethality, and
efficiency of therapies based on HGT across many different cell types, multiple
dosing and many other variables. These defining features of the proposed HGT
platform will permit the rapid and cost-effective development of novel gene
therapies to improve patient care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project aims to create a framework for the rapid
high-throughput screening of cell-specific HGT-based therapeutics. HGT was
previously thought to only be present in species like bacteria and fungi, but
has recently been discovered in human cancer cells. Preliminary data has
demonstrated the HGT’s abilities to deliver different expression vectors in
animal models and in culture, but the efficiency of delivery and expression is
currently unknown. This project will interrogate identified HGT and their
sequences in the lab to better understand how to further optimize them to
maximize delivery and expression of genomic payloads. The first aim proposes the
development of the high-throughput screening platform for assessing integration
and expression efficiency of HGT, and the second aim proposes the correlation of
flow cytometry data with HGT integration into the tumor cell genome. Successful
completion of the project will inform HGT platform development to evaluate
numerous cellular parameters simultaneously and ultimately accelerate product
development for cancer therapies and potentially in other
indications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.