* 2103604
* CRII: CNS: Bringing Predictable Real-time Computing to Connected Autonomous Driving Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Zheng Dong, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,944.00

Connected vehicle technology is a promising solution to provide reliable
autonomous driving that will change the traditional transportation system by
building stable, interactive wireless communications between vehicles, the smart
infrastructures (e.g., the roadside unit), and personal communications devices.
However, achieving reliable and safe connected autonomous driving (CAD) is still
very challenging. On one hand, the safety of the CAD system hinges critically on
its timing correctness, as crucial driving decisions fully depend on the output
of the real-time perception system. On the other hand, requesting information
from other devices mayl create additional delays for the on-vehicle real-time
perception tasks, and thus the timing correctness of the CAD system can be
easily violated by unpredictable communications. This project seeks to bring
predictable real-time computing to CAD systems, and the goal of the proposed
research is to enable the connected autonomous vehicle and exterior devices to
perform real-time perception tasks as a whole by (i) establishing a practical
real-time task model to integrate exterior devices into the on-vehicle
perception system, which can be implemented on the GPU-enabled computing
platforms; (ii) proposing real-time task scheduling algorithms and associated
timing validation analysis to guarantee that all the real-time perception tasks
can complete at the right time; (iii) developing a prototype CAD system on the
autonomous vehicle testbed, HydraOne, and the roadside unit, Equinox, to
evaluate the real-time performance of the proposed
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building a CAD system will constitute a major
technological breakthrough towards realizing fully autonomous vehicles. In
particular, this project emphasizes both scheduling algorithm design and system
implementation. The establishment of a real-time suspending-gang task model will
enable the first-of-its-kind formalization for depicting the executing flow of
real-time workloads executed between the autonomous vehicle and the exterior
devices. The real-time task scheduler oversees the entire system and ensures its
timing correctness. The creation of new real-time resource allocation methods
together with the associated analysis for validating timing constraints will
drive the scheduling theory towards real applications in future cyber-physical
systems. The proposed research aims to realize the CAD system on the physical
platforms (HydraOne/Equinox), with indoor and outdoor studies beyond simulation.
Especially, HydraOne/Equinox are ready-to-use platforms that will allow
experts/researchers to easily examine their research designs regarding
autonomous driving. Educational efforts will be devoted to (i) develop the
HydraOne Educational Toolkit for undergraduate education and research, (ii)
curriculum design for hands-on learning in the BS/MS program, (iii) summer camp
development for K-12 students and teachers, (iv) broadening participation in
computing and engineering to enhance diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.