* 2103214
* EAGER: Thermo-hydro-chemical modeling framework for mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal systems
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Donald DePaolo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 84,814.00

EAGER: Thermo-hydro-chemical modeling framework for mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to use a rapidly developing class
of computer models to advance understanding of the large-scale hydrothermal
systems that occur beneath the 65,000 km-long submarine system of mountain
ranges referred to as mid-ocean ridges (MOR). The chemical exchange that occurs
as seawater circulates through seafloor rocks affects the balance of ions in
seawater and influences the carbon cycle and Earth’s climate. The resulting
modifications to the ocean floor rocks also affect continental volcanism and the
chemical evolution of Earth’s mantle. The proposed approach uses modern thermo-
hydro-chemical modeling codes and massively parallel computation. It is a
fundamentally new way to organize, interpret, and extend data that have been
gathered from decades of study of MOR hydrothermal systems. The models provide a
way to generalize observations into predictive tools that can be used to infer
how the hydrothermal systems operate under changing conditions. This type of
information is essential to the broader Earth science community. The computer
modeling approach is at an early stage of development and hence benefits from
special funding for exploratory research. The knowledge derived from this
project will improve the ability to understand how Earth’s climate is controlled
by natural processes, and why climate and ocean chemistry were different in the
geologic past. The results will also enhance the capabilities of the U.S.
research community for using high-performance computing to study natural Earth
processes. A key part of the project is to make the approach accessible to other
researchers, including students, through participation in ongoing international
workshops and short courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In detail, the research
involves adapting and developing protocols for using the Thermo-hydro-chemical
(THC) code ToughReact, that has been developed over the past 40 years, to
simulate the hydrothermal processes at midocean ridges. THC models explicitly
couple fluid flow, heat transfer, and mineral-fluid chemical reactions, and
hence can clarify the interrelationships between the many and variable
parameters that affect the behavior of hydrothermal systems. The research plan
involves running hundreds of simulations, with varying parameters, through a
sequence of gradually increasing complexity to determine how physical
characteristics (heat flux, porosity, permeability, fracture spacing, depth of
circulation) and chemical characteristics (fracture and matrix mineralogy,
alteration mineralogy, mineral-fluid reaction kinetics) relate to patterns of
fluid chemical evolution, mineral alteration, and vent fluid compositions. The
progression is to start with 2-dimensional simulations of steady state flow with
chemical and mineralogical evolution proceeding for hundreds of years, the
approximate time required for seafloor spreading to move the rocks a distance
equal to one or two simulation grid blocks. The steady state simulations can be
used to probe the main features of fluid circulation and temperature/alteration
distribution for configurations representing different spreading rates, which
also represent different circulation depths, lithologic structure, permeability
structure, and heating profiles. The next step will be to simulate seafloor
spreading in 2D, by migrating the rock matrix with its attendant temperature and
mineralogy away from the ridge and adding new hot rock at the ridge axis. The
results of the proposed investigation could have wide-ranging impacts in the
Earth science, ocean science, planetary science, and climate science
communities. In addition to producing new insights into the workings of seafloor
hydrothermal systems, this project will lay groundwork for advancements in the
application of modern, multi-component reactive transport simulations to broader
problems in marine geology and geophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.