* 2103598
* Self-Immolative Bolaamphiphiles for Signal Transduction Across Bilayer Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bradley Smith, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 491,300.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Bradley Smith of the University of Notre
Dame will develop a series of molecules that can transmit chemical signals
across thin membranes similar to those that surround and protect all living
cells. Much of the research work will use simple membrane bubbles called
liposomes, and a set of experiments will elucidate the chemical and physical
factors controlling the speed and intensity of the transmembrane signaling. The
signaling molecules are designed to span the membrane and transduce an enzyme-
catalyzed chemical reaction input on one side of the membrane into an observable
optical signal on the other. These studies are expected to deepen fundamental
understanding of how signals are transduced across membranes and will help pave
the way toward successful development of synthetic living cells. As part of a
complementary educational project, Professor Smith and his students will
modernize the free internet workbook Organic Structure Elucidation which is used
by hundreds of high school and college-level STEM instructors for remote
learning. All planned activities will be conducted by a diverse group of
talented graduate and undergraduate students, who will receive integrated
training in experimental chemical research, data analysis, and scientific
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The membrane-spanning synthetic signaling
molecules being targeted here, self-immolative bolaamphiphiles, have chemical
structures comprised of a hydrophilic trigger group connected by a self-
immolative oligomeric linker to a releasable fluorophore. Enzymatic cleavage of
the trigger group (input signal) will occur outside a bilayer membrane and the
signal will subsequently be transduced by spontaneous depolymerization (self-
immolation) of the linker into an observable fluorescence response (output
signal) on the other side of the membrane. The results of bulk-phase
fluorescence experiments are expected to provide atomic-level insight concerning
the crucial molecular and physical factors that control the kinetics of
transmembrane signal transduction. Studies using phase-separated membranes will
test central concepts concerning membrane domain clustering as a process to
modulate enzyme-triggered transmembrane signaling. Imaging experiments that
compare the same signal transduction process occurring simultaneously in a
cohort of separate giant liposomes will enable quantification of system
heterogeneity. A practical outcome will be a new class of sensing liposomes with
fluorescent output that can simultaneously image spatiotemporal changes of
several different enzymes within living cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.