* 2103692
* Using the EPIC model to build transdisciplinary communities of practice that effectively address urban resilience in Africa and Asia
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jon Padgham, START International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,837.00

This award provides support to the global change SysTem for Analysis, Research,
and Training (START). This organization is an essential component of the US
Global Change Research Program strategic plan as it relates to international
engagement. Their mission "to increase opportunities for research, education and
training that strengthen scientific capacities in developing countries to
understand, communicate and motivate action on critical global change
challenges" addresses all of the US Global Change Research Program strategic
goals. This project will advance knowledge of global environmental change and
resilience in urban centers in the two fastest urbanizing regions of the world
in Africa and Asia. START will work in conjunction with the Educational
Partnerships for Innovation in Communities (EPIC) and the United Nation’s
Environment Program Global Adaption Network to expand EPIC model for university-
community engagement. The model is designed to engage university faculty from
across disciplines and departments to ensure that the research component of
partnerships with local governments and communities is sufficiently diverse and
integrated to be able to effectively address knowledge generation for complex
problems in rapidly growing city-regions. The transformative potential of this
project lies in its ability to link universities with local governments and
communities in transdisciplinary co-development of research questions and
approaches to concretely address complex problems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project has strong potential for generating significant societal benefits
because it is inherently centered around producing direct benefits to local
stakeholders and communities through engagement with researchers. The project
seeks to enhance the public-service mission that universities provide to the
communities in which they are located through strengthening ties between
academia and decision-making. This project emphasizes experiential learning by
doing, particularly for early-career scientists, through hands-on learning-
centered curricula that provides university students with workplace skills to
engage communities in co-developed action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.