* 2103269
* An Experimental Investigation of the Formation of Complex Organic Molecules in Interstellar Analog Ices
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ralf Kaiser, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,741.00

This research project will investigate the formation of complex organic
molecules (COMs) containing carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen atoms on ice
analog samples resembling interstellar ices. To study this problem, the
investigators will perform laboratory experiments on ice analogs at conditions
mimicking the environment of interstellar space, viz. ultra-high vacuum, low
temperatures, and exposure to ultraviolet radiation. Results from the study will
allow astronomers to understand how certain key COMs are formed on ices within
interstellar clouds and the processes that generate molecular complexity in
space. This project will provide training in advanced laboratory astrophysics to
graduate and undergraduate students, including ones from groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM. The team will also give popular science lectures at
local high schools, enabling educators to incorporate research into teaching and
attract students to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will explore the synthesis of key classes of COMs – aldehydes, ketones,
carboxylic acids, esters, and amides – on interstellar ice analogs. They will do
so by exposing interstellar ice analog samples to Lyman alpha radiation in a
low-temperature, ultra-high vacuum space simulation chamber. The molecules
produced in the experiment will be characterized in a highly complementary
manner using infrared, Raman, and ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy, as well as
mass spectrometry. The measurements will yield reliable reaction rates and
branching fractions necessary to accurately interpret astronomical observations
of COMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.