* 2103205
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Modeling Silane Spreading and Deposition for Liquid Lithography
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Francesca Bernardi, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2022
* USD 14,931.00

Liquid lithography is a promising, versatile, and accessible method for
generating three-dimensional (3D) microstructures using standard lithography
instrumentation. Extending and simplifying the fabrication process of 3D
microstructures will advance a wide variety of technologies such as organ-on-a-
chip devices, tissue engineering, microfluidics, optics and microelectronics.
This team will develop a liquid lithography process that can be used for a
variety of important applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a predictive mathematical model for the diffusion and deposition of
silane in a rectangular chamber geometry. Furthermore,by modifying the geometry
of the external chamber surrounding the substrate, the passive diffusion process
of the silane can be further tuned, allowing for greatly enhanced control of the
spatial distribution of the substrate?s surface properties. The investigators
will develop, analyze, and benchmark an accessible mathematical model for a
critical stage of the process. They will recruit and directly supervise students
with particular attention to students from underrepresented
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.