* 2103552
* The Fate of Zircon and Other Accessories in Deeply Subducted Terrigeneous Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Robert Rapp, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 244,633.00

Although volumetrically insignificant, the mineral zircon and its fellow
accessory minerals monazite and rutile exert strong control over the
distribution of several groups of geochemically- and strategically-important
elements that are concentrated in the Earth’s crust: the high-field strength
elements (Zr and Hf in zircon; Ti, Nb and Ta in rutile), the radiogenic and
heat-producing elements U and Th (in zircon and monazite), and the rare-earth
element group, La-Lu (in zircon and monazite). Isotopic analyses of these
accessory minerals have been extensively used for decades to date rocks of the
continental crust, but it has only been with experimental study of the behavior
of these accessory minerals in the laboratory, under conditions where high-
temperature fluids or partial melts (magmas) are present, that geochemists have
been able to make more broad-ranging insights into the nature of crustal
tectonics and the extent of oceans and emergent continents on the early Earth.
The low solubility of these minerals in crustal fluids and melts suggests that
they are likely to survive ultra-metamorphism in continent-continent collision
zones (e.g., the Himalayas), or in any continental-derived sediments that are
thought to be carried down deeper into the mantle in subduction zones, into the
slab graveyards of the lower mantle at depths of 700 km or more. These are where
mantle plumes that feed volcanism on ocean island chains found in the middle of
the world’s oceans may originate. A geochemical signature attributable to this
deeply recycled (subducted) continental component is seen in the lavas erupted
on the Pitcairn and Samoan archipelagos in the middle of the SW Pacific Ocean.
How that continental signature comes to be in the source region for these lavas
deep in the Earth’s lower mantle, and the role that the accessory minerals
zircon, monazite, and rutile play in conveying that signature, is the subject of
this experimental study. The experiments may also lead to the discovery of new
crystal structures and novel ceramics that may be of practical use in the long-
term storage of high-level radioactive waste.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An experimental study of the behavior of
zircon, monazite and rutile in a lithologic context appropriate to subduction of
hydrous continental sediments from the base of the lithosphere (~5- 7 GPa) to
the top of the lower mantle (~23-25 GPa) is proposed. The stability of these
minerals with respect to dehydration reactions involving major mineral phases
(e.g., phengite and hydrous aluminous minerals), and their solubility in the
fluids these reactions give rise to, will be ascertained under conditions
appropriate to variable slab geotherms extending from the crust to the lower
mantle. The concentrations of the high field strength (HFSE), heat-producing
(HPE), and rare Earth elements (REE) in the accessory minerals and in the
sediment-derived fluids with which they are in equilibrium will be determined by
electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS).
These analyses will be used to assess the effects of pressure on the
partitioning systematics of the HFSEs, HPEs, and REEs between hydrous fluids and
zircon, monazite and rutile (or their high- pressure polymorphs) in subducted
terrigenous sediments. The potential for additional fractionation of the
geochemical pairs Zr-Hf and Nb-Ta, and fractionation of the light REEs from the
heavy REEs, will also be assessed. The research would provide empirical
constraints on the nature of the “continental” isotopic and geochemical
signature in the plume source for ‘enriched-mantle’ ocean island basalts. A
better understanding of the role that the minerals zircon, monazite and rutile
play in conveying a crustal signature into the lower mantle, in terms of the
HFSEs, HPEs and REEs, is envisioned. New crystal structures appropriate for the
storage of HLRW may emerge from the proposed experimental studies, and the
development of new experimental techniques that increase the efficiency of
multi-anvil experiments and new analytical techniques for measuring trace
elements in coexisting fluids, melts and minerals are additional benefits
expected to come from this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.