* 2103013
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--The Changing Width of the Tropics in Past, Present and Future Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Thomas Reichler, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 346,562.00

The research centers on the hypothesis that extreme warming, such as during the
Early Eocene and under potential unmitigated climate scenarios, drives a
substantial expansion of the tropical belt accompanied by poleward shifts in
other aspects of the atmospheric circulation and large-scale hydroclimate. This
interdisciplinary research integrates paleo-proxy data with climate modeling to
investigate the changing width of the tropics during Late Paleocene and Early
Eocene. The observational component of the research aims to provide a
comprehensive Paleocene-Eocene hydrological data synthesis and data for a model-
data comparison. The modelling component will analyze pre-existing coupled
DeepMIP climate simulations of Paleocene-Eocene, conduct targeted atmosphere-
only simulations to explore the sensitivity of the results to sea surface
temperatures, and perform the data-model comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
poleward edge of the tropical Hadley cell is a fundamental characteristic of
Earth’s climate. The edge of the Hadley cell marks the boundary between the
tropics and extratropics - the Earth’s two main climate zones at the most basic
level. Observations reveal a poleward expansion of the Hadley cell in recent
decades, driving an expansion of the tropical belt with potentially significant
implications for worldwide climate. The expansion has the potential to shift
rain belts and cyclone tracks, expand deserts, and exacerbate droughts and
wildfires. Climate models simulate the tropical expansion, albeit at lower rates
than what is observed. This raises important questions about the causes behind
the expansion and the ability of models to simulate the expansion as well as
questions surrounding the magnitude of the widening under future global
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include involving
graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the project, a plan for
improving diversity and inclusion through existing programs, and a creative
visual science journalism film project. Specifically, the diversity activities
include collaboration with the Women in Science, Engineering and Mathematics
Program (WISEM) by contributing hands-on activity modules for their annual
outreach programs, participation in the Girls Lead the Way program for high
school students, and also providing science experiment modules for Mines Girl
Scout Engineering Day which welcomes 100 Junior Girl Scouts to participate in
STEM activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.