* 2103700
* Packaging, Targeting, and Replication of Virus-derived RNA Replicons
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* William Gelbart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2024
* USD 763,871.00

In order to better control and treat viral outbreaks such as the current
COVID-19 pandemic, it is necessary to better understand on a molecular level the
life cycles of RNA viruses – how they get into and out of their host cells, and
how they replicate in those cells. This project focuses on three of the simplest
and best characterized RNA viruses – ones, like SARS-2, whose genomes are
single-stranded RNA that the target cell translates into viral proteins. This
project aims to discover fundamental aspects of how a single RNA genome is
amplified 10,000-fold within hours, how the new RNA molecules are packaged into
protective protein shells (capsids), and how these newly-formed particles
(nucleocapsids) exit their host cell. The research involved will be carried out
by diverse undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students who are being
trained in state-of-the-art molecular biology, chemistry and physics methods,
including genetic engineering, biochemical/enzymatic reactions, and fluorescence
and electron microscopies. The results of this work will provide foundational
information that can propel vaccine design, antiviral pharmaceutical discovery,
and innovations in biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three viruses
featured in this research are: a bromovirus whose four genes are contained in
three RNA genome molecules packaged in three different particles; a nodavirus
whose four genes are contained in two molecules packaged together in one
particle; and an alphavirus whose nine genes are all contained in one RNA
molecule and one particle. These viruses illustrate the breadth of strategies
for replication of and packaging of RNA genes into virus particles. Cells
recognize these viral genomes as if they were mRNAs so that the genomes are all
self-replicating in the sense that they encode RNA replicase proteins that
replicate the genome. In comparing and contrasting the life cycles of these
viruses the ultimate goal is to control the self-assembly of self-replicating
RNA molecules. The state-of-the-art physical and molecular biological techniques
involved include: time-resolved cryo-electron tomography; genetic engineering of
capsid-forming proteins; and single-molecule/single-cell fluorescence
microscopy. The particular experiments include: time-resolved tomographic
imaging of the self-assembly pathway of RNA viruses and VLPs; syntheses of in
vitro reconstituted VLPs functionalized by protein ligands; and competitions of
viral and non-viral RNA molecules for RNA replicases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is funded by the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.