* 2103871
* 2021 Organellar Channels and Transporters GRC/GRS
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Harpreet Singh, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2023
* USD 18,600.00

The 2021 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Organellar Channels and
Transporters will be held from Aug 8th-13th in Castelldefels, Spain. The GRC
will be preceded (Aug 7th-8th, 2021) by the associated Gordon Research Seminar
(GRS) which is organized by and for young scientists. The meetings aim to
capture the most recent discoveries in the field of cellular channels and
transporters and processes associated with them. The meetings will consist of
platform sessions, short talks, poster sessions, and discussions. This will
provide ample opportunity for sharing the latest research results as well as
technical and conceptual advances, for exploring collaborative possibilities,
and for identifying new ways to break the technical barriers. The GRS will be a
special platform to attract students and postdoctoral fellows to come to the GRC
following the GRS. The GRC also focuses on diversity and strong representation
from women and underrepresented minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
combined GRC/GRS meeting will represent a unique opportunity to gather
scientists facing technical and conceptual challenges in the study of a wide
variety of organelles, including endosomes, microvesicles, lysosomes, vacuoles,
mitochondria, chloroplasts, the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, secretory
vesicles and the primary cilium in the animal, plant, prokaryotes, and fungal
systems. Importantly, techniques or concepts developed for the study of one type
of organelle could spark ideas and provide new insights to the studies of other
organelles. Both the GRC and GRS provide important training opportunity for
early- career scientists to present and discuss their research with top
scientists in the field and with each other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.