* 2103713
* Large-Scale CoPe: The Cascadia Coastlines and People Hazards Research Hub
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Ann Bostrom, Oregon State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2026
* USD 7,206,525.00

In response to the direct call by Pacific Northwest coastal communities for “a
coordinated research agenda among universities, governmental agencies, NGOs, and
others” to help them achieve resilience, the Cascadia Coastlines and Peoples
Hazards Research Hub (Cascadia CoPes hub) will inform and enable integrated
hazard assessment, mitigation, and adaptation—including comprehensive planning,
policy making, and engineering—through targeted scientific advances in
collaboration with communities. Pacific Northwest coastlines are at risk of
great subduction earthquakes from the Cascadia subduction zone (CSZ), which
extends more than 1000 km from Cape Mendocino in California through Oregon and
Washington to Vancouver Island, Canada. Cascadia coastlines and peoples face
acute shaking, subsidence, and tsunami inundation from a CSZ event, landslide
and erosion risks aggravated by climate-driven intensifying atmospheric rivers,
changing storminess patterns and sea level rise, as well as crustal faulting in
the Salish Sea. Cascadia coastal communities also have rich and diverse
cultural, social and governance histories, traditional and local ecological
knowledge (TEK/LEK), and identities, values, and economies tied to their coastal
locations and ecosystems. These distinguishing features position the Cascadia
CoPes hub to transform understanding of the temporal pacing and interactions of
acute and chronic coastal changes. The Cascadia CoPes hub will increase coastal
community adaptive capacity, through community engagement and co-production, and
by training a new generation of coastal hazards scientists and leaders from
currently underrepresented communities in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
inextricably linked tectonic and climate-driven coastal hazards, Cascadia
provides a natural laboratory for the study of local coastal changes spanning
time scales from minutes to millennia, reflecting complex and locally-specific
layering of impacts from chronic and acute hazards. For example, long-term
relative sea level rise (RSLR) is governed here by tectonic motion, with the
highest west coast rates of RSLR found at the southern end of Cascadia, while
RSLR is muted along some stretches of the Olympic Peninsula in the north by
uplift. The Cascadia CoPes hub is designed to test two overarching hypotheses:
(1) fundamental advances in convergent coastal hazard sciences will transform
understanding of the risks coastal communities face and (2) an inclusive, co-
produced approach to advancing hazard assessment and mitigation will increase
coastal communities’ adaptive capacity and broaden participation in achieving
equitable and just disaster risk reduction. With collaboratories representing
the diversity of Cascadia coastlines and peoples, the project will: (a) identify
likely sources of earthquakes, tsunamis, landslides, and land-level change,
integrate new observations and develop coupled event simulations based on novel
probabilistic tectonic multi-hazard risk models; (b) assess climate-driven
compound fluvial-coastal flooding and how these drive coastal morphology changes
and ecosystems, to quantify probabilistic exposure to coastal hazards under
present and future conditions; (c) assess risk mitigation and dynamic adaptation
strategies, including use of natural and nature-based features, (d) identify and
test multi-use and asset-focused adaptation strategies for disaster risk
reduction in processes that incorporate TEK/LEK, (e) study the inclusiveness of
coastal governance structures for hazards resilience and science-informed
hazards response, and (f) explore the conceptual linkages and communications
challenges across (a-e).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.