* 2103672
* RAPID: Planning for the present and future management of COVID-19
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Eric Laber, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2022
* USD 194,721.00

The emergence and rapid spread of COVID-19 has transformed our world in a matter
of months. In the course of a year, COVID-related illness has claimed the lives
of more than 2 million people across the globe and more than 400,000 people in
the United States. The outbreak has exposed critical vulnerabilities in our
healthcare system and created unprecedented logistical challenges in the
distribution of equipment, vaccines, tests, and other resources. Furthermore,
policymakers have found themselves facing difficult choices regarding the timing
and severity of non-therapeutic interventions which slow the spread of disease
but also incur negative economic and downstream health impacts. An optimal
adaptive decision strategy uses accumulating data to inform how resources should
be allocated over space and time to maximize cumulative health while controlling
cost. In this context, an optimal decision strategy has the potential to save
tens of thousands of lives, use resources more efficiently, and reduce negative
economic impacts. This research project develops new methodologies for
estimation of optimal decision strategies using heterogeneous data streams
including human mobility data, air traffic, as well as information on disease
spread and vaccine dissemination. This project also provides training
opportunities for students and a postdoctoral scholar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project advances statistical and
mathematical disease models by including behavior-change into stochastic
compartmental models. The integration of multiple data streams including human-
mobility, the census, incidence and testing reports, vaccination dissemination,
and air-travel allows for richer and more realistic models than those fit using
a single data modality. Furthermore, mobility data linked with census data will
generate new knowledge about heterogeneity in response to interventions such as
shelter-in-place across demographics. These models are integrated into novel
spatio-temporal reinforcement learning methods for estimation of an optimal
decision strategy that recommends how resources and non-therapeutic
interventions should be allocated across multiple resolutions (e.g., locally and
nationally) to minimize disease spread subject to constraints on economic and
other downstream impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.