* 2103563
* CDS&amp;E: Fast Search of Growing High-Dimensional Big Data to Enable Accurate Semiclassical Molecular Dynamics Studies of Large Molecular Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Yu Zhuang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2024
* USD 278,348.00

Quantum effects are inherent factors for material properties and chemical
processes. By capturing quantum effects with good quantitative accuracy, ab
initio semiclassical molecular dynamics simulation is a generally applicable
investigation tool for a broad range of chemical and material science studies,
including studies on pollutant effects on lung health, enzyme catalysis, ozone
depletion, space craft surface coating, solar cells, and a lot more studies that
promise to advance national health and pharmaceutical sciences, material design
investigations for national defense, energy and environmental protection
researches, etc. But the computation cost of semiclassical dynamics simulations
is enormously high, making semiclassical dynamics highly challenging, and even
infeasible in many cases, for large molecular systems. This project proposed
methods for reducing computation cost while maintaining simulation accuracy,
which will expand the reach of semiclassical dynamics study to a broader range
of studies of national and scientific importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ab
initio semiclassical molecular dynamics simulation has enormous computation cost
in calculating ab initio Hessians from quantum mechanical electronic structure
theories. Hessian modeling using training data in the closest time distances
from a set of saved ab initio data has been successful in reducing the cost of
Hessian calculations while maintaining simulation accuracy. It was observed that
opportunities exist for further reduction of computation cost by using training
data in the closest spatial distances, which offers more chances for Hessian
modeling to replace ab initio Hessian. Due to the frequent incoming of new ab
initio data, the ab initio data set is constantly growing. To search frequently
updated growing datasets, a challenge is that the algorithms not only need to
achieve high search efficiency but also have to be efficient for re-organizing
the dataset with frequent insertions of new data. Existing searching algorithms
are good in search efficiency but not so good in data-organizing efficiency
since they were designed for static or infrequently updated datasets. This
project develops search algorithms that will be the first to leverage the
growing process of datasets to deliver high efficiency in both searching and
data organizing. Hessian modeling using training data of closest spatial
distance returned by the new search algorithms has the potential for further
reduction of computation cost, promising to speed up dynamics simulations and
enable simulations of larger molecular systems and/or the use of higher-accuracy
electronic structure theories to capture better details of the molecular
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.