* 2103461
* Experimental refinement of the boron isotope proxy in planktic foraminifera - temperature, asymbiotic sensitivity, and seawater elemental composition
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Baerbel Hoenisch, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 741,830.00

Culture experiments will be used to study the shell composition of planktonic
foraminifera. Planktonic foraminifera are single-celled organisms that live in
the surface ocean. Scientists use the chemistry of fossil foraminifera shells to
record seawater conditions in the past. Those data reveal the ocean’s response
to natural climate change. That knowledge improves scientists’ ability to
predict future climate change. The boron isotopic composition of planktonic
foraminifera records the acidity of the surface ocean. However, boron isotopes
may be influenced by other factors including temperature and seawater calcium
concentration. The proposed experiments will quantify those impacts. That will
improve scientists’ ability to know how ocean acidity has changed in the past.
The project broader impacts include support for a graduate student and two
undergraduate helpers. The PI will attempt to recruit undergraduates from groups
that are underrepresented in the earth sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
boron isotope proxy in planktic foraminifera shells is one of the most
successful tools for reconstructing surface seawater acidity, and by inference
atmospheric CO2. A strong empirical framework has already been established for
this proxy, however, some unknowns still remain that affect the certainty with
which paleo-pH and paleo-CO2 can be reconstructed from this proxy. Specifically,
the effect of temperature on the aqueous boron isotope fractionation between
dissolved borate ion and boric acid has been suggested by thermodynamic
principles and modeling and several lines of evidence suggest that this effect
is manifested in the boron isotopic composition of planktic foraminifera, but
solid experimental proof is missing. If such an effect exists, it may explain
differences in boron proxy sensitivity between surface- and deep-dwelling
foraminifera species. An alternative hypothesis to explain species differences
is based on the observation that laboratory culture experiments are performed
over a much wider range of pH and calcite saturation states than present in the
natural ocean, which could affect foraminiferal growth rates. The following
experiments are proposed to resolve these uncertainties: (1) establish the first
laboratory calibration of a symbiont-barren foraminifera species across a wide
range of experimental pH, (2) grow planktic foraminifera over a wide range of
temperatures but constant pH, (3) grow planktic foraminifera across a wide range
of calcium concentrations and saturation states at constant pH. (4) Establish a
pH-calibration under simulated Paleocene seawater conditions, when seawater
calcium concentrations were higher than in the modern ocean, but magnesium and
boron concentrations significantly lower. This study will provide fundamental
constraints on the application of the boron isotope proxy and improve
reconstructions of surface ocean pH and atmospheric CO2, from the Pleistocene to
the early Cenozoic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.