* 2103707
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Bifrost - A CPU/GPU Pipeline Framework for High Throughput Data Acquisition and Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gregory Taylor, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,441.00

Modern computers, including cell phones and tablets, have sophisticated Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs) that render the beautiful graphic displays in games. We
are developing software that takes advantage of these same GPUs for capturing
and processing data from astronomical telescopes. This allows us to benefit from
all the years of effort spent developing these powerful computational tools.
This software, known as Bifrost, is currently in use at the Long Wavelength
Array (LWA), a radio telescope for exploration of a broad scientific portfolio
ranging from the study of Cosmic Dawn when the first stars and galaxies lit up
the Universe, to understanding the properties of the Earth's ionosphere. We are
actively developing Bifrost to make it both more powerful and easier to use for
other telescopes. Eventually we aim for Bifrost to be available as a more
general purpose framework that can be applied to research projects beyond
astronomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 5 years ago we adopted a commodity
equipment design for the second LWA station (LWA-SV) which makes use of
computing servers with GPUs to handle the data capture, beamforming, and
correlation at the station level. Previously these functions were taken on by
dedicated hardware referred to as the Digital Processor. However, this custom-
hardware design was expensive to build and maintain, lacks flexibility, and
cannot be easily replicated for future LWA stations. In contrast the commodity
approach is easier to maintain, much more flexible and expandable, and can be
readily adapted to new LWA stations. We are engaged in a concentrated effort to
improve the underpinnings of Bifrost. This involves increasing the data rates
that Bifrost is capable of handling, improving the application programming
interface, and providing tools to make it easier for users to develop and test
new pipelines. Through this award we are working with collaborators to
incorporate Bifrost in telescopes and instruments currently under development.
The availability of Bifrost will increase the scientific return of not only
radio astronomy but also other areas where high throughput data processing is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.