* 2103963
* CSSI Elements: EWMS - Event Workflow Management Service
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Brian Bockelman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2024
* USD 596,051.00

This award will begin developing an Observation Management System Framework
which will help alleviating multiple types of astrophysical data and respective
workflow management - a burden shouldered now by human researchers who process
large numbers of independent pieces of data (“events”). The core element of this
framework - Event Workflow Management System (EWMS) - is a workload manager
designed for processing events (simulated readouts from a particle physics
detector, recorded data points, images, etc.) with complex workflows. EWMS could
become a central core for applying novel computer science methods to improve
scientific data processing with an initial focus on Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
(MMA) - it will transform how ”event”-based computational problems are tackled
on the national CI ecosystem through a set of reusable services. This paradigm
is applicable across a wide range of science domains, including astrophysics,
astronomy, physics, biology, and other disciplines that deal with Big Data
flows.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The EWMS will benefit three of NSF’s 10 big ideas –
“Growing Convergence Research,” “Harnessing the Data Revolution,” and “Windows
on the Universe", bringing together data from the particle physics-based
detectors (IceCube Neutrino Observatory, High Altitude Water Cherenkov
Observatory, Cherenkov Telescope Array), traditional astronomical observatories
(large telescopes), and gravitational wave observatories (LIGO, VIRGO, KAGRA).
While the data types of each of these experiments or observatories are
dramatically different, they all record data in the independent spatio-temporal
increments, observations, triggers, events, etc. that are processed and stored
separately. The EWMS is applicable to nearly all current workflows in MMA
experiments, and by combining these most precise observations via EWMS,
scientists will be able to observe the Universe in fundamentally new ways and
learn more about its history than any one of these messengers can provide in
isolation. Thus, this award addresses and advances the science objectives and
goals of the NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics" program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Windows on the Universe Program,
the Physics at the Information Frontier Program, the IceCube Science Program,
the Antarctic Astrophysics and Geospace Sciences Program, and the Office of
Polar Programs CyberInfrastructure Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.