* 2103064
* Last Interglacial sea-level evolution from U-series chronology of ooids, corals, and caves deposits from Crooked Island, Bahamas
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Jacqueline Austermann, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 303,266.00

Sea level rise is one of the greatest climate change challenges. Studies of how
sea level has changed in past periods when Earth’s climate was warmer than today
help scientists predict how much sea level may rise by the end of this century
and beyond. However, the future magnitude and rate of sea level change are still
highly uncertain. The proposed study focuses on the Last Interglacial period,
129,000-116,000 years ago, when temperatures were on average ~ 1.5 °C higher
than today. This period may provide unique insights into the patterns of near
future sea-level rise. This project will combine field and laboratory data from
the Bahamas with statistical analysis to estimate Last Interglacial sea level in
that region. Those results will in turn improve our understanding of global sea
level during the Last Interglacial. The sea level results will help document the
response of ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica to elevated temperature in
the past. The ice sheet response is a key unknown in efforts to predict sea-
level changes in the coming decades. The study results will thus have strong
societal relevance. In addition the results will provide insight into how past
changes in sea level influenced the formation and evolution of carbonate
islands.&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of the project include support for two
early-career women scientists, and support for outreach activities hosted by
their home institution and by the American Museum of Natural
History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Global mean sea level estimates during the Last
Interglacial appear to converge on values of 6 to 9 meters above present levels.
Recent observational and modeling studies challenge this canonical range,
suggesting values might be significantly lower. Moreover, the timing and source
of ice melt that drove the high stand remains debated. This project aims to
reduce the uncertainties of Last Interglacial global mean sea level by testing
and developing a combined approach that links four sea level indicators (corals,
ooids, flank margin caves, and stratigraphic context) from Crooked Island,
Bahamas. The study will pair U-series chronology of ooids with detailed
stratigraphic analysis to assess their depositional history and the derived sea
level position. The study will use both vertical and horizontal context as
relative timing, and U-series ages of fossil corals deposited in the same
sedimentary succession as absolute timing. The project will document the
elevation and timing of abundant flank margin caves to provide additional
insight into the local sea level history. The study will translate these local
sea level observations into global mean sea level by correcting the records for
glacial isostatic adjustment and long-term subsidence. This project addresses
three key hypotheses: global mean sea level during the Last Interglacial i) did
not exceed 5 meters, a value significantly lower than current IPCC consensus;
ii) might have oscillated within the interglacial, which might be indicative of
northern and southern hemisphere ice melt that was out of phase; and iii) did
not exceed maximum rates of 5 m per kyr, which is indicative of how fast or slow
ice sheets might respond to future warming. The methodology that will be tested
and developed within this research can be applied to other carbonate islands
across the globe improving Last Interglacial sea level reconstructions at other
locations, as well as during other time periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.