* 2103041
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Reconstructions of Last Millennium Hydroclimate and Temperature from the Tropical High Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mathias Vuille, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 95,900.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glaciated mountain ranges in the
Earth’s tropical regions provide critical freshwater resources to local and
downstream communities and support richly diverse ecosystems. Yet warming at
high elevations (&gt;12,000’) is expected to amplify in the future, with the
disappearance of many glaciers projected by the mid-21st century. The Cordillera
Vilcanota (Peru) is the second largest glacierized mountain range in the Andes,
is home to world’s second-largest tropical ice cap, Quelccaya and is a principal
source of the Amazon River. However, because instrumental records are sparse,
variations in temperature and precipitation prior to the late 20th century are
poorly constrained. This project will reconstruct patterns of temperature and
moisture availability over the past several centuries using two closely-situated
but distinct climate archives: lake/peat sediments and ice cores. Lake and peat
sediments accumulate over time, preserving biological and chemical indicators of
past temperature and precipitation. Project deliverables include climate
reconstructions from well-instrumented Andean lakes and peats, which will
imporve the utility of biomarker-based temperature proxies, and enhanced leaf
wax and ice cory proxy system models. This project will also support efforts to
broaden participation from underrepresented groups in STEM and to develop K-12
educational resources, including development of climate change education modules
for high schools, and providing hands-on workshops, training and experiential
learning opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will analyze sediments
from sites in and around Lake Sibinacocha (16,043’) and use lake and ice models,
calibrated using existing instrumental measurements, to compare these
reconstructions to Quelccaya Ice Cap (QIC) ice cores. Results will provide
validation and information on air temperature, lake temperature, and moisture
changes as the high Andes transitioned from a cold period (the Little Ice Age)
to the industrial period. Climate model simulations of the past 1,000 years will
contextualize the extent to which these changes were driven by remote processes
such as the South American Summer Monsoon and sea surface temperature variations
in the tropical Pacific, putting current Andean climate change into a long-term
historical context. Data will be generated to reconstruct precipitation δD
(δDprecip) from leaf waxes, temperature from glycerol dialkyl glycerol
tetraethers (GDGTs), and runoff and precipitation/evaporation from lithologic,
bulk geochemical, and paleoecological sensors. Temperature reconstructions will
be compared from glacial and non-glacial lakes and peatlands, and air/lake
temperature relationships will be quantified using an energy balance model.
Proxy system models (PSM) will be used to evaluate the sensitivity of
δ18Oprecip, δDprecip, and δDwetland reconstructions from ice cores and sediments
to seasonal and mean annual climate variables. Forced responses vs. internal
variability will be investigated with isotope-enabled Last Millennium
simulations. Because δ18Oice and δDwax both track the stable isotopic
composition of precipitation but with differing sensitivities to humidity,
evaporation, and seasons of deposition/ablation, the project’s dual-PSM approach
will allow multiproxy reconstructions of δ18Oprecip, δDprecip, and temperature
while providing new constraints on local evaporative
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.