* 2103596
* Elements: An Infrastructure for Software Quality and Security Issues Detection and Correction
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Marouane Kessentini, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 04/30/2022
* USD 599,999.00

Research into more effective software development has the potential to make the
infrastructure on which so many aspects of society depend less costly and more
secure in the scientific community, industry and government agencies. In
particular, the scientific community is proposing millions of scientific
software prototypes to enable reproducibility of research results in almost
every domain. Scientists may frequently introduce security and quality issues
into existing scientific software via their code changes due to their limited
experience in software quality and security and the lack of tools for quality
and security assessments that can be easily used and integrated in programming
environments. Thus, several existing scientific software projects are difficult
to 1) extend by scientists due to their poor quality and 2) deploy by industry
due to the likelihood of security vulnerabilities and the bad development
practices used. Without a unified and easy-to-integrate framework for detecting,
fixing, and documenting vulnerability and quality issues in scientific projects,
the reusability, extendibility, safe deployment, and technology transfer of
scientific projects will remain limited. This project builds a sustainable,
community-driven software security and quality analysis framework. These tools
enable more scientists to build better software and to transfer their prototypes
to industry by following the best software development practices. Its integrated
education plan will bring undergraduate and graduate computer science students
more awareness and expertise in the evolution of software systems, including
security and quality issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
framework for detecting, fixing, and documenting security and quality issues. It
will continuously monitor the software repository to identify security
vulnerabilities and quality issues based on static and dynamic analyses, and
then find the best sequence of code changes to prioritize and fix them. The
developers can review the recommendations and their impacts in a detailed report
and select the code changes that they want to apply. The framework includes a
visualization support of the quality and security changes over the evolution of
the project. Furthermore, non-expert programmers from the scientific community
can use the automatically generated documentation by the framework to understand
the severity of the detected issues and necessary code changes to fix them. The
project has the potential to revolutionize how developers monitor the evolution
of their systems in continuous integration environments by unifying security and
quality issues detection and correction and enabling their automated
documentation. All tools and methodologies will be empirically evaluated in
collaboration with scientists from various domains. These tools will enable more
scientists to build better software and transfer their prototypes to industry by
following best development practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.