* 2103295
* Role of Protein Corona in the Fate of Hydrophilic Polymeric Nanoparticles: A Fundamental Study
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Shaoyi Jiang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2022
* USD 229,603.00

Nanoparticles are particles of matter with dimensions on the order of
nanometers. In a biological environment, nanoparticles acquire a layer of
proteins, called a corona, and the composition of their corona critically
affects the biological fate of nanoparticles. Although a variety of studies have
been done to understand the protein corona of nanoparticles over the past
decade, little is known about protein corona formed on commonly used hydrophilic
(i.e., "water loving") biopolymer nanoparticles. The research team on this
project will study the protein corona formed against a number of hydrophilic
biopolymers. The objectives are to decode the compositions of the protein
coronas and to correlate the identified proteins with the surface chemistry of
the nanoparticles. The researchers will then use this knowledge to further
understand the biological fate of the nanoparticles. This research will enhance
our fundamental understanding of protein corona, identify key proteins
responsible for the promotion or reduction of cellular uptake, and guide the
design of better and safer nanoparticles for a broad range of applications. The
research project serves as a training ground for graduate and undergraduate
students to perform cutting edge research. The research team will recruit
undergraduate students, particularly students underrepresented in STEM fields,
through various on-campus programs. Knowledge from this work will be
disseminated through presentations at international conferences, the development
of curricula for new courses, and outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein corona on nanoparticles have been shown to be
determinant for the biological fate of nanoparticles. At present, most research
has focused on corona formation on model hydrophobic polystyrene or inorganic
nanoparticle systems. Little is known about protein corona formed on the most
commonly used hydrophilic biopolymer nanoparticles. The objectives of this study
are to decode the compositions of protein coronas formed against a number of
hydrophilic biopolymers using a well-defined, hydrogel nanoparticle system and
to correlate the identified proteins with the surface chemistry and fate of
nanoparticles. Magnetic nanoparticles will be encapsulated inside the hydrogel
nanoparticles to enable the facile harvesting of protein corona using a magnetic
field. The compositions of protein coronas will be decoded using state-of-the-
art proteomic analysis to provide insights into the interaction of plasma
proteins with these hydrophilic polymers. The impact of these adsorbed proteins
on the fate of the nanoparticles will be investigated further through cellular
uptake experiments using both macrophage and dendritic cells. A fundamental
understanding of protein corona will guide the design of better and safer
nanoparticles for a wide range of biomedical and engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.