* 2103773
* I-Corps: Non-invasive ultrasound technology for tactile stimulation to create a sense of touch
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of small, wearable devices that deliver virtual tactile perception
to non-invasively stimulate sensory nerves creating a sense of touch to the
user. This will enable new immersive virtual experiences for remote K-12
learning, therapeutic healthcare for patients with cognitive and motor function
needs, and precise tactile feedback during recreational gaming as well as
training for competitive athletes. Near-term commercial applications appear
focus on healthcare to provide increased sensitivity in rehabilitation for
patients such as those with spinal cord injuries (SCI) that currently rely on
large sensorimotor haptic feedback devices that use simple motors to briefly
restore the sense of touch. This device is designed as a wristband that emits
ultrasonic waves that may more precisely target nerve clusters in the brain and
spinal cord to produce a more sensitive response. The technology may be expanded
to other neurotechnology applications in healthcare, education, and
entertainment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a wristband that emits ultrasonic waves that may precisely and
noninvasively target nerve clusters in the brain and spinal cord as well as
other areas. Traditional neuromodulation is done using electrical current, but
recent research has demonstrated that focal ultrasound stimulation has several
advantages over electrical stimulation, including deeper penetration into tissue
and increased spatio-temporal specificity. The proposed technology may be used
to noninvasively target nerves that would require invasive procedures for the
electrical field to reach (e.g., deep brain stimulation). Focal ultrasound
stimulation previously has been used for neuromodulation in the central nervous
system (e.g., activation of neural circuits) and in the peripheral nervous
system (activation of cholinergic nerves in the spleen and bladder muscle
control). The core of this innovation is based on research to determine exactly
how to spatiotemporally stimulate neural cells. The proposed device will combine
serial imaging using ultrasound with novel deep learning algorithms trained to
segment different body segments including nerves and neural computational models
that encode learned stimulation spatiotemporal parameters of the focal
ultrasound pulse for naturalistic neuromodulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.