* 2103711
* Long-Range Spin Transport in Light-Metal Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Christopher Leighton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 433,531.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials are ubiquitous in
technology, from the permanent magnets all around us to the precisely engineered
magnetic materials in the powerful hard disk drives that enable cloud data
storage. Spintronics is the scientific field that underpins such technologies,
based on control of the property of electrons known as spin. One major
limitation in the field of spintronics is that is very challenging to move
electron spins over even microscopic distances; the ability to do so would
unlock extraordinary technological potential, including massively reducing the
power consumption of computers. This project is addressing exactly this
challenge, not only seeking long-range transport of electron spins, but doing so
in industrially-relevant materials based on simple metals. In addition to
advancing the fundamental understanding of the physics of this process, broader
impacts are being achieved through the high technological relevance of the work,
through education and training of graduate and undergraduate students (thus
contributing to a skilled US workforce in the electronic device sector), and
through outreach to the public in conjunction with the Science Museum of
Minnesota. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;In spintronics,
injection of spins across interfaces, and their subsequent transport, is central
to the function of many devices. Such devices have already massively impacted
data storage and processing, with potential for further advances. One
particularly exciting prospect is long-range spin transport through materials,
which could realize transformative capabilities such as spin interconnects and
spin accumulation sensors. Fundamental research on long-range spin transport has
focused almost entirely on semiconductors and insulators, despite metallic
spintronics being well-established and amenable to technology. This is because
spin diffusion lengths in conventional polycrystalline non-magnetic metallic
thin films are typically only 100â€™s of nm, limited by defect-induced spin
relaxation. This project seeks to directly alleviate this limitation. Orders-of-
magnitude increases in spin diffusion lengths in nonmagnetic metallic thin films
are being sought via novel application of rationally-designed light-metal
alloys, using theory-guided compositional tuning of electronic structure and
band filling to controllably suppress spin relaxation. In addition to advancing
the fundamental understanding of the relevant physics, broader impacts are being
achieved through the high technological relevance of the work, through education
and training of graduate and undergraduate students, and through outreach to the
public in conjunction with the Science Museum of
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.