* 2103115
* P2C2: Integrating Multiproxy Records of Tropical Cyclone Activity over the Last Millennia to Contextualize 21st (twenty-first) Century Events in the Northern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Emily Elliott, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 327,532.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving the climate record of
past tropical cyclone (TC) activity and related large-scale atmospheric driving
mechanisms in the Southeast United States will advance knowledge and
understanding of past TC characteristics and their mark left in the coastal
environment. This project aims to develop a comprehensive multi-proxy database
of tropical cyclone (TC) activity, including storm frequency and intensity
throughout the last 150 years for northern Gulf of Mexico (nGoM) coastal
systems. Specifically, the researchers will compare annually to seasonally
resolved tree-ring records that act as TC proxies with lower resolution records
of high intensity TC events recorded in sediment cores.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a multi-proxy database of
tropical cyclone occurrence for the nGoM by using existing, site-specific, well-
calibrated sediment records of TCs in conjunction with instrumental and
historical records of TC events to develop a 150-year record of TC events for
each site in southeastern US. Additionally, particle size from established
sediment records of TCs will be re-analyzed to model TC surge intensity over the
150-year period. The project will also develop annually resolved tree-ring
records of TC activity for the Southeast by analyzing extant collections of
multiple tree species (principally slash pine, longleaf pine, and bald cypress)
that are known to be long-lived (~200â€“2,500 years), and are responsive to
hydroclimatic variability, in multiple locations throughout the Southeast. The
researchers will analyze various tracers including ring width and stable oxygen
isotopes for a period of ~150 years to calibrate against the constrained TC
chronology developed from sediment and instrumental records.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include the development and
calibration of Tropical Cyclones (TCs) data set over the last 150 years for the
northern Gulf of Mexico (nGoM). This data can be used to improve assessments of
hazard impact, coastal ecosystem resiliency, and predictions of Tropical
Cyclones. Coastal communities along the nGoM coast are at extreme risk in the
light of projected climate change. Additionally, identifying geographic regions
of greatest impact from TCs can inform local stakeholders on recent TC trends
and the primary drivers, thus improving hurricane forecasts and response, and
saving economic, cultural, and ecologically important resources. The results of
the project will be disseminated to climate modelers, and to stakeholders,
coastal managers, and policy makers to inform planning for TC damage from high
winds, storm surge, and intense rainfall. Data developed from this research will
be made publicly available. The project will support two early career
researchers and will provide educational, research training and professional
development opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at University
of Alabama Tuscaloosa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.