* 2103714
* Collaborative Research: A Synergistic Study of Aerosol Vertical Distributions and their Effects on Convective Clouds and Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Yuan Wang, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 06/30/2024
* USD 174,443.00

Atmospheric aerosols, such as fine particles from the incomplete combustion of
fossil fuels, wood and other fuels, can modify cloud formations and
precipitation. Thus, they have profound impacts on the Earthâ€™s weather and
climate systems. The lack of understanding of complex aerosol properties,
aerosol-cloud interactions, and aerosol variations in space and time contributes
to large uncertainties in the climate assessment and projection. The project
aims to investigate how aerosols vary vertically and how aerosols influence
cloud development and properties over a large area. Findings of this project are
expected to advance our knowledge on aerosol-cloud interactions and address
uncertainties in climate change studies. This research project will provide
opportunities to integrate research and education by involving underrepresented
minority students to conduct the research and incorporating the outcomes from
this research into classes at University of California at Los Angeles and
California Institute of Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
objective of this research is to characterize the vertical distributions of
various types of aerosols and to study their impacts on convective clouds and
precipitation through a combination of data analysis based on state-of-the-art
satellite data and in situ measurements, as well as aerosol-aware and cloud-
resolving WRF modeling. The key scientific questions are (1) what are the
specific characteristics and seasonal and regional variations of the vertical
distribution of different aerosol types? (2) how do the vertical distributions
of various aerosol types affect the micro- and macro-physical properties of
convective clouds and the associated precipitation? Three specific tasks will be
performed to answer these questions: (1) to examine the specific and unique
characteristics of the vertical distributions of various aerosol types in
different regions and seasons; (2) to investigate the relationships between
vertical distributions of various aerosol types and convective clouds and
associated precipitation; (3) to disentangle different aerosol effects (i.e.,
microphysical effect and radiative effect) as well as meteorological influence,
and assess effects of aerosol vertical distributions on convective clouds and
precipitation on the seasonal timescale using process-level models. Results from
observational analyses will be used to evaluate and constrain model simulations
to reduce the uncertainties associated with aerosol-cloud-precipitation
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.