* 2103367
* The Third Domain of T cells: the biology of gamma mu T cells in non-eutherian mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Robert Miller, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2025
* USD 687,031.00

T cells are a critical immune cell type in all vertebrate animals. T cell
deficiencies lead to susceptibility to pathogens and increased cancer rates.
There are a variety of T cell types and subtypes. Their presence and function
can vary considerably across between distantly related species. This project
investigates a new T cell, called the γμT cell, that was discovered in a model
marsupial, the gray short-tailed opossum. γμT cells are found in marsupials and
monotremes like the duckbill platypus. γμT cells, therefore, are ancient and
present in the ancestors of all mammals, but for unknown reasons was lost in the
placental mammals such as humans. Understanding why they were lost from the
placental mammals requires understanding their function in species that still
have γμT cells. This project investigates the development, distribution, and
patterns of gene expression of γμT cells to gain insights into their function.
This project will investigate the function of a novel receptor protein, called
TCRμ, that defines the γμ T cell. TCRμ shares structural similarity to an
antibody type called nanobodies. Nanobodies are useful diagnostic and
therapeutic tools. If TCRμ has the properties of nanobodies it raises the
potential for generating these tools in a species easily maintained in standard
laboratory animal facilities. This project will provide research experiences for
undergraduates transferring from two-year Community College to a four-year,
Research-intensive University. Doctoral students on the project will work
directly with these undergraduates to gain mentoring experience and enhance
their own career skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates the development, distribution, and phenotype of a novel type of T
cells, the γμ T cell. All studies will be performed using a model marsupial, the
gray short-tailed opossum. γμ T cell function remains unknown and preliminary
results support a limited time during postnatal development when they are
generated in the thymus, have a limited tissue distribution, and a limited T
cell receptor (TCR) repertoire in the adult animal. Using combinations of
reverse-transcriptase PCR and single-cell RNA sequencing this project will
investigate: 1) the timing and the progression of the γμ T cell developmental
stages, 2) the tissue distribution throughout maturation and in the adults along
with tissue specific phenotyping at the single cell level, and 3) lastly,
investigate if there is an association between the diversity of γμTCR and tissue
localization. In addition, this project will use phage display technology to
investigate the nature of antigen binding by the γμTCR. Specifically, mRNA
isolated from spleens of immunized opossums will be used to create libraries of
the putative antigen binding domain of γμTCR using a phage display vector.
Clones capable of binding the immunizing antigens will be selected by rounds of
panning and characterized further by sequencing to identify the clones that are
antigen specific. Once clones are identified these will be used to identify the
single cells to associate phenotype with antigen specificity. It is anticipated
that these results will provide the basis for testable hypotheses on the
function or functions of γμ T cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.