* 2103703
* Equilibrium Parameters of Polyelectrolyte Complex Coacervates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Joseph Schlenoff, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 484,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers having electrically
charged chemical groups, called polyelectrolytes, are seen throughout nature and
technology. Because they are charged, these polymers dissolve in water,
substantially increasing viscosity. When polyelectrolytes of opposite charge are
mixed, they associate to give new materials, polyelectrolyte complexes or PECs,
with potential applications as membranes for purification, biomedical materials,
antifouling coatings, and waterproof adhesives. Salt helps to loosen the
attractions between oppositely charged polymers, allowing the material to be
processed into desired shapes. All of these valuable applications depend on how
the properties of these PECs can be designed by choice of materials and
processing conditions. This research will shed light on three parameters
essential to understanding the response and performance of PECs. First, the size
of polymer coils, known to be entangled within the amorphous PEC, will be
measured inside the material by labeling polymer chains with heavy atoms.
Second, the efficiency of salt in actively breaking interactions between polymer
charges, as opposed to passively sitting near the charges, will be investigated.
Finally, the influence of salt on water, salt and polymer content of PECs will
be measured with ultraprecise analytical techniques. In addition to serving as a
training vehicle for domestic students, this project will reach out across
continents, engaging colleagues and students in France and in Nigeria in
seminars on polyelectrolytes and other aspects of modern polymer science and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolyte coacervation/complexation, PECs, a
subset of liquid/liquid phase separation, occurs when two polyelectrolytes of
opposite charge are mixed. The system represents a hydrated blend of charged
polymers with characteristics overlapping both a hydrogel and a classical blend
of neutral polymers. This morphology offers novel applications in the areas of
separations/purification, biomedical materials, antifouling coatings, energy
conversion, and waterproof adhesives. The materials and their properties also
lie at the intersection of intense interest in liquid/liquid phase separation
from the physics, chemistry, biology and materials fields. A deep understanding
of the properties of PECs requires knowledge of many parameters both fundamental
to polymer science and unique to PECs. The proposed research will accurately
measure three important parameters. First, the scaling of the polymer coil size
as a function of molecular weight will be determined using a series of narrow
molecular-weight-distribution deuterated polyelectrolytes. The second area
addresses the central uncertainty of what happens to salt ions when they enter a
PEC to break pairing between positive and negative repeat units: whether each
ion breaks a pair or whether some of the ions are simply present to balance the
osmotic pressure between PEC and solution. In the final subproject, a series of
short-chain-length polyelectrolytes, radiolabeled with C-14, will be prepared
and employed in highly precise and accurate radioanalytical methods to determine
a PEC phase diagram as a function of molecular weight. All of these parameters
are needed to supply the burgeoning theoretical treatments with reliable data.
In addition to serving as a training vehicle for domestic students, this project
will reach out across continents, engaging colleagues and students in France and
in Nigeria in seminars on polyelectrolytes and other aspects of modern polymer
science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.