* 2103425
* Investigation of transport of superfluid 4He through 2D materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Keith Schwab, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 02/29/2024
* USD 436,107.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superfluid helium, which appears in
liquid helium cooled below 2.17K (-455.8F), is an amazing example of a “quantum
material” — a material who’s unusual and counter-intuitive properties require
quantum physics to be understood. An example of a remarkable property of
superfluid is the ability to move without friction, even through holes and
channels which are near atomic size. During a series of recent experiments in
which the research team studied the motion of superfluid helium through
nanometer diameter holes in atomically thin sheets of carbon (graphene), they
observed, unexpectedly, that when in the superfluid state, helium appears to be
able to move through the carbon sheet even without holes. The current project
probes this observation more thoroughly through a series of experiments. If they
do validate the previous surprising outcome, their team expects this to lead to
more advances in experiment and theory which may involve more exotic and as of
yet undiscovered states of matter, such as super solids. More broadly this work
is expected to lead to technologically useful quantum devices using this unique
quantum material. This award will be enable the education of young scientists at
all stages of education and professional development in the area of quantum
devices and ultra-sensitive measurements, both which have been identified as
areas of national importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum devices based on superfluid helium-4 have
not yet been thoroughly developed due to the absence of a low temperature
Josephson junction structure. The difficulty is due to the mass of the helium
atom which inhibits quantum tunneling even through atomically thin membranes,
and the low temperature coherence length of 0.3 nm which requires atomically
sized pores to attenuate the quantum order parameter. Recently, the Schwab
research team performed experiments to probe the transport of superfluid helium
through nanometer sized pores in a graphene sheet. These graphene sheets covered
a 2 micron diameter aperture in a silicon nitride membrane. Surprisingly, after
a series of measurements, it appeared that graphene sheets were transparent to
helium in the superfluid state. This is contrary to the expectation that
graphene should be extremely opaque to the transport of helium. The current seed
project will resolve this question with a series of control experiments. If it
is concluded that graphene is indeed transparent to superfluid helium this may
indicate the formation of a super solid state on the first few layers of helium,
a possibility which has been anticipated by a number of theorists, and a novel
quantum state of matter which has not yet been observed. If it is concluded that
graphene is opaque as was originally expected, the experiments here will inform
experiments to create a low temperature Josephson junction for superfluid
helium, which is expected to lead to realization of novel quantum devices.
Superfluid quantum devices are expected to yield advances in ultra-sensitive
navigation useful for submarines and for precision pointing of telescopes and
lasers and yield novel devices for quantum information processing and precision
quantum standards. Furthermore, this seed will provide funds to purchase a
cryogen-free cryostat which will allow the research team to perform experiments
without the cost of expensive consumable cryogenic
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.