* 2103408
* Collaborative Research: What makes Low-Frequency Earthquakes low frequency?
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,01/31/2024
* William Frank, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2024
* USD 306,279.00

Both earthquakes, which cause damage, and slow slip events, which do not,
release built-up stress at tectonic plate boundaries. While we have long studied
the earthquake cycle, the recent discovery of slow slip events (lasting days to
years) has upended our understanding of this cycle. There are still no answers
to fundamental questions such as: how much tectonic motion is accommodated by
slow slip? What physical conditions at plate boundaries determine whether an
earthquake or slow slip occurs? How does this affect future earthquake hazard?
Can a slow slip event trigger a major earthquake? In this international
collaboration with scientists from Japan and New Zealand, the researchers will
investigate these questions and others by studying the subduction of the
Philippine Sea plate beneath Japan. They will use low-frequency earthquakes,
which are unique seismic signature containing information about the source of
slow slip. The study will use both low-frequency earthquakes and "normal"
earthquakes to tease out the physics of slow slip at a higher-resolution than
was previously possible, shedding light on the different styles of fault slip
that occur on tectonic plate boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
importance of slow slip in the tectonic slip budget, there are not strong
constraints on the mechanics of slow slip, or the structural properties of its
source region, the highly deformed plate interface. Small, impulsive seismic
events called low-frequency earthquakes (LFEs), commonly accompany slow slip.
This unique type of seismicity provides a high-resolution lens through which to
study slow slip, but we do not yet understand its deficiency in high-frequency
content, which is intimately tied to the physics of slow slip. This study will
conduct a localized, high-resolution analysis of LFEs in the Nankai Trough
(Japan) to accurately image the LFE source and determine why their frequency
content is lower than that of typical earthquakes. There are two potential end-
member explanations for why LFEs are low frequency: (i) either the LFE source
itself is fundamentally different from that of "normal" earthquakes, and does
not radiate high-frequencies, or (ii) near-source attenuation in the highly
sheared plate interface removes the high frequency content within the slow slip
source region before it can be captured at seismometers located at the surface.
The study will investigate this problem by performing a novel spectral analysis
of crustal and intraslab earthquakes sandwiching LFEs at the plate interface in
the Nankai Trough. This will enable high-resolution images of attenuation
structure of the plate interface, allowing for the discrimination of the role
near-source attenuation plays in generating LFEs' characteristic low-frequency
signature. By precisely determining the effect attenuation has on LFE spectra
observed at the surface, the researchers will be able to constrain the LFE
source. A range of cluster-based spectral and time-domain approaches will be
used to model the events, and search for differences between regions with and
without LFEs. The research will also explore the time-dependent evolution of
attenuation and LFE source parameters to evaluate how the plate interface
changes throughout the slow slip cycle. Slow slip plays a significant role in
the earthquake cycle, and this research will provide new and essential
constraints on the LFE source and the structure of a major plate boundary,
shedding light on the dynamics and physics of slow
slip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Geophysics program
and the Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.