* 2103745
* CRII: III: Interpretable Models for Spatio-Temporal Event Forecasting using Social Sensors
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Liang Zhao, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 07/31/2021
* USD 81,893.00

Significant events that occur at certain times and in specific locations, such
as disease out-breaks and crime incidents, have tremendous impacts on our
society. This strongly motivates the need to anticipate event occurrences in
advance in order to reduce the potential social upheaval and damage caused. For
example, for traffic congestion predictions based on social network reporting
and traffic sensors, these methods would inform the authorities where the future
congestion will occur and why certain ongoing traffic incident and congestion
hot spots will worsen the problem on specific roads. In recent years, such model
interpretability has attracted increasing attention as machine learning is
beginning to be applied to ever more practical applications. As a domain with
significant impact on society, the interpretability of spatio-temporal event
forecasting models is particularly important in order to earn the trust of
practitioners and become widely adopted in their everyday workflow. However,
like conventional machine learning models, models for social event forecasting
still primarily focus on prediction accuracy and are rapidly becoming too
sophisticated and obscure to be easily understood by human operators. There is
thus an urgent need to fill the increasing gap between data scientists and
practitioners. To address it, this project focuses on developing a novel spatio-
temporal social event forecasting framework that can jointly optimize the model
accuracy and interpretability, and automatically illustrate the explanatory
process of prediction generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address challenges
like spatial dependency and high-dimensional large data, the project aims at
exploring the conditional independence and spatial topology to boost the
sparsity of spatial dependence patterns. The project will then move on to
exploit the hierarchical conjunction lattice of primitive data features to
enforce the conciseness and sparsity of expository high-level representations of
the data. To solve the formulated optimization problem for jointly maximizing
accuracy and interpretability, this project also involves research on the
corresponding optimization methods with rigorous theoretical analysis on
efficiency and optimality. Finally, strategies for evaluating model
interpretability in social event forecasting are systematically investigated.
The success of this project will shed a light on the generic research in
interpretable data mining and machine learning. The methods and tools developed
in this project will help fill the gaps between data scientists and domain-
specific forecasting experts. Finally, this project will provide valuable
resources to support courses with new topics, datasets, techniques, and
software, and gives more research opportunities for underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.