* 2103812
* Novel, engineered bio-inks for 3D printing of complex, perfusable structures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Sarah Heilshorn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 04/30/2025
* USD 579,975.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioprinting, printing with living
cells, of three-dimensional tissue has immense future potential, but progress of
this emerging technology is limited by a lack of biomaterials that have the
necessary mechanical properties to be printable while also having the
appropriate biochemical properties to interface with living cells. In
particular, biomaterials that enable perfusion, the transport of oxygen,
nutrients, and other life-sustaining components, is critically lacking. The need
for perfusable structures is perhaps best demonstrated through blood vessel
networks, which are required to deliver oxygen and nutrients to living tissue.
Perfusable structures are critically important for many other tissues throughout
the body including the lymphatic system, airways, and the gastrointestinal
tract. To achieve the next generation of printed tissue, this project will
develop a family of biomaterials that enable a new biofabrication strategy
termed Gelation of Uniform Interfacial Diffusant in Embedded 3D Printing
(GUIDE-3DP). The GUIDE-3DP materials will allow rapid fabrication of perfusable
networks of interconnected channels with precise control over their shapes and
sizes. In Aim 1, fluid-perfusable structures with complex branch points, such as
mimics of branched blood vessels will be printed. In Aim 2, materials for gas-
perfusable structures will be developed. As a case study, a human intestinal
tissue will be printed and evaluated for the transport of oxygen through the
printed living material. In Aim 3, materials that enable fabrication of
continuous vessels with precise variation of the internal diameters will be
developed. As case studies, printed models of (1) vascular stenosis (in which a
region of the blood vessel is constricted) and (2) the large intestine (which
has a repetitive, pouch-like structure) will be printed. These biomaterials will
enable the future fabrication of living tissue mimics for a variety of
applications that advance, biomaterials, biotechnology, national health and will
further position the US to have global leadership in the emerging field of
biomanufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perfusion, and specifically perfusion-
enabling biomaterials, remains one of the most critical challenges in the
formation of three-dimensional (3D) multicellular structures, whether for the
purposes of tissue engineering, in vitro models of organ development and
disease, or fundamental studies of cell behavior. The challenge of fabricating
channels with specified geometry are important for multiple tissues throughout
the body, including blood vessels, lymphatics, airways, and the gastrointestinal
tract. To address this challenge, this project will develop a family of
biomaterials that enable a new biofabrication strategy termed Gelation of
Uniform Interfacial Diffusant in Embedded 3D Printing (GUIDE-3DP). Embedded 3D
printing involves the fabrication of desired structures within a support
material, reducing deformation and buckling due to gravity and enabling the
printing of complex structures. The GUIDE-3DP method builds upon this approach
by developing an interfacial diffusant strategy to rapidly fabricate perfusable
networks of interconnected channels with precise control over the branching
geometry and vessel diameters. In Aim 1, fluid-perfusable structures with
complex branch points are fabricated. As a biological case study, endothelial
cell morphology and phenotype in the bioprinted branch structures will be
characterized, with a focus on how matrix mechanics alters cellular response to
fluid shear stress. In Aim 2, gas-perfusable structures for controlled oxygen
concentration will be fabricated. As a case study, a 3D human intestinal
organoid culture model will be printed and evaluated for the role of oxygenation
in regulating intestinal stem cell fate. In Aim 3, continuous vessels with
precise variation of luminal diameters will be fabricated, as this geometry
commonly occurs in many structures in vivo. As case studies, in vitro models of
(1) vascular stenosis (in which a region of the blood vessel is constricted),
and (2) the large intestine (which has a repetitive, pouch-like structure) will
be printed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.