* 2103116
* Modeling electrocatalysts in operating conditions: Surface restructuring and catalytic activity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anastassia Alexandrova, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 502,130.00

Electrochemistry is slated to play a large role in clean energy, chemical
manufacturing, and environmental processes in coming years, as renewable
electricity becomes increasingly available from sources such as wind and solar
energy. The project focuses on two electrochemical reactions, the hydrogen
evolution reaction (HER) to produce hydrogen from water, and the carbon dioxide
reduction reaction (CO2RR) to convert CO2 to higher-value products. Both
reactions are facilitated by catalysts. Copper-based catalysts are amongst the
most active identified to date, but as with many electrocatalysts, their
chemical structure changes under reaction conditions. The project focuses on
understanding the reconstruction process with the goal of designing more active,
selective, and stable catalysts. Specifically, the project develops and employs
computational techniques to predict structural changes in response to key
electrochemical process variables. Beyond the technical aspects, the project
incorporates a training program for high-school teachers that brings the topics
of sustainability and energy to their classrooms, while introducing students to
the rapidly emerging area of molecular modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will determine, by unique first-principles, multi-scale stochastic
theoretical simulations, how the surface of copper-based electrocatalysts used
for the hydrogen evolution and CO2 electroreduction reactions restructures in
realistic conditions of potential, solvent, and electrolyte. The influence of
the potential-induced reconstruction on the electrocatalytic mechanism,
activity, and selectivity of these reactions will be studied, in link with
experiments. There is evidence from in-situ characterization that the surface
structure of electrocatalysts is strongly modified in operational conditions.
However, it is not yet possible to determine the atomic structure of the active
surface, and thus, the implications of these reconstructions on the mechanisms
are unknown. The proposed multiscale first-principle simulations appear to be
the most adequate approach to elucidate the interface structure. Principally,
new reaction mechanisms may emerge. The selectivity of CO2 electroreduction
versus hydrogen evolution (the latter being a major hurdle in applications) will
be studied. Several theoretical methods unique to the laboratories of the PIs,
including the incorporation of electrochemical potential, solvent effects,
global optimization algorithms, and STM image simulations, will be advanced,
adapted, and merged to make this research possible. Close connection to the
experiment is proposed, both for structural aspects, with operando scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM), and to validate the predicted kinetics and
selectivity. This project will educate young researchers in techniques of modern
surface chemistry and catalysis, including realistic modeling, method
development, quantum mechanics, and statistical mechanics. In addition, students
will learn how to connect modeling efforts to experimental data and
capabilities. The training will promote a highly-skilled workforce to address
global challenges in the manufacture of sustainable fuels and
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.