* 2103715
* EDGE FGT: Essential New Molecular Genetic Tools for Defining Phenotype in the Global, Harmful Algal Bloom-producing Diatom, Pseudo-nitzchia spp.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Andrew Allen, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,600,000.00

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) threatening ecosystems, fisheries and human health
worldwide, are driven by one diatom genus, Pseudo-nitzschia, along with several
dinoflagellate genera and cyanobacteria. In the last decade, various species of
Pseudo-nitzschia have produced devasting blooms of the neurotoxin, domoic acid
(DA), in the coastal waters of Australia, Brazil, California, Chile, France, the
Gulf of Maine, Indonesia, Italy and Tunisia. Currently there is great
uncertainty regarding how ocean acidification, increased concentrations of
atmospheric CO2, precipitation and nutrient stress will shape the productivity,
and global range of Pseudo-nitzschia species' HABs. Indeed, long term trends
have emerged that link toxic Pseudo-nitzschia spp. blooms to more frequent DA
contamination of shellfish fisheries in the warmer ocean temperatures that
prevail during warmer years. Our collective experience with diatom molecular
genetics, current diatom model organisms, marine biochemistry and microscopy and
our recent discovery and characterization of the hitherto unknown pathway for DA
biosynthesis places us in ideal position to establish, Pseudo-nitzschia sp., as
new model diatom. In so doing, molecular biological methods will be developed to
enable genome-to-phenome investigations of the regulation and biosynthesis of
DA. Specifically, a method to transform Pseudo-nitzschia sp driven by bacterial
conjugation will be developed and disseminated to marine labs worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research will establish a new model diatom, Pseudo-
nitzschia sp., and produce and disseminate state-of-the-art molecular biological
methods to characterize the genome-phenome linkages that drive domoic acid (DA),
harmful algal blooms worldwide. Taking a two-track approach, we propose to
significantly upgrade the functional genomic and molecular biological tools
currently used by the diatom community. Track I, We will construct a bacteria-
diatom conjugation protocol and a concomitant, maintainable episome for
transgenic gene delivery in Pseudo-nitzschia australis and multistriata, two
globally dispersed, highly-toxigenic diatom species. Developing and
disseminating new methods for diatom transformation will increase the number,
and variety of species of diatoms available for functional genomics studies.
Track II, With robust genetic manipulation tools for Pseudo-nitzschia spp. in
place, we will develop a new diatom toolkit for molecular and biochemical
applications. The first three tools to be developed are a) nanobody-fluorescent
proteins (Nb-FPs) that can either repress or activate the target protein's
function in vivo; b) inducible fluorescent biosensors (UnaG) that can detect DA
in laboratory or seawater cultures; c) proximity-labeling enzymes: TurboID and
miniTurbo, that provide insights into protein-protein interactions in vivo. As
the development of the conjugative transformation protocol for Pseudo-nitzschia
spp proceeds, we will express and troubleshoot each of the proteomic tools in
the model organism, Phaeodactylum tricornutum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.