* 2103627
* Elements: Open-source tools for block polymer phase behavior
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kevin Dorfman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 506,505.00

Block polymers are molecules formed by bonding one or more different polymer
molecules at their ends. When a liquid of block polymers is cooled, it
spontaneously forms an ordered structure with nanoscale domain sizes and a
structure that is dictated by the chemistry of the block polymer. Understanding
the selection of different ordered states has both fundamental and practical
implications. On the fundamental side, block polymers provide an important model
system for examining self-assembly and the formation of crystalline order in
soft matter. At a practical level, the ability to construct materials with a
controllable arrangement of components with dramatically different properties
(e.g., glassy spheres embedded in a rubbery matrix) enables novel applications.
Computation plays an important role for both fundamental studies and these
technological applications by providing guidance towards the selection of
materials to analyze and a framework for interpreting the results. This project
will produce an open-source software package that enables block polymer
researchers to easily use state-of-the-art computational tools in their own
research. The long-term goal of the project is to achieve, within the context of
the block polymer theory and experimental community, a widespread use of field-
based simulation tools that naturally complement particle-based molecular
dynamics simulation methods for studying block polymer properties. This project
also provides graduate students and undergraduates with the opportunities to
work on state-of-the-art simulation methods and training in high-performance
scientific computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed open-source software
package will enable self-consistent field theory (SCFT) and field theoretic
simulations (FTS) under a common framework implemented in C++. The package will
include SCFT tools that build on the successful Polymer Self Consistent Field
(PSCF) software package for periodic systems to provide the full suite of
functionality required for advanced polymer physics research. This new package,
entirely rewritten in a new language and with a more flexible design, will
enable accelerated calculations on either GPUs or multicore CPUs, efficient
treatment of problems with special symmetries, and treatment of complex
boundaries such as polymer-grafted nanoparticles and patterned surfaces. A
separate set of FTS programs will allow the user to implement either complex
Langevin sampling of the fully fluctuating model or a more efficient form of
stochastic simulation that involves an approximate treatment of non-specific
steric interactions that maintain a uniform density. Input/output tools will
also be developed to lower the barrier to usage of the software. Dissemination
of the work will include a project website, which will provide background for
potential users and links to documentation, and an online tutorial workshop that
will introduce the software and its capabilities to the broader community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, with the Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Chemistry in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems in the
Directorate for Engineering also contributing funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.