* 2103511
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Improving Utilization of High-Performance Computing Systems via Intelligent Co-scheduling
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Lowenthal, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,298.00

This project is aimed at increasing efficiency of high-performance computing
systems by scheduling multiple jobs on the same set of nodes in a system,
generally called co-scheduling. This is a break from current practice in which
nodes are dedicated to one job at a time, which results in predictable execution
time but inefficient use of system resources. To make this practical, the
project will develop analyses to determine how to carry out co-scheduling such
that overall system efficiency is improved while the performance impact on
individual applications is minimized. In particular, the goal is to co-schedule
jobs that can co-exist without contending for similar resources on the nodes.
The work done in this project will help achieve better efficiency on high-
performance systems, which will impact application domains such as
climate/weather, renewable energy, and national security. The work will be
implemented and validated on systems at Lawrence Livermore and Sandia National
Laboratories and then transitioned into software that will be used at these
national laboratories. The project will also have an impact on education by
integrating the techniques in this research into courses covering parallel and
distributed computing at the PIs' institutions. In addition, the project will
take place at two Hispanic-serving institutions, and the PIs have a history of
advising under-represented students; the project will broaden participation in
computing by recruiting Hispanic undergraduates to work on the project and
sending them to national laboratories for internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-standing abstraction at high-end computing facilities is one of a submitted
job being allocated a set of dedicated nodes. However, this makes systems much
less efficient, as there are more per-node resources that will often be used
inefficiently. In addition, the demand for high-end systems is increasing and
dedicating nodes to jobs can increase job turnaround time and decrease overall
system throughput. One way to address this problem is for supercomputer centers
to break from the current common practice of assigning each job a private,
isolated portion of a supercomputer. The intellectual merit of the project is
three-fold. First, novel profile analyses will be developed that will reveal the
effects on jobs due to sharing nodes. Second, novel statistical projection
techniques will be developed that predict scaling behavior of jobs that are
utilizing shared nodes. Third, new job-level scheduling techniques will be
designed that use the interference analysis and projections to choose a set of
shared nodes that will lead to good job turnaround time and maximize system
throughput. The broader impact of the project is multifold. This project will
help achieve better efficiency on high-performance systems, which will benefit a
broad range of applications that includes climate/weather prediction, nuclear
energy, and national security. Through a long-standing collaboration with both
Lawrence Livermore and Sandia National Laboratories, the PIs will implement and
validate the techniques on LLNL and SNL systems as well as transition the
techniques into future resource managers at the national laboratories. In
addition, both PIs will broaden participation in computing by recruiting
Hispanic undergraduates to work on the project and sending them to national labs
for internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.