* 2103558
* Create biobased peptides and determine their mechanisms as ice recrystallization inhibitors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Tong Wang, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice recrystallization, where large
ice crystals replace small ones, is a critical problem that impacts quality and
functional property of biomaterials, such as food, biomedical tissues, and cell
cultures during freezing storage. Ice recrystallization inhibition (IRI) is the
restriction of the growth of ice crystals caused by fluctuations in freezing
temperature. Although synthetic chemicals can be used as ice growth inhibitors,
their wide application is limited due to toxicity. This research, based on
exciting preliminary findings, aims to understand how peptides obtained from
hydrolysis (breakdown due to reaction with water) of food proteins can act as an
IRI agent and how minor structural modification will enhance such effect. The
research will address the relationship between molecular structure and IRI
activity so that the mechanism of action can be better understood. These bio-
based peptides are expected to have adequate IRI activity and low toxicity. They
will have a wide range of applications in the food industry (increasing quality
of frozen foods), agriculture (increasing resistance of plant to freezing
temperatures), medicine (cold storage of cells and tissues), and material
technology (deicing road or aircraft and climate control). The knowledge gained
and evaluation tools established from this study will provide insights to future
fundamental biomaterial chemistry research. This project will provide STEM
education to underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students. The training
will increase students’ understanding of the role of fundamental chemistry in
advancing science through addressing the current challenges and needs. It will
have a long-lasting impact on the students’ appreciation of applying basic
knowledge in problem-solving. The students will also grow in key skills to
become future biomaterial researchers through leadership training, and
introduction to FDA and EPA regulations of new bio-based compounds and
intellectual property protection and technology adoption. Successful recruitment
and training of minority students will diversify student profile in the
department and college and create an inclusive and enriching environment for
all. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice
recrystallization and growth during freezing storage is a critical challenge
that remains to be addressed. Bio-based and safe compounds are urgently needed
to avoid the toxicity of synthetic anti-freezing agents. Based on the exciting
earlier findings of the investigators’ group, this project aims to investigate
ice recrystallization inhibition (IRI) using peptides that are derived from
common food proteins through biocatalyzed hydrolysis and amidation reactions.
The relationship among peptides’ structure, physicochemical properties, and IRI
activity will be established. The fundamental understanding of how peptides’
H-bonding ability and their amphiphilicity affect IRI activity will be gained.
The ice-water interfacial behaviors influenced by peptides will be studied using
a novel vibrational sum frequency generation spectroscopic method. Therefore,
this research addresses what is currently unknown in the field, i.e., how the
bio-based peptides’ molecular characteristics relate to their IRI activity.
Although theories of IRI have been tested for some pure compounds, little is
known about peptide mixtures from common proteins. The structural diversity of
proteins and peptides has made the structure-function studies challenging, and
this is to be addressed by studying group characteristics in this work. The
proposed quantification of H-bond and amphiphilicity as the key factors for IRI
activity is a novel angle for IRI research, and the use of advanced spectroscopy
will provide new insights on mechanisms of action. Hence, this research
demonstrates the use of innovative approaches to identify bio-compatible
materials for maintaining quality and integrity of biological systems under
freezing conditions. This research will provide transformative experience for
graduate students and undergraduate research assistants in their appreciation of
how chemistry principles are used in problem-solving. Successful recruitment and
training of students with diverse backgrounds will provide an enriching
environment in the academic communities within the college and in the local
community. Students’ practice of essential skills of critical thinking, problem
solving, teamwork, and leadership will lead to the development of future
biomaterial researchers and an highly capable and adaptable
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.