* 2103495
* Integrating Rational Number Sense
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Robert Siegler, Schiller, Lauren Kelly
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Robert
Siegler at Teachers College, Columbia University and Dr. Clarissa Thompson at
Kent State University this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating children’s understanding of the relations among
rational number notations (fractions, decimals, and percentages). Earlier work
has shown that rational numbers, particularly fractions, are important for
algebra, which in turn, is predictive of life outcomes. Unfortunately,
children’s rational number understanding is quite poor. The ultimate goal of the
proposed research is to understand children’s conceptions of our number system
and to identify methods for improvement. This work may have important
implications for curriculum and instruction across elementary and middle school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project builds on Siegler, Thompson, and
Schneider’s (2011) Integrated Theory of Numerical Development, which argues that
fractions are central to numerical development. Here, we focus on children’s
understanding of the relations among fractions, decimals, and percentages, what
we call, integrated number sense. Very little is known about children’s cross-
notation understandings. Initial findings (Schiller, 2020) suggest that
integrated number sense is a critical skill that is largely ignored by
curriculum and research. Specifically, integrated number sense, as measured by
magnitude comparison across notations, uniquely predicted math achievement
beyond fraction magnitude representations. Additionally, integrated number sense
predicted fraction arithmetic estimation, whereas fraction magnitude
representation did not. However, students demonstrate little cross-notation
understanding. For example, students are biased towards perceiving percentages
as larger than fractions and decimals (e.g., higher accuracy for comparing 40%
vs. 1/4 than 2/5 vs. 25%). The proposed project aims to develop instruction to
build integrated number sense by: 1) investigating integrated number sense in
much greater detail and the role it plays in other math outcomes, 2) examining
use of the mental number line by investigating strategic use of magnitude within
and across notations, 3) testing whether it is more effective to use an isolated
or integrated approach to build this cross-notation abstraction of the mental
number line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.