* 2103817
* Adaptable and Robust Multi-Robot Decision Making through Generalized Sequential Stochastic Task Assignment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Geoffrey Hollinger, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2024
* USD 496,065.00

This project envisions teams of multiple robotic systems cooperatively and
autonomously executing complex missions in the physical world. These missions
include environmental monitoring, search and rescue, and scientific exploration,
where robots are tasked to provide timely information to end users. The success
of many robotic missions depends on a small number of critical, irreversible,
and high-impact decisions. Examples of such decisions include selecting where to
deploy aerial robots from ground robots, determining how to deploy communication
hardware, and specifying when to execute specific motion behaviors. In current
fielded robotic systems, these types of decisions are largely left to human
operators, who typically do not have the required situational awareness,
reasoning skills, or available time to make these decisions effectively. This
work seeks to bridge the gap between current multi-robot systems that require
significant human input to make high-impact decisions and future intelligent
robotic systems capable of executing the most effective behaviors at the right
time and location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate objective of this project
is to develop new algorithmic solutions for making high-impact decisions in
heterogeneous multi-robot teams. When reasoning over such decisions, many
variables must be considered, such as the mission goals, available actions,
environment belief models, future rewards, and the behaviors and capabilities of
other robots. Many of these variables carry a significant degree of uncertainty,
have a prior belief of their value, and may change based on dynamic conditions
and robot observations. New algorithmic solutions for reasoning over this
information will be developed by formulating and solving new generalizations of
the sequential stochastic assignment problem (SSAP). These SSAP generalizations
require reasoning over the uncertain future values of robot actions, accounting
for information acquired in situ, exploiting dependencies in the reward
distributions, and computing policies in a decentralized manner. Validation will
be performed through both simulated and field experiments for marine monitoring
and environment exploration scenarios. The developed algorithms will be made
publicly available through open source distribution and will help foster ongoing
collaborations with marine and environmental
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.