* 2103628
* Collaborative Research: Semiconducting Behavior in Silsesquioxane Macromonomers and Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Aleksander Rebane, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 101,223.00

With support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry, Professors Richard Laine and John Kieffer of the
University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, and Professor Aleks Rebane of Montana State
University will develop new families of silicone-based polymers. Silicone oils
and rubbers are hydrophobic, colorless, and electrically insulating materials
and as such find wide uses. Recently, two families of silicon-containing
polymers were developed wherein silicon-containing building blocks alternate
with fluorescent ones. Unlike most known silicon-based materials, these polymers
are intensely colored, brightly fluorescent, and behave as semiconductors.
Importantly, they still retain key properties of traditional silicones, such as
water and flame resistance. Semiconducting polymers, such as, organic light-
emitting diodes (OLEDs) are found in flat panel displays and in some instances
can be used to convert sunlight into electricity. Hence the study of these new
polymer families could lead to unexpected and potentially useful properties,
bringing new, low-cost and more robust materials to many everyday societal
applications. This research project will facilitate the training of graduate and
undergraduate students to expand knowledge of these materials and their
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silsesquioxanes (SQs) are unique, regularly
symmetric 3D macromolecules that resemble single silica crystals in being
extremely robust, some remaining air-stable up to 600 Â°C. The phenyl derivatives
of SQs can also be selectively functionalized by using electrophilic
substitution reactions. The cage centers interact with appended moieties in the
excited state providing 3D conjugation (cage centered LUMOs) and semiconducting
behavior. There is potential to develop new families of polymers with
semiconducting properties wherein siloxane bridges offer potential value for
photonic applications, for example for displays, hybrid lasers and
photovoltaics. These avenues of scientific inquiry, which constitute the basis
for the broad collaboration, aim at expanding the number of cage architectures
that form the presumed cage centered LUMOs, detailing the substitution patterns
required to promote onset of such properties, and optimizing one- and two-photon
quantum efficiencies for display, white light and laser applications. These
goals will be pursued through detailed photophysical measurements, theoretical
modeling, and electrochemical probing with the aim of improving fundamental
understanding of structure-property relationships in this polymer family. The
potential exists to make available important new sets of semiconducting polymers
for chemists, physicists and materials scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.