* 2103842
* Collaborative Research: Probing quasiparticle excitations in TMDC Moir√© superlattices for revealing and understanding novel two-dimensional correlated phases
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Xiaofeng Qian, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 214,999.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Thanks to the development of two-dimensional
(2D) atomic crystals, researchers have managed to create a new kind of periodic
lattice that arises from the interference of two vertically stacked 2D atomic
lattices. The existence of this so called "moire superlattice", has been
theoretically predicted and experimentally demonstrated. In this collaborative
project, the research team studies a family of such moire superlattices made
from transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDC). The team aims at understanding the
key questions of how semiconducting TMDC monolayers turn into unconventional
insulators, magnets, or even superconductors when stacked together vertically,
by probing the dynamics of the periodic lattices, the charge carriers, and the
magnetic moments in these TMDC stacked structures. The project is further
integrated with education and outreach activities to recruit and mentor
underrepresented and first-generation students, present demo experiments and
tutorials to K-12 students, and introduce the background and results from
collaborative research to the general public. These activities involve a wide
group of participants and promote science, technology, and engineering among
K-12 students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The formation of moire superlattice by either lattice
mismatch or angular misalignment between two atomically thin crystals has been
experimentally demonstrated as a powerful way to design and engineer electronic
properties of 2D systems. One particular outstanding example is the small twist-
angle TMDC moire superlattices, showing a wealth of strongly correlated
electronic phases that are absent in the individual composing TMDC monolayers.
In this collaborative project, the research goal is to develop a comprehensive
understanding on these emergent correlated phases in TMDC moire superlattices.
The focus is to investigate the collective phonon, charge, and magnon
excitations of these correlated phases by using an integrated optical
spectroscopy experiment and first-principles theory method. Specifically, the
research team fabricates TMDC moire superlattices, performs time- and frequency-
domain dynamic measurements using time-resolved and Raman optical spectroscopy,
and carries out theoretical calculations to guide the experimental design and
interpret the experimental results. The success of this project not only opens a
new pathway to better understand emergent correlated physics in 2D systems, but
also expands the platform to explore strongly correlated physics in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.