* 2103536
* NSF-BSF: Investigation of multi-scale turbulence coupling by goal-oriented adaptive surface modulation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Siddhartha Verma, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 309,527.00

Turbulent flows have a significant influence on the efficient operation of
ships, automobiles, and aircraft, as well as on the safe design of buildings,
bridges, and wind turbines. The main characteristic that defines turbulent flows
is a strong coupling between large-scale structural flow features and
fluctuations at extremely small length and time scales. A better understanding
of this link across disparate scales is essential for modulating flow
characteristics to improve the optimize efficiency of engineering designs and to
reduce noise generation. Therefore, the primary aim of this project is to use
experiments and computations to leverage novel control and analysis techniques
to modulate turbulent flows with the aim of reducing unsteadiness in bluff-body
wakes. The project will also provide an invaluable opportunity to promote early
enthusiasm for science and engineering among high school students from
underrepresented backgrounds, who will be hosted at a week-long engineering
summer camp where they will be introduced to various aspects of fluid mechanics
that permeate our day-to-day lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will investigate unsteady interactions between large- and small-scale turbulent
coherent structures around a cylindrical bluff body by combining distributed
surface actuation with deep-learning techniques. The study will help address
fundamental gaps in current knowledge regarding non-linear interactions that
regulate the spatiotemporal evolution of coherent structures in separated
turbulent flows. Prior attempts at building a general understanding of coherent
structure interactions have primarily on linear analysis techniques suitable
mostly for canonical, equilibrium flows. The proposed research will also develop
a better understanding of the suppression of wake unsteadiness. Deep-learning
algorithms will be leveraged both to facilitate the coordinated perturbation of
the flow via a distributed array of moving surfaces on the cylindrical body and
to extract the localized behavior of dynamically important coherent structures
from the non-equilibrium system. The unique combination of unsteady flow
forcing, distributed adaptive wall response, and deep-learning based control and
analysis will offer a broad perspective on the dynamics of turbulent coherent
motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.