* 2103459
* CRII: CPS: Building Highly-efficient and Low-power Edge Computing with Data-driven Learning and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kun Suo, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 173,918.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) is described as networks of small physical devices,
embedded with sensors, software, and other technologies, that easily exchange
data with other devices and systems over the Internet. The convergence of
traditional technologies from wireless networking, control systems, and
automation with miniaturization and low-powered devices contributed to the
development of IoT, spurred on by strong demand and rapid growth in smart home
automation and smart cities. Affordable interoperable IoT systems are
increasingly ubiquitous in daily life. These IoT devices, working closely
together, orchestrate a range of tasks, increasingly used for such activities as
programmable personalized control of heating, cooling, and security in homes and
offices. As these IoT devices become more capable, more computationally
demanding tasks can be performed by these devices singly or in combination as a
local distributed network bringing computing closer to the location where needed
to improve responsiveness, i.e., at the edges of the Internet. The challenge is
to ensure the highly capable, timely performance, seamless collective operation
of IoT devices with edge computing and even cloud services as an efficient
purposeful system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the relationships
between system resource utilization and energy efficiency in various edge and
IoT systems in order to better understand how to optimize the key performance
parameters of edge computing systems. This project explores mitigating the
inefficiency in edge systems through a data-driven approach. Specifically, the
primary research directions include: (1) analyzing the power inefficiency in
different edge systems and develop a data-driven energy-aware framework for
runtime edge and IoT applications, (2) tailoring the edge runtime framework
including parts of data and control planes to reveal hidden dependencies, and
(3) scaling and evaluating this framework and methodology in high-fidelity
realistic test scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.