* 2103434
* Collaborative Research: Enhanced 4D-Flow MRI through Deep Data Assimilation for Hemodynamic Analysis of Cardiovascular Flows
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Amirhossein Arzani, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 01/31/2023
* USD 91,486.00

Forces resulting from blood flow interaction with walls of blood vessels have
major impact on the initiation and progression of vascular diseases such as
aneurysms, atherosclerosis, and vasospasms. Consequently, detailed and accurate
blood flow analysis could be key to prognosis and treatment of such diseases.
There are two popular modalities that are currently used to study 3D blood flow.
The first is based on computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations. The second
is through direct non-invasive imaging using techniques such as phase contrast
magnetic resonance imaging (a.k.a 4D-Flow MRI). CFD requires accurate vascular
geometry, model parameters, and estimates of boundary flow and initial
conditions. These are time consuming and very difficult, if not impossible to
estimate. Furthermore, the fidelity of CFD is limited by model assumptions. On
the other hand, 4D-Flow MRI directly measures in-vivo volumetric blood flow
velocities, but has low spatio-temporal resolution and the scans are
contaminated by noise and image artifacts. The proposed project overcomes the
limitations of both CFD and 4D-Flow MRI through a novel technique called deep
data-assimilation. Here deep neural nets are used to model the blood flow. The
training process imposes data fidelity with 4D-Flow MRI and simultaneously
ensures that the physics of fluid flow and magnetic resonance are satisfied. The
neural nets are then used to generate accurate dense spatio-temporal flow fields
and flow dependent parameters such as wall shear stresses, vorticity etc. The
ability to enhance 4D-Flow MRI will enable clinical researchers to investigate
the impact of hemodynamics on the initiation and progression of vascular
diseases. This will lead to novel physics-based flow image analysis tools for
disease management that will significantly reduce cost and optimize treatment
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed project is to enable
accurate and reliable hemodynamic analysis of cardio-vascular flows from time
resolved three dimensional phase contrast magnetic resonance imaging (4D-Flow
MRI). The proposed approach uses physics informed deep learning wherein time-
varying flow (velocity and pressure) and field (magnetic moment) variables are
modeled as deep neural nets. The training process fits 4D-Flow MRI data and also
imposes blood flow physics (Navier-Stokes equation) and MRI acquisition physics
(Bloch equations) as constraints. Creative design of loss functions in the
learning process will achieve super-resolution, attenuate noise, and eliminate
various image artifacts. Automatic differentiation will facilitate truncation
error-free computation of velocity-dependent higher order hemodynamic
parameters. Carefully designed in-vitro experiments will be used to validate and
optimize the method. The proposed hybrid experimental and deep learning approach
will create a new paradigm in cardiovascular flow research wherein the governing
equations will be directly applied to low quality imaging data using deep
learning to raise the reliability and accuracy to the level needed for
scientific discovery. The project will provide opportunities to train graduate
students in the latest deep-learning based techniques in engineering, engage
undergraduate students in research through numerous programs at UW-Milwaukee and
Northern Arizona University, and outreach to high school students belonging to
marginalized communities through summer programs at UW-
Milwaukee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.