* 2103738
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Sustainable Open-Source Quantum Dynamics and Spectroscopy Software
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Edward Valeev, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2027
* USD 550,000.00

With support from the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure and the Division of
Chemistry at NSF, Professor Li and his team will work to expand the capabilities
of the open-source software platform, Chronus Quantum (ChronusQ), to include
time-resolved spectroscopy for supporting quantum chemistry calculations. The
new capabilities will include novel computational methods to provide
unprecedented capabilities to simulate chemical processes of electrons and
nuclei that exhibit quantum behaviors. The physical insights gleaned through
applications of ChronusQ underlie the advancement of new technologies that are
crucial to sustainable energy, catalysis, quantum computing, and other
applications that can immediately impact society. This project provides a
mechanism for advanced interdisciplinary education and training in the areas of
inorganic, theoretical, physical, and materials chemistry. The collaborative
academic research serves as a test ground for identifying and deploying ways
that the scientific community as a whole can both increase awareness of the
importance of active engagement in professional skill development for graduate
students and post-doctoral scholars, and develop tools to facilitate
professional development in an academic setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ChronusQ
seamlessly integrates time-dependent quantum mechanical theories, spectral
analysis tools, and modular high-performance numerical libraries that are highly
parallelized, extensible, reusable, community-driven, and open-sourced. The Team
develops in ChronusQ the complete time-dependent quantum description of coupled
nuclear and electronic dynamics within the time-dependent density functional
theory and equation-of-motion coupled cluster framework. The project enables
computational studies of ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopies and simulations
of chemical processes in the strongly nonadiabatic regime. Software modules are
bolstered by algebraic and integral acceleration engines that can make it
feasible to simulate fully quantum mechanically molecular dynamics. The
collaborative project advances the theoretical description of quantum dynamics
across time scales, bridging the attosecond and subnanosecond regimes, enabling
the development of spectroscopic technologies to probe molecular and materials
properties with state specificity that is beyond the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.