* 2103794
* Elements: Open-Source Cyberinfrastructure as a Decision Engine for Socioeconomic Disaster Risk (DESDR)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Daniel Osgood, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2024
* USD 599,998.00

Natural disasters can have long-lasting financial consequences for vulnerable
populations such as farmers, but disparate disaster impacts make the accurate
and timely deployment of limited resources such as disaster funding and relief
very difficult. This project will develop an open-source suite of
cyberinfrastructure tools, called the Decision Engine for Socioeconomic Disaster
Risk (DESDR), to fill data voids by collecting and cleaning disaster risk data
directly from affected populations. As well, the project will combine those data
with satellite data to provide farmers and others with data and tools to make
better informed decisions about disaster risk management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing approaches for disaster detection, mapping, and
prediction primarily rely on satellite and sensor data that are susceptible to
errors and do not measure how disasters directly affect regions and individuals.
This project will develop open-source software infrastructure employing data
from rural populations, and then use the data to build more accurate disaster
risk models. The cyberinfrastructure, DESDR, will provide a scalable,
customizable data collection platform using mobile messaging services that take
local incentives and community norms into account, and will be used to gather
data on from affected communities. A data visualization and cleaning platform
will enable local partners and researchers to cross-reference the data with
satellite and sensor data sources, and to identify and clean data errors. A
database architecture will store the data in an interoperable format. And, a
web-based interface will provide government agencies, policy makers,
researchers, and other stakeholders the ability to interactively create and
back-test disaster risk models. DESDR will be disseminated as open-source,
ready-to-deploy software to a user community of governmental meteorological
agencies, humanitarian program officers, insurers and affiliated agricultural
and social scientists. By combining these tools into an integrated, extensible
process cyberinfrastructure, DESDR will directly involve vulnerable populations
in the design of solutions, enabling disaster risk managers to scale up critical
relief programs to reach multitudes of farmers and others while providing an
unprecedented voice to the project beneficiaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, and by the
Division of Social and Economic Sciences in the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral &amp; Economic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.