* 2103874
* Frameworks: Advanced Cyberinfrastructure for Sustainable Community Usage of Big Data from Numerical Fluid Dynamics Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Tamer Zaki, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2026
* USD 3,992,109.00

In most computer simulation-based research, the prevailing approach has been to
perform large simulations that generate so much data that only some quantities
can be computed during the simulation runs while at most a few representative
snapshots are stored and shared for subsequent analysis. Storing the entire time
evolution creates access and distribution bottlenecks that have been a pervasive
challenge. This project addresses the challenge and broadens the impact of high-
performance scientific computing in one of the disciplines at the frontier of
high-performance scientific computing: fluid turbulence. Improved tools for
turbulence research are required to model many natural processes in atmospheric
and ocean sciences and to develop engineering applications. The project builds
easily accessible and useable databases from world-class turbulence simulations
that help bridge the increasing resource gap between top computer simulators and
the wider turbulence data user community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
develops and implements an advanced cyberinfrastructure framework for turbulence
databases that enables ground-breaking research on fluid turbulence in various
engineering, atmospheric and ocean flows. Novel services include user-
programmable server computation, efficient batch processing tools, easy-to-use
inspections of the data that also allow users to store and query the locations
of specific flow patterns. The system extends the applicability of notebook-
based, AI-augmented data analyses accessing a diverse federation of structured
databases with more complex data objects, and includes datasets for various new
flows of engineering and geophysical interest at increasing Reynolds numbers. It
contains backwards compatible elements with a legacy system, to support and
maintain compatibility with an existing active community of users. Research
training and mentoring focus on the interplay between physical concepts and
computer and computational science aspects of massive simulation-based datasets.
Over 2.5 Petabytes of data will become available to support breakthroughs in
turbulence research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the National Science Foundation
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems within
the Directorate for Engineering; and by the Physical Oceanography Program,
Physical and Dynamic Meteorology Program, and the Division of Integrative and
Collaborative Education and Research within the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.