* 2103722
* Synthesis of Hierarchical Materials with a Tunable Photoisomerization Response
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Natalia Shustova, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 458,902.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, principal investigator (PI) Prof. Natalia Shustova and her research
group at the University of South Carolina at Columbia develop crystalline metal-
organic framework (MOF) materials for which electronic properties can be
modulated through external stimuli, such as light or heat. They also study the
fundamental understanding of these materials which elucidates the concept of
tailoring material properties upon light irradiation. This in turn advances
applications ranging from adaptive lenses and memory storage devices to
nonlinear optics, fuel cells, or field-effect transistors. A specific example is
that the proposed crystalline photoresponsive materials enable future
optoelectronic materials. The research is synergistic with the Materials
Assembly and Design Excellence in South Carolina (MADE in SC). In addition to
transformative research, PI Shustova also continues the development of the
Carolinian Women in Science (Wi-Sci) Supportive Network. The major Wi-Sci goal
is to create and grow a network of support for women currently at the Carolinian
institutions of higher education, including historically black colleges and
universities (HBCUs), and therefore increase opportunities for women to attain
at least 50% of the positions projected for STEM disciplines in the Carolinas.
The proposed Wi-Sci initiative integrates educational and research opportunities
for female students in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving control over photoisomerization kinetics
through material design is a challenge that must be addressed to advance the
fields of optoelectronics or memory and energy storage. However, fundamental
principles, that allow for enabling control over photoisomerization kinetics
(i.e., achieve reversible and fast material photoresponse) are still vastly
underdeveloped. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, furthers the
development of crystalline stimuli-responsive hybrid materials exhibiting
tunable and reversible photoisomerization of coordinatively-immobilized stimuli-
responsive units as a function of material topology. The research team pursues
two routes to assemble photoresponsive MOFs: a) assembly of MOFs from a
combination of photochromic ligands, such as diarylethene-based ones, and non-
photochromic ligands; and b) photoisomerization through MOF-linker side groups.
Extensive photophysical analysis of the resulting photoresponsive frameworks are
elucidating structure-property relationships related to electronic structure
modulation. Additionally, the project promotes integration of educational and
research opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students,
with a special emphasis on women in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.