* 2103630
* Dynamics of Block Copolymer Micelles
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2026
* USD 900,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Micelles are nanoscale objects
formed by spontaneous assembly of amphiphilic molecules such as detergents and
lipids. Larger amphiphiles known as block copolymers (BCPs) adopt analogous
structures, but typically are much more robust against mechanical forces or
changes in chemical environment. For these reasons, BCP micelles are of growing
importance in a variety of emerging technologies, including as viscosity
modifiers in synthetic motor oils to boost fuel economy, and as vehicles for
delivery of therapeutic agents to specific target cells, such as cancers. In
these applications, and many more, the nanostructure is created through the
“bottom-up” process of self-assembly, whereby the molecules are carefully
designed to produce the intended structure. However, a fundamental problem is to
understand the mechanism of self-assembly itself. In particular, it is important
to know whether the resulting nanostructure is the most favorable, equilibrium
one, or whether the system has become trapped in a non-optimal so-called
“metastable” state. In the latter case, which is quite common, by what
mechanisms do micelles evolve toward a more favorable state? With this
knowledge, it will be possible to tailor a given commercial process to produce
the most useful nanostructure, reliably and reproducibly, in the shortest
possible time. Graduate students will acquire a broad suite of skills in polymer
synthesis and characterization, light, X-ray and neutron scattering, and
electron microscopy. They will also have extensive opportunities to present
technical talks and posters to external audiences, as well as to mentor talented
undergraduates. High school students from the greater Twin Cities, particularly
women and underrepresented minorities, will be exposed to polymer science
through "Polymer Day: You Make It, You Break It", a hands-on component of a
broader "Discover STEM: Materials Week" summer camp. A diverse cohort of
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows from across the country will
participate in Future Faculty Workshops, to enhance skills in acquiring and
succeeding in academic positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; While the equilibrium structure of block
copolymer (BCP) micelles is relatively well understood, the dynamic processes by
which such structures evolve are not. Furthermore, BCP micelles formed by
solution self-assembly are often trapped in metastable, non-equilibrium states.
A comprehensive experimental program is described, aimed at developing a
quantitative understanding of the five molecular-level processes believed to
control block copolymer micellar self-assembly. These processes include micellar
fragmentation and fusion, for which prior studies are very scarce. Recalcitrant
problems in understanding single chain exchange will be attacked with computer
simulations, and unresolved issues in understanding the effect of energetic
barriers to micelle creation and annihilation will be addressed using the same
model polymer systems. A suite of powerful experimental tools will be employed,
especially dynamic light scattering, small-angle X-ray and neutron scattering,
and liquid-phase transmission electronic microscopy. The results will provide
critical tests of existing models, or will provide benchmark data sets to inform
future theoretical developments.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.