* 2103754
* Large-scale CoPe: Megalopolitan Coastal Transformation Hub (MACH): Researching complex interactions between climate hazards and communities to inform governance of coastal risk.
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Klaus Keller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Cooperative Agreement
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2026
* USD 11,320,090.00

Risks from rising seas, shifting storms, and eroding coastlines, as well as
changing ecosystems and development patterns, are escalating in coastal
megalopolises around the world. Local, state, and federal climate risk
management decisions are interacting with one another and coastal dynamics in
complex ways that will shape risk patterns for decades. However, the frameworks
informing these decisions are often ill-suited for sustained, complex
environmental changes unfolding under deep uncertainty and often reinforce
existing inequities. The CoPe Megapolitan Coastal Transformation Hub (MACH) aims
to develop climate-resilient decision-making frameworks to equitably support
coastal communities. Fundamental research questions will be addressed through
co-production of climate research, with the intended legacy of producing a
replicable model for climate risk management. The project is driven by
demographically representative stakeholder engagement, which will be sustained
through the continuous engagement of researchers with a Collaborative
Stakeholder Advisory Panel. MACH partners with organizations that are trusted by
and routinely represent, serve, and engage socially vulnerable and historically
underrepresented populations in target communities. MACH will broaden
participation in the STEM workforce by engaging community college faculty in the
development of research priorities and by working with community college faculty
and students to incorporate critical service-learning. In addition to
facilitating interdisciplinary science through a broad range of academic
partners, the Hub advances CoPe goals by linking researchers with coastal
community stakeholders and decision-makers to ultimately co-develop dynamic
adaptation policy pathways for navigating a deeply uncertain future in an
equitable manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome challenges in the dynamics of
natural-human systems drive coastal climate risk, MACH will bring natural
scientists, social scientists, civil engineers, and humanists together with
coastal stakeholders and decision-makers in the New York City-New Jersey-
Philadelphia region to co-produce knowledge that informs climate-resilient
development pathways of coastal communities. MACH’s convergence research agenda
will provide fundamental insights into the complex interactions between coastal
climate hazards, landforms, and decisions that shape the distribution, dynamics,
and uncertainties of increasing climate risks. It will facilitate flexible,
equitable, and robust planning to manage coastal climate risks, building upon
the iterative process of framing, analyzing, implementing, and monitoring
adaptation systems that constitutes the Dynamic Adaptive Policy Pathway (DAPP)
co-production framework. It will address three fundamental questions: 1) How can
an improved scientific understanding of the integrated natural-human-decision
system inform coastal climate risk management and the design of mission-oriented
basic research? 2) How do the dynamics of coastal natural-human systems drive
hazards and risks? 3) How do dynamic interactions among decisions affecting the
coastal system at different scales and time horizons influence exposures,
vulnerabilities, and risks?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.