* 2103708
* CRII:OAC: Machine Learning- Enhanced Multiscale Simulation of Fiber Composites
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ramin Bostanabad, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

Many engineered materials such as fiber composites have a hierarchical structure
that spans multiple length scales. The analysis and design of these materials
rely on multiscale simulations whose computational costs significantly increase
if the structure is large and if the material deformation depends on its loading
history. These high costs prohibit computationally intensive studies such as
uncertainty propagation and design optimization. To tackle this challenge, the
project employs recent advances in high performance computing and machine
learning to accelerate multiscale simulations by orders of magnitude without
compromising accuracy. The developed methods and tools are applicable to many
materials systems and the testbed on fiber composites benefits a wide range of
academic and industrial efforts since these materials are heavily used in, for
example, the automobile and aerospace industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
develops cyberinfrastructure foundations that will enable acceleration of
multiscale simulations while (1) minimizing the information loss incurred in
inter-scale communication, and (2) considering various uncertainty sources such
as spatial variation of microstructural properties and morphologies. The project
builds mechanistic machine learning (ML) models that emulate complex and
history-dependent microstructural deformations that embody a broad range of
nanoscale and mesoscale effects to ensure transferability. The ML models are
integrated with a message passing interface (MPI) design that leverages the
hierarchical nature of the multiscale simulation to achieve two-level
parallelism, both within and across the computational nodes of a compute
cluster. The message passing is employed to manage inter-scale and intra-scale
data transfer during multiscale simulation of a light-weight fiber composite
whose microstructures spatially vary due to manufacturing uncertainties. The
simulations on composite materials aim to increase understanding of how their
properties are affected by inter- and intra- microstructural uncertainties,
constituent properties, deformation history, and microstructure
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.