* 2103608
* Invariant Metrics on Complex Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Damin Wu, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2024
* USD 348,009.00

As one of the oldest branches in mathematics, geometry concerns the properties
of spaces related to sizes, shapes, and distances of objects. Modern mathematics
makes use of powerful analytic tools such as calculus to study geometry, which
creates the field differential geometry. Differential geometry has been one of
the most active fields in mathematics, with interconnections and applications to
other mathematical fields like topology and differential equations, and also
with physics - in Einstein's theory of relativity, gravity is the curvature of a
metric. This project investigates the complex aspects of differential geometry,
especially the important metrics on complex spaces called invariant metrics,
with tools from complex analysis and differential equations. A main goal is to
understand the shape or curvature of the invariant metrics, and their underlying
mathematical structures. This study of complex geometry interplays with the
algebraic sides of mathematics, including algebraic geometry, representation
theory, and number theory, and has applications to physics such as string theory
and to scientific computing via conformal maps. The project includes training
through research involvement for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are four classical invariant metrics on complex manifolds, the Bergman metric,
the Caratheodory-Reiffen metric, the Kobayashi-Royden metric, and the complete
K채hler-Einstein metric with negative scalar curvature. They are invariant under
biholomorphisms, and hence depend only on the underlying complex structure of
the complex manifold. The study of invariant metrics give rise to intriguing
connections between differential geometry, several complex variables, topology,
nonlinear partial differential equations, and algebraic geometry. For instance,
the invariant metrics are closely related to several long-standing conjectures
such as that a simply-connected, negatively curved, complete K채hler manifold
must be biholomorphic to a bounded complex Euclidean domain. The K채hler-Einstein
metric and the Kobayashi-Royden metric play key roles in understanding the
positivity of canonical bundle. Combining methods from partial differential
equations and several complex variables, the project aims to provide deeper
understanding on the geometry of the invariant metrics, for a large class of
complex manifolds, including complete noncompact K채hler manifolds, compact
complex manifolds, and quasi-projective manifolds. The research will also lead
to applications in algebraic geometry and number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.