* 2103055
* Collaborative Research: Sensitivity of Walker circulation to CO2 forcing during the late Pliocene as an analogue for future climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Ran Feng, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 329,753.00

The proposed study will produce new measurements and simulations of the late-
Pliocene (3.3 – 2.58 million years ago) to determine how the Pacific Walker
Circulation responds to a warmer climate. The Pacific Walker Circulation is a
key feature of the climate system; it impacts temperature and rainfall
worldwide, with important socioeconomic consequences. The late Pliocene is an
attractive target for understanding sensitivity of Pacific Walker Circulation to
changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations because it features biome
distributions, geography, and topography that are similar to the present-day.
Carbon dioxide concentration decreased from roughly today’s level during the
mid-Piacenzian (3.3 – 3.0 million years ago) to around the preindustrial level
during the early-Pleistocene (&lt;2.58 million years ago), coincident with (and
perhaps driving) the expansion of Northern Hemisphere ice sheets. The study will
produce new geochemical data (sedimentary leaf wax isotope data from both
western and eastern sides of the tropical Pacific) and will develop water
isotopologue tracking enabled Earth System Model simulations to investigate
Pacific Walker Circulation sensitivity to late-Pliocene changes in carbon
dioxide concentrations and ice sheets. The products will contribute to the
existing archives of Pliocene Earth System simulations and observations,
providing a community resource for future research and education. A collection
of educational activities at high school, undergraduate, and graduate level are
also planned to train next generation climate scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Strengthening of the Pacific Walker Circulation in response to carbon dioxide
increase is a common prediction from atmosphere-ocean coupled Earth System
Models. Yet, confidence in this prediction is low due to the short duration of
instrumental records, which only chronicle a narrow range of transient climate
responses to carbon dioxide increase. This project aims to test model
predictions of changes in Pacific Walker Circulation during the late-Pliocene
with measurements of deuterium concentrations of sedimentary leaf wax from both
western and eastern sides of the tropical Pacific. The team will develop a
series of water isotopologue tracking enabled Earth System Model simulations and
leaf wax records to understand 1) whether a weaker Pacific Walker Circulation
existed during the mid-Piacenzian; 2) what is the sensitivity of Pacific Walker
Circulation to carbon dioxide decline during the late-Pliocene; and 3) if the
early-Pleistocene glacial expansion strengthened the Pacific Walker
Circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.