* 2103542
* Many-Body Echo, Topological Defects and Long-Range Interactions in Dressed Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Cheng Chin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 638,020.00

This research program attempts to explore some of the most intriguing and even
counterintuitive predictions in quantum physics: (1) evolution of complex
systems described by quantum mechanics is reversible, (2) particles with exotic
properties can emerge from an excited quantum field, and (3) interactions and
entanglement between distant objects can be mediated by virtual excitations in
vacuum. As dynamics of complex quantum systems are frequently intractable by
classical computers, this project employs three sets of experiments using
ultracold atoms and molecules as a simulation platform to test the predictions,
an inspiration originally from physicist Richard Feynman. Here the ultracold
atoms and molecules can be precisely programmed to reproduce the conditions
under which the predictions can be tested. A deeper understanding of these
phenomena will broaden our understanding of the fundamental laws and the origin
of exotic phenomena in the quantum world. The program also embodies an education
component that shares the excitement of discoveries in science with URM high
school students through the S.M.A.R.T. program and with undergraduate students
who will lead and perform independent research in the Undergraduate Research
Center of Levitation Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, for the first
objective, to test reversibility, a number of “many-body echo” schemes will be
developed to reverse the heating of interacting atoms when they are coupled to a
time-dependent electromagnetic field. Such heating is generic and detrimental to
many quantum material and quantum gas experiments. In such systems, a newly
identified symmetry suggests systematic approaches to undo the heating,
analogous to spin echo sequences that rephase in NMR experiments. The second
objective is to investigate topological defects in a quantum gas coupled to a
synthetic gauge field. Here the gauge field is synthesized by modulations of the
potential energy and atomic interactions, and the defects form spontaneously. A
full characterization of the defects will be realized by a systematic
investigation of their dynamical response to the synthetic fields. The third
effort involves bosonic cesium atoms immersed in a degenerate Fermi gas, which
is expected to induce long-range interactions and entanglement between the
bosons. A high-resolution imaging and optical projection will be employed to
test and quantify the correlations of bosons at length scales greater than the
range of direct interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.