* 2103832
* Collaborative Research: ELEMENTS: Tuning-free Anomaly Detection Service
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Elke Rundensteiner, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 04/30/2024
* USD 259,651.00

Finding and understanding anomalous behavior in data is important in many
applications. A large number of anomaly detection algorithms exist, and it can
be difficult to determine which algorithm is best suited to a particular domain.
And once an algorithm is selected, users must tune many parameters manually to
get the algorithm to perform well; this requires in-depth knowledge of the
machine learning process and an understanding of the trade-offs among different
algorithms to select the best performing approach. To address these
difficulties, this team develops a package that can test a range of unsupervised
anomaly detection techniques on a dataset, explore options to identify best-fit,
and classify anomalies with higher accuracy than manual
tuning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will automatically test a range of
unsupervised anomaly techniques on a data set, extract knowledge from the
combined detection results to reliably distinguish between anomalies and normal
data, and use this knowledge as labels to train an anomaly classifier; the goal
is to classify anomalies with an accuracy higher than what is achievable by
thorough manual tuning. The approach can be applied across of a range of data
types and domains. The resulting cyberinfrastructure provides tuning-free
anomaly detection capabilities while making it easy to incorporate domain-
specific requirements. It enables scientists and engineers having little
experience with anomaly detection techniques to steer the anomaly detection
process with domain expertise. Evaluation of the unsupervised anomaly detection
package will use data sets and partnerships with collaborators from the
Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Cyber Security research,
and Signify (formerly Philips Lighting) to ensure that the utility and usability
of the package is verified throughout the development process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
is jointly supported by the NSF Division of Information and Intelligent Systems
within the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.