* 2103829
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Deep Learning for Insider Threat Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Shuhan Yuan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2024
* USD 498,618.00

Insiders are malicious people within organizations who abuse their authorized
access in a manner that compromises the confidentiality, integrity, or
availability of information systems. Attacks from insiders are hard to detect
and can cause significant loss to organizations. While the problem of insider
threat detection has been studied for a long time, the traditional machine
learning-based detection approaches, which heavily rely on feature engineering,
are hard to accurately capture the behavior difference between insiders and
normal users due to the dynamic and adaptive nature of insider threats. Advanced
deep learning techniques provide a new paradigm to learn end-to-end insider
threat detection models from complex user behavior data. This project develops a
deep learning framework for insider threat detection. The project’s novelties
are the development of self-supervised user behavior representation learning,
few-shot learning for malicious session detection, reinforcement learning for
adaptive behavior detection, and counterfactual explanations based malicious
activity detection. The project’s broader significance and importance are to
provide a novel toolset for detecting and mitigating internal security risks,
which can be benefit industries and governments who are frequently under attacks
from malicious insiders.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project develops novel deep
learning approaches to detect malicious sessions through a) developing a self-
supervised representation learning approach to encode user sessions into a low-
dimensional embedding space without using any manually labeled data, b)
advancing a few-shot learning framework via disentangled representation learning
to detect malicious sessions with subtle activity changes, c) adapting
reinforcement learning framework to identify dynamically evolving insider
attacks, and d) proposing a counterfactual explanation approach to detect
malicious activities in malicious sessions. The framework has the potential to
extend to different types of fraud detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.