* 2103889
* Elements: Machine Learning Quark Hadronization
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Philip Ilten, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,989.00

Particle physics explores the fundamental building blocks of nature, and their
interactions. This is accomplished by colliding particles like protons together
at high energies, producing many particles which are then measured by
experimental detectors. To interpret the data, detailed simulations of particle
collisions are needed. Monte Carlo event generators provide the simulations and
are at the core of particle physics discoveries, such as the discovery of the
Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider in 2012, forming a keystone of the
cyberinfrastructure for particle physics. This project addresses a bottle-neck
in Monte Carlo event generators — how quarks are bound together inside protons
and other composite particles through the process of hadronization.
Hadronization models are improved by this project, including the speed of
simulating the process of hadronization, fulfilling a critical step for
understanding the scientific impact of upcoming large-scale particle, neutrino,
and nuclear physics projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Event generators simulate
particle collisions in three steps: a high energy collision at the small
distances, evolution of the event into a large distance (low energy)
configuration, and finally a hadronization into observable particles. The
hadronization step is particularly challenging, because it cannot be directly
calculated from first principles. Since hundreds of particles must be produced
for each particle collision, algorithmic efficiency is necessary and requires
innovative approaches. This project is applying Machine Learning (ML) techniques
to hadronization in order to: connect to existing models of hadronization,
understand the underlying description of data by current event generators
augmented with ML, and provide a fast and accurate ML based simulation of
hadronization. As part of the project, a platform is being built where user
submitted modules, such as this ML hadronization module, can be incorporated in
the most widely used event generator in the particle physics community,
Pythia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.