* 2103480
* Dynamic Model Identification for Inverter-Based Resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Zhixin Miao, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 04/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Historically, synchronous generators, invented in 1880s, are the main work horse
for electricity generation. To date, generic models of synchronous machines for
power grid dynamic analysis are well developed and indispensable for power grid
dynamic analysis. The current power grid is going through a significant
transition. Penetration of inverter-based resources (IBR), e.g., wind, solar,
and batteries, is going up. For example, the U.S. Energy Information
Administration’s hourly electric grid monitor shows that on May 2, 2020, 59% of
power was generated by wind energy in Electric Reliability Council of
Texas.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;IBRs significantly change grid dynamic
characteristics. Unprecedented dynamic phenomena appeared in power grids.
Examples include subsynchronous oscillations that occurred in 2009 and 2017 in
Texas wind farms, low-frequency oscillations in an offshore wind farm that
caused Great Britain power disruption on 9 August 9 2019, subcycle overvoltage
dynamics which triggered large-scale solar photovoltaic (PV) tripping in
California in 2017 and 2018, and instantaneous ac overcurrent dynamics which
caused another large-scale PV tripping event in California in July 2020.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High penetration of IBRs leads to a significant change in
the modeling practice of the bulk power system industry. It is expected that
generic models with standard structures will be used for grid dynamic evaluation
as a future trend. On the other hand, models provided by original equipment
manufacturers (OEMs) are black boxes. Real-code models provided by OEMs are
usually in dynamic-linked library format with input and output specified while
internal details not released. Though these real-code models have been
benchmarked by hardware experiments, detailed structures and parameters are
unknown. Thus, there is an urgent need: How to find the generic model’s
parameters based on what we have, which are essentially black
boxes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to address
the urgent need to design a gray-box model identification framework for IBRs.
This project makes two significant innovations, including (i) first principle
based IBR gray-box model structure design and linear time invariant model
derivation; and (ii) measurement-based IBR model structure parameter estimation
relying on black-box model identification and advanced computing algorithms. The
notable innovation is the integration of the two core technologies from two
different fields: Power Electronics and System Identification. The two core
technologies are: admittance-based black-box model measurement and
identification and gray-box model identification through optimization problem
formulation and solving. The project employs both computer simulation and
hardware experiments for validation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles
real-world IBR modeling challenges and can generate significant impact to the
current power grid industry. The tackled problem falls into the category of
gray-box model identification and this research will also generate reference
values to many other domains (e.g., automotive systems and airplane systems)
that use gray-box model identification approaches for model building and control
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.