* 2103680
* Frameworks: MUSES, Modular Unified Solver of the Equation of State
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Nicolas Yunes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2026
* USD 4,421,367.00

The recent detection of X-rays from hot spots on the surface of rotating neutron
stars and the observation of the gravitational waves emitted when neutron stars
collide hold the promise of revealing the mysteries of nuclear astrophysical
phenomena in a previously inaccessible regime. Meanwhile, in the laboratory,
heavy-ion collision experiments, akin to miniature neutron star mergers, can
reveal complementary information about the properties of matter at extreme
temperatures and densities. A core group of research teams at the University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign, the National Center for Supercomputing Applications,
the University of Houston, Kent State University, and several other auxiliary
institutions are creating a new cyberinfrastructure that can rapidly and
efficiently describe nuclear matter across vastly different densities and
temperatures. This open cyberinfrastructure allows users to understand the
nature of the building blocks of matter through comparisons with data from
NASA’s Neutron Star Interior Composition Explorer, the National Science
Foundation’s Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory, the Department
of Energy’s fixed target Solenoid Tracker at the Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider, and other international facilities. The project provides outreach to
the community through an online science portal that makes high-end computations
more approachable for end users with additional tutorials, extended showcases,
and detailed documentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan creates a
cyberinfrastructure, MUSES (Modular Unified Solver of the EoS), that provides
various scientific communities with novel tools to help answer critical
interdisciplinary questions in nuclear astrophysics, gravitational wave
astrophysics, and heavy-ion experiments. The investigators are creating modern,
efficient and parallelizable code to generate equation-of-state modules in
different regimes of density, pressure, and temperature in either 2, 3, or 4
dimensions. These modules are then integrated into a single, standardized global
calculational engine that allows the fast generation of equations-of-state
across the entire phase diagram of quantum chromodynamics — the fundamental
theory of strong interactions. The project creates a web interface with a
collection of application programming interfaces that allows external users to
run the MUSES cyberinfrastructure remotely and deploy it in high-performance
computing clusters. In particular, the plug-and-play operability of MUSES allows
external users to select parameters in the equation-of-state package to run a
given set of modules and generate a global EoS with a chosen set of observable
byproducts. This project advances the goals of the Division of Physics and the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure of the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Windows on the Universe NSF Big
Idea program, the Physics at the Information Frontier (PIF) program in the
Division of Physics (PHY), and the Division of Astronomical Sciences
(AST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.