* 2103440
* Movement compensation after rotator cuff tear: What is safe and what is risky?
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Meghan Vidt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2024
* USD 238,118.00

Rotator cuff tear is a common musculoskeletal injury that affects more than half
of adults over the age of 60 years. This injury is disabling because it disrupts
the distribution of muscle forces at the shoulder, causing individuals to
develop compensatory movements when performing functional tasks. Some of these
compensations could pose a risk for a secondary injury, but the associations
between compensation strategies and secondary injury risk are not clear. The
goal of this project is to develop a robust computational model of the shoulder
to study the effect of a rotator cuff tear on movement compensation and injury
risk. Outcomes from analyses performed with the model will highlight targets for
design of rehabilitation strategies that promote movement compensation in ways
that do not increase secondary injury risk. Research outcomes will also be
translated into educational outreach activities at the University and K-12
levels, including adoption of modeling activities in the classroom and
partnering with a local high school teacher for a Research Experience for
Teachers, further broadening the impact of this work. Developing a model will
help us improve our understanding of the functional effects of rotator cuff
tear, including movement compensation and secondary shoulder injury risk. These
outcomes will benefit the millions of adults in the US who experience movement
limitations and secondary injury due to a rotator cuff
tear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this study are to develop and
validate a computational musculoskeletal model of the shoulder complex to
characterize upper limb movement and identify mechanisms of injury after a
rotator cuff tear. Existing models do not capture all articulations (scapulo-
thoracic, glenohumeral translation) and soft tissue (ligament) contributions at
the shoulder complex that are needed to fully understand the implications of
injury. To achieve this, the current project will develop a biofidelic
computational musculoskeletal model of the shoulder complex that includes
detailed descriptions of joint articulations and soft tissue structures.
Simulations with the model will be performed to characterize movement
compensation in the context of rotator cuff tear and examine the associations
between compensation and secondary injury risk. The modeling tool developed here
will be used to inform our understanding of the functional effects of rotator
cuff tear and expose targets for rehabilitation. This model will be made
available to the community through an open-source software platform, providing a
notable advancement for the biomechanics community and broadening the impact of
this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.