* 2103813
* CRII: AF: RUI: New Approaches for Space-Efficient Similarity Search
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Samuel McCauley, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2024
* USD 148,707.00

Given a large dataset, how can one find a similar item to a given query?
Preprocessing the dataset to quickly find these similar items is called
"similarity search." Similarity search is a fundamental computing problem with
applications in data science, machine learning, and bioinformatics. Similarity
search has been studied extensively both in theory and in practice, and the
state of the art has been highly optimized. Unfortunately, many previous
techniques require a very large amount of extra storage space to help answer
queries quickly. This can be a significant limitation, as storage space is
limited by the hardware being used to store the dataset. Surprisingly, space-
efficient similarity-search methods have only been studied in a few restricted
settings. This project seeks to close this gap, first by creating black-box
methods that can be used for space-efficient similarity search in a far wider
variety of settings, and then by extending known methods to achieve improved
results. This project will be integrated into undergraduate courses and research
opportunities at Williams College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
solve this problem from several new directions. First, Fiat-Naor function
inversion is a cryptographic technique giving a time-space tradeoff for
inverting functions. Initial results show that Fiat-Naor inversion can be used
to give a black-box result that improves the space usage of a wide variety of
similarity-search algorithms. Even better, Fiat-Naor inversion can be integrated
with known space-efficient similarity-search techniques to give improved query
times using the same space. Furthermore, it appears that Fiat-Naor inversion
interfaces particularly well with similarity search, and that tuning Fiat-Naor
inversion to similarity search can give even better bounds. Second, the project
will look at similarity search in the context of text strings. Similarity search
on text strings has a rich literature of distinctive techniques tailor-made to
the case of strings, generally using trie-based data structures. This project
seeks to combine these techniques with more recent advances made in other areas
(usually using hashing), to achieve better bounds. Finally, this project is
examining heuristics for edit-distance similarity search, with the goal of
matching or improving the current (space-inefficient) state of the art while
retaining very small space requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.