* 2103520
* Stream Corridor Hydrologic Controls on Carbon Dioxide Fluxes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* David Boutt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2024
* USD 368,508.00

Rivers and streams are increasingly recognized as important sources of
greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2) to the atmosphere; however, the
full magnitude of emissions and the processes that control them remain highly
uncertain. This project will combine innovative field characterizations of
stream hydrology and carbon processing with advanced computer models to improve
our ability to predict and scale stream CO2 fluxes. Results of this research
will advance our understanding of an important component of the global carbon
cycle and the ability to monitor changes into the future, and generated computer
models will be made publicly available. This research will also comprise the
training of a PhD student and undergraduate researcher, and it will serve as the
focus of a 1-day educational module for a diverse group of high school students
through the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratoryâ€™s summer Field Biology
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to develop
quantitative models of stream corridor hydrologic processes, their controls on
watershed-level stream CO2 fluxes, and their spatial and temporal modes of
variability. Through intensive field monitoring of the upper East River
watershed in the Colorado Rocky Mountains, the project will address a number of
research goals: (1) Provide direct observations of groundwater inputs to streams
using high resolution temperature mapping and geochemical characterization to
understand their contributions to CO2 fluxes and role in driving spatiotemporal
variability through connectivity and flowpath variations; (2) Disentangle in-
stream CO2 production between water-column and hyporheic zone sources and
characterize the dominant processes that control CO2 exchange with the hyporheic
zone through a series of reach-scale monitoring efforts and tracer release
experiments; (3) Incorporate process-based representations of groundwater inputs
and stream corridor production, along with transport and turbulent gas exchange,
into reach- and watershed-scale stream network models of CO2 to improve
predictions and monitoring of stream concentrations and
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.