* 2103437
* FET: SMALL: New Abstraction and Design Automation for Complex Computations with DNA Using Fractional Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* sayed ahmad salehi, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,396.00

The use of DNA-based technologies in complex biomolecular circuits is a quickly
developing field of synthetic biology that has the potential to disrupt how one
designs smart drugs or delivers targeted treatments. Given their biological
nature and in-vivo compatibility, other applications for synthesized DNA-based
computational circuits that cannot be foreseen now will surely follow. Recent
advances in biotechnology have shown the potential for implementing complex DNA-
based circuits. However, as the complexity of these circuits increases, they
become slower and more difficult to be designed efficiently. As shown in
silicon-based technology, new design approaches and automation tools are
essential for progress in the field. This project aims to develop a systematic
design framework and new approaches for fast and complex molecular computing
circuits using fractional coding and to investigate the use of this framework
for the efficient and scalable implementation of artificial neural networks
(ANNs). Along with the development of the design automation framework, a
companion software, called FUNDNA, that maps mathematical FUNctions to DNA
reactions will be produced. This freely available, open-source software with its
tutorials and documentation will transform bio-design automation research by
enabling efficient design of molecular circuits for complex computations with
mathematical representation without requiring biological/chemical skills. The
tool will make the creation of novel complex DNA computing circuits faster,
cheaper, and more accessible. This project includes two major educational
initiatives with the goal of broadening participation in STEM. First, students
who are underrepresented in engineering fields will be recruited through the
Kentucky-West Virginia LSAMP program, the University of Kentucky (UK) Student
Chapter of the National Society of Black Engineers, and UK Student Support
Services to be trained to work on the research project. A new course, Molecular
Programming and DNA Computing Circuits, will be developed to integrate the
knowledge and findings of this research and to help train students in the area
of DNA computing. Second, an iGEM (International Genetically Engineered Machine)
chapter, the first iGEM team in the state of Kentucky, will be established to
share resources and compete in international synthetic biology competitions.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will enable systematic design of efficient
molecular circuits for fast computation of complex mathematical functions. The
design of molecular computing circuits will be systematic because the project
will develop a new level of design abstraction that accepts mathematical
representation of desired computations. It will create an end-to-end compiler
that transfers the mathematical representation to chemical reaction network, and
then generates candidate DNA reactions and sequences. The developed circuits
will be fast because they work based on fractional coding. While for traditional
molecular encoding each input/output is represented by a molecular
concentration, for fractional coding inputs/outputs are ratios of pairs of
molecular concentrations. Molecular circuits based on traditional encoding need
to wait for the final (at equilibrium) concentrations of molecules, whereas for
circuits based on fractional coding, the ratios reach their final values much
faster than molecular concentrations. This project will expand the computational
power of molecular computing circuits to complex computations through two
approaches: 1) it will map all electronic stochastic computing logic circuits to
molecular circuits, 2) it will implement finite state Markov chains by molecular
reactions. Finally, the project will develop new approaches for performing ANNs
with molecular reactions. The goal is to demonstrate how fractional coding can
improve molecular computation, and DNA computing in particular, through three
objectives. 1) Development of a design automation framework and a companion
software, called FUNDNA, that maps mathematical FUNctions to DNA reactions. 2)
Investigation of complex computations such as neural networks based on
fractional coding. 3) Experimental DNA implementation of basic molecular
computing circuits using fractional coding. This project will have a significant
impact on the field of bio-design automation because it will introduce and
attempt to realize the idea of automated design of molecular circuits, starting
from high level mathematical or algorithmic representation. While there is prior
work in molecular computation of different sorts of mathematical functions, no
systematic method has been proposed for computing complex general mathematical
functions within a molecular circuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.