* 2103256
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Collective Intelligence for Proactive Autonomous Driving (CI-PAD)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2023
* USD 913,956.00

The aim of this project is to develop real-time situational awareness that is
shared via vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-network (V2X). The approach
is to combine the perception of sensors with interpretation of their situation
to enable safer decisions, and take into account the limitations of the
communication between vehicles and infrastructure. A highway system that
supports autonomous and self-driven vehicles will include infrastructure sensors
and onboard vehicle sensors, with massive connectivity among them and
distributed intelligence across the entire transportation network. The resulting
collective intelligence is one where autonomous vehicles serve as mobile sensors
that augment one another along with fixed infrastructure sensors, to construct a
real-time picture of traffic. This real-time picture is used to develop
proactive driving actions that optimize traffic flow and minimize accident risk.
The broader impacts include focused mentoring of undergraduate students who are
interested in careers that require graduate training, to broaden participation
in the fields of computing and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
organize an interdisciplinary project in signal processing and machine learning,
control and optimization, communication and network science. The collective
intelligence framework for proactive driving includes the following modules: 1)
Scene Construction, consisting of signal processing and machine learning for
constructing a representation of the driving environment from multi-modal multi-
view sensors; 2) Situational Interpretation, consisting of driving environment
dynamic analysis at progressive levels; 3) Decision Making, consisting of
optimization and control to support proactive driving for safety and optimized
flow; and 4) A Failsafe Network, consisting of communication and network science
that supports optimized traffic flow under nominal conditions of sensing and
communication, and moderated flow under conditions of compromised sensing and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.