* 2103778
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Shared Data-Delivery Infrastructure to Enable Discovery with Next Generation Dark Matter and Computational Astrophysics Experiments
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Matthew Turk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2024
* USD 264,014.00

Modern laboratories provide unprecedented sensitivity to the many different
galactic-messengers that stream through our planet by the minute: cosmic rays,
light from distant galaxies, elusive neutrinos, and possibly dark matter.
Combining this information with models and data from simulations provides
insight into how our universe began and continues to evolve -- the scales at
which objects first collapsed, the development of stars and galaxies, and the
dynamics within our own galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, this data is often
inaccessible: scientists within an experiment or community struggle with the
complex, custom-built programs they use to access the data. And switching to a
standard format is usually not an option: these data formats are designed for
requirements that often do not include cross-experiment synthesis or
linking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Junior scientists - let alone the public - can
struggle to generate new insights from the data because the data is difficult to
access, understand and analyze. The cross-cutting inquiry that could arise from
clever reuse and combination of data from different experiments and simulations
is rarely conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes data accessible
both within and across collaborations, providing the infrastructure to search
for signals in detectors across the globe. Extending existing efforts to improve
data access makes this project possible: yt is software that provides uniform
access to simulation data; Kaitai is a data-description language that enables
easy access to any data format; Rucio and other tools provide a standard
interface that allows data downloads; and ServiceX can identify, subset and
process data with little effort from the end
user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists have built experiments that offer an
incredible wealth of information about our world. This project works to make
that information accessible to everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Personal Data-Delivery infrastructure
(PONDD) addresses the data challenges of existing dark matter and astrophysics
experiments while requiring no changes to existing data formats. This non-
invasive, no-changes-necessary support for any file format provides
opportunities to expand beyond our two identified use cases, dark matter
searches and astrophysics simulations, into many other data-driven science
domains that rely on custom file formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
delivers an infrastructure that seamlessly delivers data in a well-supported
format (such as Parquet) from multiple sources. To successfully deliver cross-
experiment data to end users, we bring together ongoing projects from High
Energy Physics and the broader NSF community; while this project will involve
development of software products (yt and Kaitai) it will also include synthesis
of existing investments in cyberinfrastructure and efforts to improve their
long-term sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Office of Advanced Infrastructure in the Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering and the Division of Physics in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.