* 2103088
* Collaborative Research:  Probing Causal Links Among Volcanism, Dust, and Carbon Burial in the Permian - a Harbinger of the Future?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ying Cui, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 62,230.00

Humanity has undertaken an unintentional experiment on Earth’s climate system,
causing atmospheric carbon to increase to levels never before experienced by
humans. The climate system is now responding in palpable ways, and the
triggering of positive feedbacks will accelerate changes, posing large risks to
the biosphere in general and human populations in particular. Increasing
concerns of potential runaway effects have spurred talk of intentional
geoengineering to stabilize Earth’s temperatures, and its large ice sheets. A
commonly discussed approach is solar radiation management (SRM), the intentional
injection of atmospheric aerosols to mimic the planetary shading induced
naturally by explosive volcanism. However, the unintended consequences of such
action remain unknown, and could initiate even larger disruptions of the
biosphere. This project targets an interval of Earth history analogous to today—
a time with large continental ice sheets and abundant atmospheric dust followed
by “greenhouse” warming— to explore how Earth’s climate and biospheric systems
responded to sustained explosive volcanism. This research will test a number of
hypotheses centered on the idea that frequent, explosive volcanism over the
equatorial Pangean supercontinent ~300 million years ago increased delivery of
micronutrients (e.g. iron) from atmospheric dust, leading to enhanced plant
growth and development of widespread anoxia in marine ecosystems. Recent
research documents large accumulations of dust deposits ~300 Mya, a remarkably
elevated but enigmatic micronutrient content of these dusts, and abundant
explosive volcanism, especially at equatorial latitudes. The confluence of
volcanism, atmospheric dustiness, and nutrient reactivity is posited to have
greatly affected Earth’s carbon cycle, and thus climate and biosphere. If
society embarks upon intentional geoengineering, it is imperative to learn from
Earth’s past to understand potential future consequences. In addition to
shedding light on behavior of the climate system through publication and
dissemination of results, this project will help prepare several students and
early-career researchers for the STEM workforce, enhancing the nation’s
capabilities in science and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work explores
novel aspects of climate-system behavior in two ways: 1— the role of repeated,
high-frequency explosive volcanism in affecting Earth’s climate directly, and 2—
linkages that tie explosive volcanism to enhanced nutrient release from mineral
dusts and consequent ecosystem fertilization that affects the carbon cycle. To
test this, field and laboratory work will be done on a well-exposed section of
volcanic rocks representative of a vast center of volcanism in paleoequatorial
Pangea; data will be collected on volcanic recurrence intervals and sulfur
loading, and on the nutrient richness of coeval mineral dusts. These data will
enable modeling of how this volcanism affected climate by both 1— direct
“shading” of the planet, and 2— altering atmospheric acidity, stimulating
micronutrient content of dust and thus fertilizing marine ecosystems. OU
Geosciences and Science Education faculty will prepare and deliver long-term
professional development for Oklahoma teachers, to increase climate science
literacy amongst secondary school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.