* 2103219
* Bioengineering Leukemic Bone Marrow Niche for Dissecting the Heterogeneous Leukemia Chemo-resistance Mechanisms
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Weiqiang Chen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2024
* USD 314,000.00

B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is the most common cancer found in
children. B-ALL occurs when our bone marrow, which is responsible for producing
red and white blood cells, starts making immature white blood cells (termed
lymphoblasts) instead of the mature white blood cells our body needs to defend
against infection and disease. In recent years, B-ALL patient survival has
improved dramatically with multi-drug chemotherapy treatments, but it remains a
leading cause of cancer-related deaths in children. Compared to solid tumors, a
comprehensive understanding of the leukemic bone marrow niche remains in infancy
due to the limitations of current in vitro (in lab) and in vivo (in living)
systems. This project will engineer a unique human leukemic bone marrow niche
model to study critical mechanisms underlying chemotherapy resistance. Research
and education are integrated through high school, undergraduate, and graduate
training and outreach activities, a hands-on soft lithography educational
module, and a summer workshop on emerging biomedical research areas, so as to
encourage more young students to pursue studies in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
microfluidics-based, three-dimensional human ‘Leukemia-on-a-Chip’ platform to
recapitulate the in vivo bone marrow tissue architecture and immunity in order
to dissect the heterogeneous leukemia niche associated resistance mechanisms in
chemotherapy. This biomimetic leukemic bone marrow niche model will be
engineered with real-time imaging, immune cytokine measurement, and precise
control over the hematopoietic, perivascular, endosteal stromal niche and
extracellular hypoxia signatures. This study aims to apply the unique
organotypic microphysiological system to (1) Interrogate how the stromal niche
cells differentially regulate B-ALL survival and chemo-resistance through
hijacked CXCL12/CXCR4, VLA-4/VCAM-1, and NF-κB signaling; (2) Engineer the
leukemic bone marrow immune niche with precise control over input immune cell
populations and in situ cytokine monitoring to identify critical immune
regulatory factors that underlie B-ALL chemo-resistance; (3) Assess chemotherapy
efficacy for different subtypes of B-ALL samples and to distinguish and co-
target the bone marrow niche signals to improve chemotherapy outcomes. Such a
tissue engineered Leukemia-on-a-Chip model can be further translated to B-ALL
patient-derived samples and, potentially, clinical trials for reliable
preclinical tests to optimize and personalize chemotherapies for a broader
population of leukemia patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.