* 2103574
* BCSER: Increasing Interest in Ecological and Environmental Sciences to Broaden Participation of African Americans in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/09/2020,11/30/2023
* Mark Dugo, Johnson C. Smith University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 11/30/2023
* USD 327,735.00

This project explores approaches to increase the participation of African
Americans in environmental and ecological sciences. The project aims to achieve
this goal by designing and testing an intervention designed to improve the
recruitment of African Americans into environmental and ecological sciences
programs and careers. The project will support a combination of exploratory
research and professional development activities. The professional development
plan centers on helping the investigator acquire expertise in qualitative
research methods and in the engagement of minority populations in a formal
research setting. Professional development activities will include site visits
to study locations, mentoring from coaches and advisors, and attendance at
relevant conferences. This project aims to position the investigator to conduct
longer term research towards broadening participation in ecological and
environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is grounded in
identity-based motivation theory and cultural mismatch theory of inequality, and
uses social science constructs to collect and analyze the research data. The
project has three research questions: (1) Do perceived historical and
contemporary constraints influence students' pursuit of ecological and
environmentally related STEM disciplines? (2) Does the intervention induce an
alignment of African American identity and value system towards greater interest
and motivation in ecological and environmentally related STEM disciplines? and
(3) Does the intervention induce a shift in perceptions concerning the
importance of ecological integrity and biodiversity? The intervention will
engage undergraduate students in a summer research and enrichment experience
that incorporates constructs to increase interest and motivation to pursue
ecological and environmental disciplines. Pilot data will be collected on the
effectiveness of the experience and analyzed using qualitative methods. The
research will provide insights about the influence of contextualized
interventions in addressing STEM education research
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported through the EHR Core
Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition
that is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality
fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.