* 2103011
* East Asian monsoon response to changes in Earth’s orbit: A new stable isotope modeling study
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jung-Eun Lee, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 371,311.00

Understanding the timing, intensity, duration, and spatial extent of Asian
monsoon rainfall is important for the large population across Asia. Meanwhile, a
perspective from geological records of past climates can give insights into how
the Asian monsoon will respond to anthropogenic forcing of future climate
scenarios. Speleothems from caves had created a unique opportunity to study past
climates because the oxygen isotopic ratios preserved in their minerals record
environmental information when they were formed. Oxygen isotope ratios have been
shown to exhibit a close relationship with the amount of summer solar radiation
in the northern hemisphere, which varies due to changes in Earth’s orbit.
However, so far, there is no consensus on why the oxygen isotopic composition in
speleothems follows the Earth’s orbital variation. This project will compare
observed and modeled isotopic composition to inform a better understanding of
the climate dynamics of the East Asian monsoon, thus improving our predictive
ability of the East Asian monsoon. Additionally, the researchers will work with
the next generation of scientists, engineers, and citizens by (1) participating
in Brown Earth Sciences curriculum design and teaching program to the local
schools with a high percentage of under-represented students and (2) providing
research opportunities in climate science to undergraduate researchers from
minority-serving colleges and universities during the
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes incorporating stable water
isotopes into the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) Coupled Climate
Model, allowing researchers to compare observed and modeled isotopes and
disentangle what causes the variation of isotopes. Previous research from this
research group supports the hypothesis that precipitation in the East Asian
monsoon region is sensitive to summer insolation, emphasizing the importance of
ocean dynamics in understanding the Asian monsoon system. This research will
validate the incorporated isotope model using present-day observations, perform
past climate model simulations with a fully coupled ocean-atmosphere-land
configuration, and assess the role of ocean circulation in the dynamics of the
East Asian monsoon in response to the Earth’s orbit
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.