* 2103676
* Collaborative Research: H-NOX homologues in biofilm formation: A combined molecular and systems level approach.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Tanner Schaub, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 870,776.00

Biofilms are stationary communities of bacteria that adhere to various surfaces.
Inhabitation of a biofilm often makes bacteria resistant to clearance strategies
that are effective against their free-living (planktonic) counterparts. As such,
understanding the molecular cues that promote switching between the stationary
and untethered lifestyles can guide our responses to biofilm formation in both
beneficial and detrimental contexts. This project seeks to characterize cellular
changes accompanying biofilm formation at the systems level, as well as the role
of a particular family of sensor proteins in biofilm formation/dissolution at
the molecular level. Student training is a major emphasis of this work. Students
will be co-mentored by a team of scientists with expertise in diverse techniques
and will have the opportunity to conduct transformative research at national
laboratories. A proteomics workshop for graduate students will also be developed
to train the next generation of scientists in this cutting-edge
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective is to define conserved
and novel mechanisms of bacterial signaling relevant to biofilm formation across
multiple species using advanced structural and proteomics methods. At the
molecular level, this will include determining the mechanisms by which the heme
nitric oxide/oxygen binding proteins (H-NOX) sense oxidants and/or nitric oxide
(NO), resulting in biofilm formation or dissolution. Structure determination
using X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) will be
utilized as well as X-ray absorption fine-structure (EXAFS). Advanced proteomics
and phosphoproteomics will detail the signaling networks involved in this
process at the organismal level using H-NOX deletion mutants. This combination
of approaches will yield detailed mechanistic understanding of an important
signaling process and how it has evolved to meet the needs of diverse bacterial
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.