* 2103785
* Collaborative Research: ELEMENTS: The LROSE Science Gateway LIDAR/RADAR Analysis In The Cloud
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Dixon, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 295,965.00

Remote sensing observations from weather radars and lidars consist of a
tremendous amount of raw data. Analysis of this data is often time-consuming,
slowing the translation of data to scientific insights. The research team, under
prior NSF funding, developed the Lidar Radar Open Software Environment (LROSE)
which consists of freely available tools to help analyze and visualize data.
This award will take the next step by making LROSE available online, eliminating
the need for a complicated installation on local computers and taking advantage
of data sets on the cloud. The impact of this project will be on all areas of
science that make use of lidar and radar data, such as for severe weather and
air quality. The online approach will also make it possible for educators to set
up exercises and teaching aids for students in a classroom, along with the
relevant data and documentation for learning
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon the Lidar Radar Open
Software Environment, which is a software toolbox for analyzing radar and lidar
data, by developing a fully functional science gateway for LROSE. The research
team will integrate LROSE into a web portal environment, thereby allowing ready
accessibility to computational resources via web browser interfaces and allowing
users to move data directly within the cloud. The intent of this CSSI Elements
award is to facilitate access to analysis and data processing tools, reducing
barriers to effective science and expanding the user base. The project has two
major development components: 1) the underlying infrastructure, including the
gateway, the data handling layer and data visualization capabilities, and 2) the
scientific software modules that allow users to perform experiments using the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.