* 2103426
* Collaborative Research: Advanced and Highly Integrated Power Conversion Systems for Grid Stability and Resiliency
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Junjian Qi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 04/30/2024
* USD 219,370.00

To accelerate residential and commercial photovoltaic penetration to meet future
utility and grid needs, energy storage and innovative power electronics need to
be integrated into photovoltaic systems. The integration of energy storage into
the photovoltaic system can enable grid support, load shifting, peak shaving,
energy backup, reduced power loss in transmission and distribution networks, as
well as optimization of power utilization. Transforming the grid into a more
distributed configuration will require system capabilities well beyond today's
simple grid-tied photovoltaic inverters. The goal of this project is to create
scalable, modular, highly efficient, and flexible architecture and control for
photovoltaic systems, energy storage, and the grid. This smart, highly
integrated system will enable higher penetration of solar energy into the grid
and disrupt the conventional energy system by delivering an integrated,
efficient, and reliable solar energy solution. The higher penetration will lead
to higher photovoltaic deployment and growth in photovoltaic industry, increase
job creation, and boost economy. One fully integrated product will not only
reduce installation cost and complexity but will also ensure simplified supply
chain management from module supplier to end user. Such technological
integration of hardware and advanced control systems with its modularity and
expandability will pave way for even higher photovoltaic penetration.
Educational outreach activities will be performed by integrating the proposed
research to undergraduate or graduate level courses, making the hardware
inverter testbed accessible to undergraduate and K-12 students, organizing
panels and tutorials at IEEE power electronics and power and energy society
conferences, and hosting open-access webinars. Engaging minority and under-
represented groups will be implemented throughout such outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will propose the
development and deployment of a novel design of a highly efficient, modulator,
distributedly controlled, and scalable power system with the capability for
integration and coordination of photovoltaic, local energy storage, and a
bidirectional smart micro-inverter. The hardware consists of a three-port
single-stage power conversion circuit integrated with photovoltaic, battery, and
grid with a novel topology known as the flying capacitor multilevel inverter
with Gallium Nitride devices. The proposed decentralized model predictive
control will address challenges including state-of-charge control of energy
storage, photovoltaic smoothing, maximum power point tracking, and energy
arbitrage. This will support grid functionalities, provide energy shifting/peak
shaving, and apply power management strategy for stable and predictable power in
both grid-connected and islanded modes. Moreover, a novel optimization problem
for coordinating multiple three-port inverters considering optimal trade-off
between voltage regulation and reactive power sharing and technical constraints
on voltage and reactive power is to be formulated. A primal-dual gradient based
distributed solving algorithm is to be developed to address the unique
challenges including non-separable objective function, unavailable global
average voltage, and globally coupled reactive power constraints. The proposed
algorithm will not only effectively and efficiently solve the formulated
microgrid control problem but will also benefit the distributed optimization and
control community by providing a useful method for distributedly solving a
general form optimization problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.