* 2103843
* Large-scale CoPe Hub: Rising Voices, Changing Coasts: The National Indigenous and Earth Sciences Convergence Hub
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Marika Holland, Haskell Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Manda S. Adams
* 06/30/2027
* USD 6,004,344.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The Rising Voices, Changing Coasts (RVCC) Hub will
create a space for convergence of disciplines and epistemologies where
Indigenous knowledge-holders from diverse coastal regions will work with
university-trained social, ecosystem, and physical Earth system scientists and
students on transformative convergence research to address coastal hazards in
the contexts of their communities. The goals are to 1) co-produce convergence
research with social and Earth sciences and Indigenous Knowledges to improve
modeling and prediction of coastal processes that support decision making by
Indigenous communities around mitigation and adaptation, 2) develop a
successful, inclusive framework for cross-cultural convergence research that can
be adopted and adapted by future research collaborations, 3) broaden
participation amongst Indigenous students and researchers, and train a new
generation of diverse convergence research scientists, 4) increase
administrative and technological infrastructure to support current and future
research with and by Indigenous scientists and communities. The place-based
research is focused on four regions: Alaska (Arctic), Louisiana (Gulf of
Mexico), Hawai‘i (Pacific Islands), and Puerto Rico (Caribbean
Islands).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RVCC Hub will combine Indigenous Knowledges,
modeling capabilities, archeological records, GIS techniques, socio-economic
analysis, and hazards research. Together, these data, transdisciplinary
analysis, and convergent findings will enhance fundamental understanding of the
interconnected physical, cultural, social, and economic processes that result in
coastal hazards and climate resilience opportunities and increase the accuracy,
relevance, and usability of model predictions on multi-decadal timescales.
Selecting four diverse marine coastal regions - ranging from tropical to Arctic
- will allow this hub to compare similarities and differences across the regions
in order to build understanding of largescale drivers of change, how these
drivers manifest and are observed locally, and how Indigenous communities vary
in their adaptive responses. By focusing on marine coastal areas in Indigenous
territories, this project will be able to use the fullest capabilities of Earth
system modeling, test the extent of downscaling capabilities, and couple those
data with ancestral observations and contemporary adaptive capacity of
communities. Bringing together Indigenous Knowledges with Earth system modeling
will also test the efficacy of converging multi-epistemological ways of knowing.
Therefore, this Hub will advance the physical understanding and modeling
capabilities of climate scientists; enhance documentation and invest in
Indigenous methodologies of climate and ecological knowledge, and test how these
distinct frameworks of data and knowledge can co-inform and advance one another.
The trans-disciplinary, cross-cultural team will advance understanding of how
data and knowledge can inform community decision-makers and how community-held
knowledge can make science more applicable in building resilience. Improved
modeling capabilities will be incorporated into the Community Earth System Model
and will be publicly released and freely available. The RVCC Hub’s analysis will
enable Indigenous participants to identify the likelihood and nature of future
coastal changes, and to develop mitigation and adaptation strategies that target
their priorities. The student and postdoctoral opportunities that integrated
into this project will broaden participation amongst Indigenous students and
researchers, and train a new generation of diverse convergence research
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.