* 2103114
* Collaborative Research: Mineral-associated organic matter: an overlooked source and mediator of bioavailable nitrogen
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Grandy, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 260,000.00

Plants need nitrogen (N) to survive, but it remains a mystery exactly where,
when, and how plants acquire enough N from the soil. This N dilemma limits
productivity and leads to challenges in predicting and managing N cycling in
natural and managed systems. This project examines a new, more holistic
perspective on the terrestrial N cycle that encompasses multiple sources of N
from the soil. The research focuses on the previously overlooked role of
mineral-associated organic matter (MAOM) as a potential major driver of N supply
to plants. Long-standing theories consider MAOM to be largely inaccessible to
plants and microbes, but emerging evidence highlights the need to re-examine
this wholesale classification. This work examines the potential N-supplying
capacity of MAOM in the zone of soil surrounding roots, a critical nutrient
hotspot. Ultimately, the results provide new insights into the role of MAOM as a
mediator of bioavailable N, which will challenge our fundamental understanding
of the processes that regulate soil N cycling in terrestrial ecosystems. The
work involves participation in a program at Oklahoma State University, which
aims to increase the participation of under-represented populations in STEM
disciplines. The project also supports a collaboration with the Oklahoma
Conservation Commission to develop a student-led workshop and video series on
soil biogeochemistry with specific relevance to soil organic matter and MAOM
management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective is to quantify and
characterize the intrinsic and plant-mediated capacity of MAOM to supply
bioavailable N. The guiding hypothesis emphasizes the dependence of MAOM-N
supply on the intrinsic physical-chemical properties of MAOM, the
bioavailability of MAOM relative to other forms of soil organic matter, and
plant-microbial mechanisms that can facilitate the mobilization of N from MAOM.
The project pursues the following objectives: 1) Examine edaphic factors
regulating plant and microbial access to MAOM-N; 2) Identify mechanisms driving
MAOM-N mobilization; 3) Assess feedbacks between plant investment in belowground
carbon and MAOM-N mobilization. The study assesses soils varying in geochemical
properties using laboratory and greenhouse experiments. Experimental
manipulations combined with stable isotope tracing allow for the tracing of
MAOM-derived N into bioavailable pools, as well as uptake by microbes and
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.