* 2103301
* CDS&amp;E: Physics-driven computational tools for photonic design
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Fan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

Device innovation today typically requires scientists or engineers to perform a
time-consuming iterative procedure involving design and simulation. The design
process is based on the application of expert knowledge to identify plausible
device layouts, which are validated with a general physics-based algorithm and
iteratively improved. New advances in machine learning have the potential to be
disruptive in this innovation cycle, due to the ability for such algorithms to
learn and process data in entirely new ways. This proposal focuses on the
development of new machine learning tools that can automate and dramatically
accelerate the design and simulation procedure by orders of magnitude faster
speeds. These concepts will be based on a new class of algorithms that bring
together conventional concepts in the data sciences with physics. Optical
devices that can serve as miniaturized optical systems will be used as a testbed
to benchmark the performance of these algorithms, though the concepts are
ultimately general to scientific computing problems. If successful, these
algorithms will serve as the foundation for a new class of computer-aided design
tools that will help scientists and engineers innovate new classes of devices
and systems with great expediency. The education goal of this project is to
develop and disseminate new curricula that inspires high school students to
consider STEM as a career pathway. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this proposal is to create an algorithmic platform for the global
optimization of freeform photonic devices that can scale to large area, three-
dimensional, multi-functional devices. The fundamental roadblock that is
targeted is the inability of existing global freeform optimization methods to
practically scale to complex three-dimensional systems, due to scaling limits in
the sampling and simulation of devices within the global design space. These
fundamental scaling limits will be addressed by creating data-driven and
physics-driven neural network electromagnetic surrogate solvers that can couple
with new global search and design space evaluation tools based on deep network
training. The proposed concepts will build on a recent discovery that
population-based global freeform optimization can be performed by training a
generative neural network using physics-based calculations. The expected
outcomes are the development of new concepts and broadly applicable algorithms
that will enable the global optimization of three-dimensional dielectric
electromagnetic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.