* 2103625
* New tools for static and dynamic imaging of antiferromagnetic textures using Bragg diffraction of coherent x rays
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Valery Kiryukhin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 439,422.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials are extensively
utilized in modern society in a wide variety of fields, ranging from energy
generation to transportation to microelectronic devices. Antiferromagnets are
the magnets in which the magnetism exists locally but cancels out on a
macroscopic scale. Recently, it was realized that antiferromagnets can be used
as media for novel electronic devices with enhanced operational characteristics.
These materials also exhibit exotic quantum properties of fundamental scientific
interest. Some of these properties may find applications in future quantum
information technologies. A fundamental property of any magnet is the formation
of small uniform spatial regions called domains. These domains are essential for
the operation of magneto-electronic devices, especially for information storage.
To understand the quantum properties of antiferromagnets, and to ensure the
correct operation of devices based on them, it is essential to image the
domains. Time-resolved imaging is of a special importance. Imaging
antiferromagnetic domains is difficult. In this project, a novel imaging
technique using the x-rays produced by synchrotrons is utilized to investigate
the static and dynamic behavior of the domains in antiferromagnets relevant to
the studies of quantum matter, and to prospective electronics applications. The
technique is uniquely suitable for many domain types previously inaccessible to
imaging, especially to time-resolved imaging. The aim is to understand how these
materials behave on the microscopic level, and how to control them. In the long
term, such studies are expected to contribute towards the better understanding
of quantum matter, to the development of faster and smaller electronic devices,
and perhaps even to novel quantum information technologies. The proposed work
will be carried out at large-scale National synchrotron research facilities.
There is a recognized need for young specialists in modern synchrotron x-ray
scattering techniques. Such specialists will be trained under this project,
contributing to the fulfillment of this long-standing national
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Project
utilizes a new method of imaging antiferromagnetic (AFM) domain walls and AFM
domain textures. The method is based on interference effects in the reflected
coherent x-ray beam under the condition of resonant magnetic Bragg scattering.
It produces real-space images in a single exposure, without any need for image
reconstruction procedures. Its unique capabilities include direct real-space
imaging of AFM phase domains, and real-space studies of the AFM domain dynamics
on millisecond to hours timescales. The project aims at the demonstration and
development of these and several other capabilities of the new imaging method.
It will be applied to study AFM domain textures and their dynamics in several
systems of high current interest. These systems include magnets with topological
AFM domain textures (vortices and skyrmions), compounds utilized in AFM
spintronics, including topological AFM spintronics, and multiferroics. This
technique should provide valuable means for the characterization of active AFM
media in device-like structures utilized both in applied and fundamental science
studies. This should be relevant, for example, for the investigations of the
exotic Hall-type effects in antiferromagnets, such as at the AFM anomalous Hall
effect, the topological Hall effect, etc. For AFM spintronics device
engineering, understanding the domain dynamics is key for ensuring device
stability and high operation speed. Dynamic studies of the prototype AFM device
media will therefore be carried out. Exploratory in-situ studies of the AFM
domain control methods relevant to spintronics applications will also be
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.