* 2103016
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Variability Changes during Abrupt Climate Events
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Lisa Zuraw, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 132,915.00

The research team aims to reconstruct changes in variability of the El
Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) during the last deglacial period by measuring
coral delta O-18 on previously collected samples from Vanuatu in the tropical
southwestern Pacific Ocean. Modern coral delta O-18records from Vanuatu and
pseudoproxy experiments show a high degree of skill in capturing changes in ENSO
variability, providing confidence that the resulting records can be used to
reconstruct past ENSO variability. The researchers will compare the
reconstructions to climate model output of ENSO during previous glacial times
when Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) was both vigorous and
sluggish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team’s current hypotheses, based on
climate model output, is that ENSO was reduced during glacial times, relative to
modern, and that ENSO was more active when AMOC was shutdown, relative to
contemporaneous glacial times when AMOC was active. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will conduct hosing model experiments under glacial boundary conditions to
test the sensitivity of ENSO and AMOC changes to background conditions. The
research will also investigate how non-stationarity of ENSO may affect the
skills of Vanuatu corals by using an ensemble of climate models run under
different climate boundary conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project may
help shed light on the sensitivity of ENSO to external forcing, a highly
critical issue given that climate models used for future climate projections do
not agree if ENSO will strengthen or weaken as the Earth
warms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include a deeper
understanding of ENSO variability, development of a new drilling system for
field research, involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in the
research including undergraduates at a primarily undergraduate teaching
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.