* 2103658
* Non-Equilibrium Dynamics in Closed Interacting Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anatoli Polkovnikov, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2024
* USD 389,226.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research with a general aim to understand interacting quantum mechanical systems
that are out of equilibrium, with a particular focus on "quantum chaos". In
everyday life chaos is usually defined as a mess, or more accurately, as a lack
of any order. In classical physics, chaos is mathematically defined through very
strong sensitivity of a particle's trajectory to slight perturbations. This
sensitivity is behind many phenomena surrounding us, from unstable weather
patterns to the emergence of equilibrium statistical physics, with the most
fundamental example being the second law of thermodynamics. In quantum systems,
on the other hand, particles do not have well defined trajectories, since their
positions and velocities cannot be defined at the same time due to the
uncertainty principle. Accordingly, defining and understanding chaos in the
microscopic world in a quantum mechanical language becomes more subtle and has
been a subject of active debate in the last four decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores new ways of defining quantum chaos
through sensitivity of quantum states to small perturbations. Through this
language it aims to establish direct connections between quantum and classical
chaos and explore how it emerges as we increase the number of particles in the
system. Another focus of the project is finding ways of suppressing chaos in
interacting quantum systems by active dynamical control, which should lead to
developing efficient computational and energy transfer schemes. These schemes,
in turn, can be used in future technologies to develop fast and efficient
quantum computers, quantum simulators, and quantum heat engines or
refrigerators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational and
outreach activities which involve training students at both graduate and
undergraduate levels in topics at the forefront of condensed matter and
statistical physics, delivering public talks and lectures, and developing a new
book on quantum mechanics, which covers modern advances in the field that are
not typically found in standard textbooks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research aimed at developing
new theoretical approaches for understanding non-equilibrium interacting systems
and on applying these approaches to existing and future experimental setups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has three main thrusts: (1) The first theme
of the project focuses on a method recently developed by the PI, which
characterizes quantum chaos through adiabatic deformations expressed through the
adiabatic gauge potential. The PI will analyze universal properties of the
transition between integrable and chaotic regimes driven by weak integrability
breaking perturbations, apply this method to disordered, periodically driven and
other systems, and extend it to classical nonlinear systems like the Fermi-
Pasta-Ulam-Tsingou problem to analyze emergence of chaos. (2) The second closely
related theme of the project focuses on finding approximate local adiabatic
gauge potentials, which can be used to identify approximate local conservation
laws in nonintegrable systems. The goal is to develop efficient local counter-
diabatic and fast-forward protocols that suppress dissipation in interacting
systems, which is important for both efficient information and energy
processing. This project will aim to design such protocols in driven Floquet
systems, finite-temperature systems, and non-linear systems with locally
unbounded spectrum. A particular emphasis will be on developing experimentally
relevant protocols, which can be realized in different setups like
superconducting qubits, cold atoms and trapped ions. (3) The third theme of the
project will focus on investigating the connections between quantum and
classical chaos by using a formalism recently developed by the PI that shows a
correspondence between classical Hamiltonian systems and quantum eigenstates
even away from the semi-classical limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports educational and outreach activities which involve training students at
both graduate and undergraduate levels in topics at the forefront of condensed
matter and statistical physics, delivering public talks and lectures, and
developing a new book on quantum mechanics, which covers modern advances in the
field that are not typically found in standard
textbooks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.