* 2103553
* Next-generation PEGylation: antifouling and immunoevasive semi-randomized zwitterionic peptides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Danielle Benoit, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2023
* USD 543,982.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the use of
computationally designed peptides to enhance drug delivery systems, aligning
with NSF’s mission ‘To promote the progress of science’ and ‘to advance the
national health prosperity, and welfare’. Nanoparticles have tremendous
potential for delivering new, highly promising therapeutics to specific
locations withing the body, enhancing drug potency, and reducing side-effects.
However, blood proteins adsorb to nanoparticles, resulting in clearance. Protein
adsorption reduces the ability of nanoparticles to reach tissue targets organs
and tumors. Existing materials to control nanoparticle protein adsorption are
limited in number. Furthermore, they are implicated in allergy-like immune
system responses after repeated exposures, which has been highlighted recently
by the mRNA vaccines for COVID19. This project explores computationally designed
peptides with partially randomized sequences to make a new class of diverse
anti-protein adsorption options, which, through randomized design, will avoid
allergic reactions and other long-term immunological side effects. These
materials are expected to be versatile for multiple nanoparticle systems and
will enable improved drug delivery. The research activities will be integrated
with Rochester’s ongoing K-12 education and outreach efforts, including the
“Teach for Teachers” program and graduate/undergraduate researcher
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
specific protein adsorption to nanoparticle (NP) drug delivery systems (DDS) has
challenged the tremendous promise of NP therapeutics by reducing target tissue
accumulation and NP delivery function and increasing off-target accumulation in
the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS). Anti-fouling materials currently used to
combat protein adsorption, such as poly(ethylene glycol), have limited chemical
diversity and have been recently demonstrated to be antigenic, as highlighted by
adverse reactions to PEGylated mRNA vaccine approaches for COVID19. This project
seeks to develop computationally designed anti-fouling zwitterionic peptides
(ZIPs) with semi-randomized sequences to create a diverse new class of anti-
fouling materials (srZIPs) resistant to adaptive immunity. The computational
design considers peptide-peptide and peptide-protein interactions and evaluates
potential ZIPs with the lowest interaction potential, as well as amino acid
substitutions that maintain overall interaction character to allow semi-
randomization of ZIP composition for diversity. srZIPs will be tested in
existing NP formulations and compared directly to PEGylation. By investigating
links between design parameters, in vitro behavior, biodistribution,
pharmacokinetics, and immunogenicity, this project will further the
understanding of the interplay between anti-fouling material composition and
clinically relevant NP performance parameters while establishing a new category
of anti-fouling functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.