* 2103008
* Enhancing Quantum Efficiency of Thin Film Solar Cells via Joint Characterization of Radiation and Recombination
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Shima Hajimirza, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2023
* USD 401,931.00

Thin film solar cells are at the forefront of innovation in photovoltaics
technology. However, the efficiency of thin film solar cells is significantly
lower than bulk cells, limiting the scale of their application. Light trapping
schemes based on structural modifications have been used to improve the
efficiency of nano-scale photovoltaic devices. These schemes affect both
radiative and electrical characteristics of thin semiconductors in complex ways.
These effects are neither accurately modeled nor well known. This research fills
this knowledge gap by modeling the combined radiative and electrical effects of
light trapping. The proposed models will be diverse, comprehensive and more
accurate than the existing literature. By using the improved models, novel
architectures can be designed for solar cell devices with enhanced conversion
efficiencies and reduced energy payback periods compared to the state-of-the-art
technology which is highly valuable to the US economy. Additionally, the work
leads to better understanding of the radiative effects of nano-structural
modifications which is imperative in nano-scale radiation applications beyond
photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates methods to
systematically enhance the quantum efficiency of nano-scale thin film solar
cells. To this end, fundamentals of light-trapping affected radiation at nano-
scale are studied. Analytical models are formulated for explaining radiation in
non-homogenous semiconductors along with electrical carrier recombination. The
radiative models are based on improved estimations of the local density of
optical states in the presence of pseudo-periodic Metallo-dielectric surface and
bulk patterns, and accurate estimation of extinction cross-section in plasmonic
nano-particles based on improvements of Mie scattering using mathematical shape
formulations and data fitting. Overlaying radiative effects from multiple
mechanisms are modeled and combined with carrier transport models under
realistic material imperfections and physical defects assumptions. The work
utilizes the improved models to design structures with broad-band/angle optical
absorption beyond the ergodic limits, and quantum efficiencies approaching the
limits of bulk cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.