* 2103009
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Paleoclimatology of the East African Monsoon
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* William Lukens, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 119,293.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The East African Monsoon (EAM)
provides intense, seasonal rains that are critically linked to food security and
infrastructure for a large portion of global population. The timing and amount
of these rains are projected to change substantially under anthropogenic climate
change. Studying past intervals of global warmth can inform the scientific
community and general public on the direction and magnitude of change in EAM
characteristics as the planet warms and cools. This project aims to leverage a
large archive of fossil soil (paleosol) samples collected from the Baringo Basin
of Kenya, Africa, to reconstruct aspects of past hydroclimate and temperature
during the Pliocene-Pleistocene epochs (~4.1-2.6 million years ago). This work
will produce the first quantitative estimates of precipitation and temperature
across intervals of warming and cooling, including the last time that
atmospheric CO2 reached current levels. The response of vegetation to these
climate changes will be also be documented, thereby informing the scientific
community on the sensitivity of different plant groups to changes in climate
parameters. This work will support a large cohort of undergraduate student
researchers and a PhD student, and scientific results will be incorporated into
upper level, data-driven geoscience courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleosols were
previously described in the field in the vicinity of a coring locality
associated with the Hominin Sites and Paleolakes Drilling Project. New analyses
will include reconstructing paleoclimate (rainfall, temperature) using robust,
multivariate models based on paleosol bulk geochemistry as well as the clumped
isotope composition of pedogenic carbonates; vegetation will be reconstructed
using stable isotopes from pedogenic carbonates and organic matter. This work
will provide the first quantitative paleoclimate estimates from the Baringo
Basin, which contains the most continuous Neogene stratigraphic record in
equatorial eastern Africa and preserves a rich paleontological and
paleoanthropological archive. The results of this work will be placed within an
existing, high-resolution geochronologic framework to test hypotheses that
relate the effect of CO2 rise to EAM strength, local climate seasonality, and
landscape-scale vegetation structure. The project will include outcrop-to-core
comparisons to evaluate proxy robustness, thereby strengthening paleoclimate and
paleoenvironmental interpretations. The multi-proxy approach will allow for
rigorous testing of proxy robustness and
repeatability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.