* 2103436
* SBIR Phase I:  Miniaturization of a Magnetic Craniofacial Distraction System
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Jessica DesNoyer, OSTIIO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 05/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve surgical outcomes for the more
than 200,000 newborns worldwide who are born each year with congenital
conditions that cause impaired growth of the skull or mandible. These
abnormalities affect breathing, hearing, speech, visual function, neurologic
development, and mastication. Current treatments for this fragile population are
inherently complex and traumatic. Distraction osteogenesis (DO) is a widely
recognized treatment modality for craniofacial abnormalities that harnesses the
body’s natural ability to regenerate bone in order to correct skeletal
deficiencies and defects. While surgeons have shown the utility of DO for
restoring functional discrepancies in patients born with craniofacial
differences, the technique has not been widely adopted due to limitations of
current DO systems, including their semi- buried design and burdensome reliance
on caregivers to follow precise treatment protocols. This project will further
development of a novel distraction technique that will address many of these
issues. Beyond the initial DO indication, eventual applications in surgical
correction of obstructive sleep apnea and temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorder
represent an eventual market potential of at least $6
B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will further development of a novel contactless implant and associated
external driver that will significantly improve upon current distraction
osteogenesis (DO) surgical apparatus by removing a principal path to device-
associated complications and treatment noncompliance. The current standard of
care includes an external component that protrudes through the patient’s skin;
this is required for manual expansion of the device. The device package to be
developed in this proposal will eliminate the protruding component through use
of an innovative design that leverages magnets instead of manual action to
produce the force necessary for distraction. This will not only remove a pathway
to infection but also will resolve many of the other limitations associated with
the standard of care such as the increased risk of device dislodgement,
analgesic use, patient stigma, required manual operation, and treatment
noncompliance. This project will build on early proof-of-concept work to model,
produce and then test a set of device prototypes, with critical dimensions no
larger than standard of care, to rigorously demonstrate that they can meet key
performance specs; in particular that they can provide the distraction force
necessary to enable a new and entirely contactless DO
procedure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.