* 2103976
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Scaling Time Series Analytics to Massive Seismology Datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Gareth Funning, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 800,000.00

This project will enable a team of computer scientists and earth scientists at
the University of California-Riverside, the University of California-San Diego
and the University of New Mexico to develop novel tools to search existing
seismographic databases for subtle earthquakes that may have evaded detection.
These more complete earthquake catalogues will allow more accurate hazard
analysis and risk reduction. The intellectual merit of the proposed work is in
creating novel data representations, definitions, algorithms (and ultimately,
highly usable open-source code) that will allow the seismological community
greatly to expand both the type and the scale of the analytics that they can
perform, both offline and in real time. The broader impacts of this project
results from the more comprehensive and complete earthquake catalogs created.
These have the potential to affect multiple branches of earthquake science. For
example, the more accurate hazard and risk models derived from the catalogs can
be used by governments and private industry to plan for and mitigate economic
and human losses, e.g., by mandating resilient construction and infrastructure,
and by accurately assessing insured risk. In addition, the projects
comprehensive educational and outreach activities have already been piloted on a
small scale and include detailed plans to reach out to underserved communities
at the K-12 and college levels, and to create grade-level appropriate teaching
resources that exploit the natural interest most K-12 students have in the drama
of earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans notice large earthquakes, but the
frequently occurring smaller quakes caused by the constant slipping of fault
lines typically go unnoticed, even by skilled seismologists with access to
telemetry. However, these imperceptible quakes could help us understand the
physical processes that trigger hazardous earthquakes, assisting in hazard-
reduction efforts. Recently, a novel data structure called the Matrix Profile
has emerged as a very promising technique for pattern discovery in large
datasets. The PIs, an interdisciplinary team of computer scientists and
seismologists, propose to investigate techniques to use Matrix Profile the scale
up the size of datasets that can be investigated by 100X magnitude, to find 20X
more earthquakes. The intellectual merit of this project will result in novel
data representations, definitions, algorithms (and ultimately, highly usable
open-source code) that will allow the seismological community to expand both the
type and the scale of the analytics that they can perform. The broader impacts
of this project are difficult to overstate. Comprehensive and complete
earthquake catalogs are foundational to multiple branches of earthquake science,
notably the physics of earthquake nucleation, hazard analysis and risk
reduction. The hazard and risk models derived from them can be used by
governments and private industry to plan for and mitigate economic and human
losses, e.g. by mandating resilient construction and infrastructure, and by
accurately assessing insured risk. The projectâ€™s comprehensive educational and
outreach activities have already been piloted on a small scale and include
detailed plans to reach out to under-served communities at the K-12 and college
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.