* 2103489
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Simulation-driven Evaluation of Cyberinfrastructure Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Henri Casanova, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2024
* USD 284,973.00

Most scientific breakthroughs and discoveries are now preconditioned on
performing complex processing of vast amounts of data as conveniently, reliably,
and efficiently as possible. This requires high-end interconnected compute and
storage resources, as well as software systems to automate the processing on
these resources. An enormous amount of effort has been invested in producing
such "cyberinfrastructure" software systems. And yet, developing and evolving
these systems so that they are as efficient as possible, while anticipating
future cyberinfrastructure opportunities and needs, is an open challenge. This
project transforms the way in which these systems are evaluated, so that their
capabilities can be developed and evolved judiciously. The traditional
evaluation approach is to observe executions of these systems on real-world
hardware resources. Although seemingly natural, this approach suffers from many
shortcomings. Instead, this project focuses on simulating these executions.
Simulation has tremendous, and untapped, potential for transforming the
development cycle of cyberinfrastructure systems. Specifically, this project
produces software elements that can be easily integrated into existing and
future systems to afford them with simulation capabilities. These capabilities
make it possible for developers to put their systems through the wringer and
observe their behaviors for arbitrary operating conditions, including ones that
go beyond current hardware platforms and scientific applications. Simply put,
these capabilities will make it possible to establish a solid experimental
science approach for the development of cyberinfrastructure systems that support
current and future scientific endeavors that are critical to the development of
our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cyberinfrastructure has been the object of
intensive research and development, resulting in a rich set of interoperable
software systems that are used to support science. A key challenge is the
development of systems that can execute application workloads efficiently, while
anticipating future cyberinfrastructure opportunities and needs. This project
aims to transform the way in which these systems are evaluated, so that their
capabilities can be evolved based on a sound, quantitative experimental science
approach. The traditional evaluation approach is to use full-fledged software
stacks to execute application workloads on actual cyberinfrastructure
deployments. Unfortunately, this approach suffers from several shortcomings:
real-world experiments are time- and labor-intensive, and they are limited to
currently available hardware and software configurations. An alternative to
real-world experiments that does not suffer from these shortcomings is
simulation, i.e., the implementation and use of a software artifact that models
the functional and performance behaviors of software and hardware stacks of
interest. This project uses simulation to transform the way in which
cyberinfrastructure systems are evaluated as part of their long-term development
cycles. This is achieved via software elements for enhancing production
cyberinfrastructure systems with simulation capabilities so as to enable
quantitative evaluation of these systems for arbitrary execution scenarios.
Creating these scenarios requires little labor, and executions can be simulated
accurately and orders of magnitude faster than their real-world counterparts.
Furthermore, simulations are perfectly reproducible and observable. While this
approach is general, its effectiveness will be demonstrated by applying it to a
number of production systems, namely, workflow management systems. This project
capitalizes on the years of development invested in the SimGrid and WRENCH
simulation frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.