* 2103624
* How Atmospheric Synoptic Kelvin Waves Influenced the Propagation of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Paul Roundy, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2024
* USD 488,466.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is a large pattern of cloudiness and
precipitation that forms over the equatorial Indian Ocean and the adjacent west
Pacific and propagates slowly eastward over several weeks. The pattern is an
east-west dipole with a region of enhanced cloudiness and rainfall big enough to
cover much of the tropical Indian Ocean, accompanied by an equally large region
of clear skies and reduced precipitation to the east. The MJO has been called
the "holy grail" of tropical meteorology, as 50 years of research to date has
not produced a generally accepted explanation for it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
MJO is sometimes called a multiscale phenomenon since its rainy half is best
described as an envelope of convection in which various forms of convective
aggregation occur. The extent to which the smaller convective disturbances
within the MJO envelope affect the large-scale behavior of the MJO is an open
question. Work conducted here looks specifically at the extent to which the MJO
is influenced by synoptic Kelvin waves, wave disturbances centered on the
equator which are smaller than the MJO and propagate through its envelope from
west to east. Previous work by the PI shows that the vertical tilt of the Kelvin
waves is altered as they move through the convective envelope. The change in
tilt may lead to a vertical flux of eddy momentum that contributes to the
eastward advance of the MJO. A further mechanism through which Kelvin waves can
affect the MJO involves upper-level ridging due to the advection of low
potential vorticity air by the Kelvin waves, which could also help move the MJO
envelope eastward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a combination of
statistical techniques combined with examination of the moisture and momentum
budgets to assess Kelvin wave impacts on the MJO. Datasets to be used include
reanalysis products and satellite-based estimates of convective clouds and
rainfall. Once the analysis is completed using observational datasets it is
repeated for simulations from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
(CMIP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance due to the
importance of the MJO for long-range weather prediction. The MJO influences
weather phenomena around the world including the monsoons of Asia, hurricanes in
the Gulf of Mexico, and atmospheric rivers making landfall in the western US.
The slow propagation of the MJO means that its effects can, at least in
principle, be anticipated well in advance. But the MJO is not well captured in
weather and climate models, and work conducted here can directly inform efforts
to improve MJO simulation in such models. In particular the work may show the
need for better simulation and initialization of Kelvin waves as a key to MJO
simulation improvement. The project supports two graduate students, thereby
developing the future workforce in this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.