* 2103105
* IRES: Track I: Collaborative Research: Supporting FSU and MTU Student Research with NTNU Faculty on Automatic Improvement of Application Performance
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Soner Onder, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 149,996.00

When the technology for computers advance and programs execute faster, more
computer applications become possible. This project will enable Florida State
University (FSU) and Michigan Technology University (MTU) students to visit the
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) to conduct research that
will allow the performance and energy efficiency of computer applications to be
automatically improved. Over the three years of this project, 16 FSU and MTU
students (in cohorts of five, five, and six) will visit NTNU, which is in
Trondheim, Norway, for a period of 10 weeks during May, June, and July. While in
residence, the students will work closely with the faculty, postdoctoral
associates, and graduate students in the research groups of Professors Magnus
Sjalander and Magnus Jahre who are affiliated with the Computer Architecture
Laboratory (CAL) at NTNU. The participating FSU and MTU students will not only
increase their research knowledge, but will also become more globally engaged
and better prepared to work in a culturally diverse, international environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The era of improving processor performance without
innovations in computer architecture or compilers is over since increasing the
clock rate for computers has not been possible in recent years due to thermal
limitations. However, manually modifying programs to efficiently exploit
computer architectures is time consuming, error prone, and not portable to other
systems. The most effective way to improve application performance is to
automatically exploit architectural features without the intervention of the
application developers. Our focus will be on automatically achieving high
performance and energy efficiency by generating code to exploit existing and
proposed architectural features at the machine instruction level. We propose to
develop the compilation tools to facilitate the process of automatically
generating code to exploit &lt;br/&gt;these proposed architectural features and
to develop the simulation tools to evaluate the impact on both performance and
energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.