* 2103645
* Instrument Development: A New Digitally Driven Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Peter Reilly, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2024
* USD 526,214.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Peter Reilly and his group at Washington State
University are devising and enhancing methods of biological and chemical
analysis by converting an important method of analysis called “mass
spectrometry” from analog to digital operation. The aim is to expand
applicability and to enhance the quality of results, comparable to the
improvements derived from the conversion of telephones from analog to digital.
The project focuses on a type of instrument called a triple quadrupole mass
spectrometer that is routinely used in hospitals and medical laboratories to
perform diagnostic tests. The digital conversion seeks to expand the number and
types of tests that can be performed by enhancing the instrument’s speed,
resolution, mass range, and sensitivity. Beyond the important scientific goals
of this proposal, the training of highly skilled instrumentation scientists is
an emerging national need that will be addressed by this effort and the
collaborations that will result. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Reilly group has
invented a new digital waveform generation method that they recently used to
develop a digital mass filter. Relative to a conventional analog analyzer (i.e.,
sine), the digital filter can operate in higher stability zones without loss of
mass range, providing significantly better sensitivity, resolution, and speed of
analysis compared to commercial counterparts. They are now using the digital
waveform technology to create a digital triple quadrupole mass spectrometer
(DQ3MS) both to outperform commercial instruments (Q3MS) both by improving
performance at m/z (mass:charge ratio) &lt; 3000 (accessible by Q3MS) and
extending the accessible m/z range. This should substantially expand the range
and types of biological molecules that can be analyzed by tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS). The development of instrumentation with increased mass
range is needed to directly and rapidly measure and quantify the distribution of
expressed proteins, analyze complexes and their interactions. Digitally driven
mass spectrometers are expected to increase the rate of discovery in the
biology-based sciences. The anticipated benefits arising from the proposed work
include: 1) training and education of future scientists in the area of
analytical chemistry and biological mass spectrometry, 2) changing the paradigm
for analyzing biological molecules and particles by mass spectrometry, and 3)
establishing the area of analytical biology by rapidly quantifying biomolecules,
their interactions and processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.