* 2103682
* Elements: Scaling MetPy to Big Data Workflows in  Meteorology and Climate Science
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Ryan May, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 04/30/2024
* USD 598,024.00

MetPy is a Python-based software package for atmospheric science; it provides
modern, well-tested, domain-specific software tools for reading data formats,
performing calculations, and creating visualizations. MetPy builds upon an
extensive set of community-developed scientific Python tools, and leverages
technologies such as continuous integration, automated documentation generation,
screencasts, and Jupyter notebook tutorials. This project advances MetPy to
address some current limitations in supported data formats, scalability, and
run-time performance; it makes MetPy more suitable for working on much larger
datasets, frequently encountered in climate science and ensemble-based modeling
studies. Addressing these areas allows MetPy to continue to be a powerful tool
for Python users in the atmospheric sciences for both small and large datasets.
When equipped with modern and well-engineered tools, researchers will be able to
better utilize the large amounts of data available in a more time-efficient
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three main goals: enabling efficient
access to big and small datasets, enabling access to cloud-based datasets, and
creating training resources for using MetPy with big data. In tackling these
challenges, the project is creating a benchmark suite for MetPy, to quantify the
current performance of MetPy in important workflows as well as the performance
improvements that occur as a result of further development. Using performance
profiling tools, bottlenecks in MetPy are identified and optimized using Python
performance tools like Cython and Numba. MetPy is also being refactored to work
better with the Dask library, which provides facilities for distributed
computing in Python and would allow MetPy to work more effectively with large
datasets. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has made GRIB (GRIdded
Binary) its standard format for gridded model output, and BUFR (Binary Universal
Form for the Representation of meteorological data) the standard format to
encode meteorological observational data. MetPy enhancements developed in this
project will enable reading of additional datasets used in large cloud-based
data holdings, such as GRIB and BUFR. All of this work will be featured in
additional, freely available training materials in MetPyâ€™s online
documentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Physical and Dynamic Meteorology
Program and the Division of Integrative and Collaborative Education and Research
within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.