* 2103884
* EAGER: Meta-gut Dynamics Influence Aquatic Ecosystem Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jose Ponciano, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,629.00

When animals defecate or die, they transfer a portion of their gut microbes to
the environment, together with the organic matter, nutrients, and metabolic
byproducts that comprise their feces or carcasses. Microbial decomposition of
these inputs can change the characteristics of an ecosystem. In this EAGER
project, the proposed research will test whether this coupled gut-environment
system, the 'meta-gut', allows microbial communities from the gut of hippopotami
to persist external to the animal and have a greater influence on ecosystem
function. Hippos are the focus of this study by this team that specialized in
the ecosystem ecology of the Mara River in Kenya, which has thousands of hippos
and is the only permanent source of water for wildlife in the world-famous
Serengeti National Park. Although environmental microbial communities are
traditionally considered important drivers of ecosystem function, demonstration
that animal gut microbes can significantly influence ecosystem function directly
would represent a paradigm shift in our understanding of the influence of
animals on ecosystem processes. This research will increase our understanding of
the influence of organic matter loading in aquatic ecosystems, as well as
microbial drivers of organic matter decomposition and nitrogen cycling under low
oxygen conditions, which are increasingly common in some aquatic ecosystems.
This project will train a postdoc and 2-3 undergraduate students in each year of
the grant and seek to broaden the participation of underrepresented students in
science. Products from this research will be used to develop a module for zoos
that have hippo facilities to educate the general public about the important
role these animals play in structuring river
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will use an experimental
approach based on observations from field research on hippos in the Mara River.
Hippos aggregate in slow-moving pools along the river where they defecate large
quantities of organic material that alter pool biogeochemistry. Previous
research has shown that high subsidy pools, with large hippo inputs and low
flushing rates, can become anoxic. As a result, these pools develop microbial
communities that closely resemble the hippo gut, suggesting hippo gut microbes
may persist in the external environment. Researchers will conduct an experiment
in replicated stream mesocosms using coupled, high-frequency sampling of
microbial communities and biogeochemical responses to test whether hippo gut
microbes can persist and function in the external environment, and whether they
influence carbon and nutrient cycling. Hippo feces from a captive animal
facility will be added to recirculating streams across a gradient from fresh
feces with active gut microbes to sterilized feces with no gut microbes.
Presence and activity of microbes from the hippo gut will be measured using
metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and metabolomics, as the mesocosms transition
from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism. These measurements will be coupled with
detailed measurements on aquatic biogeochemistry, carbon cycling, and nitrogen
metabolism. A stochastic population model will simulate how microbes from the
hippo gut survive and influence key ecosystem processes in the pools. In
addition to training the postdoc and undergraduate students, findings from this
research will be shared with resource managers and stakeholders in Kenya,
broadening the understanding of the ecological role of hippos and their
influences on water resources in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.