* 2103945
* Framework: Awkward Arrays - Accelerating scientific data analysis on irregularly shaped data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jim Pivarski, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,067,480.00

Nowadays, scientists need to be programmers as well as experts in their fields.
Any software that simplifies the computational gymnastics of analyzing data is
welcomed, as it allows scientists to focus more of their attention on what they
want to compute, rather than how, but there is usually a tension between ease of
use and computational speed. Faster computation means more data analyzed, but
error-free code matters most. Awkward Array is a software library that performs
calculations on data that do not fit into neat rows. For instance, a fleet of
undersea probes may each measure ocean temperatures at a different number of
depths, but data analysis tools like Excel, Pandas, and SQL require measurements
to be arranged in rectangular tables with the same number of columns in each
row. The problem is more acute when variable numbers of measurements are nested
within variable numbers of entities. Traditionally, scientists have either used
slow scripting languages or unforgiving "bare metal" languages to perform
calculations on these non-tabular datasets. Awkward Array generalizes array
concepts so that the easy and fast expressions that once applied only to
rectangular tables now apply to irregularly shaped data, allowing bare metal
speed in a high-level scripting language. This project broadens the
applicability of Awkward Array beyond the problem domain it was originally
intended for, particle physics, to a wide variety of scientific fields,
including oceanography, astronomy, genetics, chemistry, and health care. It also
integrates the Awkward Array library with popular data science and machine
learning tools and extends the implementation to GPUs for extremely fast
processing of the same array idioms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists use NumPy-
based tools, such as Pandas, to analyze large and regularly shaped data
efficiently. Packing tables of numbers into contiguous arrays allows operations
to be precompiled and fast; and expressing operations as concise commands with
implicit loops makes them easier to read and quicker to type during data
exploration. However, scientific data often has a complexity that does not fit
well into tabular format. This forces scientists to write programs with explicit
loops, which are slow in Python. But what about analysis of large and
irregularly shaped data? Awkward Array is a generalization of NumPy; it is a
Python library defining arrays of objects with arbitrary types and a suite of
generic operations on them. Like NumPy arrays, Awkward Arrays are packed into
contiguous buffers for efficiency, but unlike NumPy arrays, they can include
variable-length lists, nested fields, missing values, and mixed types. Awkward
Arrays use 10 times less memory than equivalent Python objects and are up to 100
times faster in computations. This project generalizes Awkward Array as a
foundational library for science. It is a cross-disciplinary effort, extending
Awkward Array to efficiently solve challenges faced by scientists in a variety
of fields and data science in industry. The project members work with scientific
collaborators to solve specific problems, adding features to Awkward Array if
necessary, and industry collaborators at Anaconda and Nvidia update Pythonâ€™s
standard tools to recognize these new array types for CPU and GPU workloads. It
is also an educational project, teaching new approaches to complex problems
using array idioms, both to practicing scientists and to
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.