* 2103524
* Elements:Software A Scalable Open-Source hp-Adaptive FE Software for Complex Multiphysics Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Leszek Demkowicz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2024
* USD 589,762.00

Computer models can be used to augment, inform, and even replace expensive
experimental measurements in science and engineering. However, complex models of
engineering applications can quickly exceed computational capability, driving
the need for advanced simulation tools. Applications in high-frequency wave
simulation--such as submarine sonar (acoustics), fiber optics
(electromagnetics), and structural analysis (elastodynamics)--pose a significant
challenge for large-scale simulation. This project advances computational
modeling capabilities through the development, documentation, and dissemination
of a leading-edge simulation software. The effort builds on decades-long
research and code development by the investigators and their project
collaborators. Distributed as open-source, the software is accessible to the
broader scientific community, thereby contributing to fundamental research and
education for computer modeling in science and engineering. Furthermore, the
project expands the national workforce by training young computational
mathematicians at the graduate and postdoctoral levels. The project results are
disseminated through conference presentations, workshops and seminars, as well
as publications in scientific journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hp3D software
leverages hybrid MPI/OpenMP parallelism to run efficiently on NSF extreme-scale
computing facilities and interfaces with state-of-the-art third-party scientific
libraries. In addition to publishing the hp3D code and documentation, this
project focuses on the development of a scalable multigrid (MG) solver based on
the pre-asymptotically stable discontinuous Petrov-Galerkin (DPG) finite element
method. This DPG-MG solver represents a significant advancement in solver
technology as 1) the first robust, scalable solver for problems with highly-
indefinite operators, such as high-frequency wave propagation; and 2) the first
multigrid solver with support for fully anisotropic hp-adaptive hybrid meshes
and a reliable built-in error indicator. Serial implementations of the DPG-MG
solver have demonstrated near-linear scaling with respect to degrees of freedom
in both time and memory; its parallel implementation significantly expands
scientific compute capabilities and enables solution of currently intractable
problems in 3D wave simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.