* 2103049
* Ocean Heat Uptake of the Last Twenty Thousand Years
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Geoffrey Gebbie, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 516,784.00

Global cooling or warming occurs when Earth has an imbalance between the energy
received versus that released to space. Imbalances in this budget are difficult
to detect due to the large amounts of energy that come and go at any given time.
Ocean temperature is the most reliable indicator of changes in the planet’s
energy budget because Earth primarily stores excess energy in the ocean.
Furthermore, increases in stored energy cause ocean temperature to rise. The
rate that the ocean stores more heat is the ocean heat uptake, a key measure of
climate variability. Ocean heat uptake is accelerating over the last few
decades, but it is unknown whether there is any precedent in Earth’s past. This
study will reconstruct ocean heat uptake for the last twenty thousand years in
order to put ongoing changes into context. The last twenty thousand years
included enormous changes in climate, including the disintegration of large ice
sheets that extended southward into much of the current United States. This time
period also had large warming events with ocean heat uptake that could have
rivaled the present day. The reconstruction of ocean heat uptake may benefit
society by improving our understanding of how climate responds to changes in
atmospheric carbon dioxide. In addition, this project will quantify the
potential for the deep ocean and ice sheets to affect the climate of the 21st
century. The project includes plans to train the next generation of ocean
scientists through support for a postdoctoral researcher and integration of
methods into a MIT/WHOI Joint Program graduate&lt;br/&gt;course. All research
products will be publicly and freely accessible through archives at the National
Centers for Environmental Information and GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to reconstruct global ocean heat uptake for the last 20,000 years
by assimilating paleoceanographic temperature data into an ocean circulation
model that describes decadal, centennial, and millennial timescales of climate
variability. The key methodological question is, how well can paleo-temperature
observations be inverted for ocean heat uptake? The method will utilize known
climate power laws that dictate that low-frequency temperature variations
contain more energy than high frequencies. These power laws permit the infilling
of gaps in paleo-data and a statistically-rigorous uncertainty analysis.
Improved reconstructions of ocean heat uptake will address the hidden systematic
errors due to the time-evolving composition of the observing system, the
sparsity of observations before 1955, and the expected variability of the deep
ocean. The resulting ocean heat uptake evolution connects through periods with
both proxy and instrumental data, including the last deglaciation, the mid-
Holocene climate optimum, the Medieval Climate Anomaly, the Little Ice Age, and
the industrial era, which facilitates comparison between past and present ocean
conditions. Examination of ocean heat uptake since the Last Glacial Maximum
(20,000 years ago) will allow a wide perspective on warming rates, and new
observational evidence suggests that deglacial ocean heat uptake rivaled the
present day during some time intervals. This project benefits the broader
science community by producing dynamically-informed reconstructions of ocean
heat uptake for the last 20,000 years, including uncertainty estimates. Ocean
heat uptake is a required quantity to diagnose equilibrium and transient climate
sensitivity, two key climate metrics for predicting surface temperature.
Quantification of uncertainties is a necessary step toward more accurate risk
assessments of future climate scenarios and has relevance to policy
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.