* 2103702
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel System for Uniform Preload in Bolted Joints
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,04/30/2022
* ZAEEM KHAN, ENDEAVOS INNOVATIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the development of an improved bolt tightening technology applicable
to a wide variety of industries including renewable, power generation,
transportation, and infrastructure. The basic bolt-tightening method utilizing a
torque-wrench has remained largely unchanged since the introduction of the
modern fastener in the 1800s. This results in a preload variation of up to 30%
in a multi-bolt joint. New methods, including preload sensing, reduce this
variation down to 15% albeit at a high cost. High preload variation leads to
inefficient joints, bolt loosening, bolt rupture, and leakage problems over the
joint’s lifetime. The proposed innovation can potentially reduce this variation
down to 5%, a significant improvement. Additionally, it allows multi-bolt joint
tightening in just two passes compared to the current method of four passes
which saves time and labor. Successful implementation of the proposed technology
will be beneficial in reducing the cost of energy, in particular, offshore wind
which is poised for rapid growth in the US. Additionally, it will help prevent
hazardous leakage of joints in the nuclear, petrochemical, and oil and gas
industries and prevent vibration loosening of joints in the transportation,
infrastructure, and heavy machinery industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed technology combines existing, widely used technologies, such as a
torque-wrench and ultrasonic bolt tension measurement, with a unique and
proprietary computer algorithm. The proposed innovation offers precise control
of bolt tensioning, which is essential for the reliability of multi-bolt flange
joints. The fundamental concept is already proven through high-fidelity
simulations. In Phase I research, simulation studies will continue on more
realistic multi-bolt joints to further validate the algorithm. The primary goal
of Phase I research is the experimental validation and optimization of the
proposed algorithm. Extensive testing will be conducted on a scaled-down flange
joint with the help of ultrasonic preload sensors. The secondary goal is the
development of a minimum viable product concept based on this
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.