* 2103696
* New Synthetic Routes to Well-Defined Nanocarbon Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* T. Don Tilley, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2025
* USD 673,414.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation,
Professor T. Don Tilley of the University of California, Berkeley is exploring
synthetic routes to prepare large-sized polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs),
which represent a family of molecular nanocarbon materials. Graphene, an
extended two-dimensional nanocarbon material, is well known for interesting
electronic properties; however, its structure is irregular, which complicates
its utility in nanoelectronic devices. In contrast, the PAHs under investigation
exhibit well-defined molecular structures with graphene-like electronic
properties. The project is geared toward providing fundamental knowledge
regarding the effect of specific molecular structural features on desired
electronic properties. The project is expected to impact the field of
nanoscience, and especially the availability of carbon-based semiconducting
organic materials as components for emergent applications in areas such as
quantum information science, communications, and sensing. During the course of
conducting this research, the students involved will be trained in advanced
organic synthesis and material characterization techniques. The associated
outreach activities include participation in the ACS Summer Experiences for the
Economically Disadvantaged (SEED) Project and the Bay area scientists in school
at Berkeley (BASIS) Program targeting elementary school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops synthetic
methodologies for the efficient introduction of multiple fused aromatic rings in
the controlled construction of large, tailored polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs). This is accomplished with high yielding [2+2+n] cycloadditions that
produce multiple fused aromatic rings in a single synthetic step. The scalable
reactions are used to access a wide range of new carbon nanostructures,
including helicenes, nanobelts, cycloarenes, and nanoribbons. A specific target
is a family of expanded, helical PAHs that are to be studied in the context of
host-guest chemistry and interactions with polarized light. Other targets
include macrocyclic PAHs and their assembly by way of supramolecular
interactions, and elongated, nanoribbon structures expected to exhibit
properties as 1-dimensional semiconductors. Nanobelt structures that represent
molecular cut-outs of carbon nanotubes are being synthesized and studied. An
additional interest is development of strategies for linking the PAHs together
to form well-defined, extended structures that help bridge the gap between
bottom-up organic synthesis and top-down synthesis of carbon allotropes. The
research aims to first understand the behavior of new nanocarbon materials from
a fundamental perspective, and then (as a longer-term goal) take advantage of
the modularity of the syntheses to rationally tune structures for desired
applications in organic electronics and quantum information science
(QIS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.