* 2104883
* Model 2D Ordering: Structure and Dynamics of Nanoparticles and Their Mixtures at Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Thomas Russell, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 11/30/2024
* USD 495,544.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles, too small to see
with even the best optical microscopes and just larger than individual
molecules, can attach to a liquid surface and pack there at increasing density
to create a two-dimensional layer only one particle thick. To keep the particles
from aggregating, they typically are coated with a solvent-swollen polymer that
prevents the particles from physically touching each other. The individual
nanoparticles form layers that possess magnetic, conductive, optical or sieving
properties. These nanoparticle assemblies are of increasing importance for
emerging technologies, ranging from displays to storage media to flexible
electronics. In this project, a new electron microscopy method enables the in
situ, real-time imaging of nanoparticles as they rearrange and possibly
crystallize or jam at a liquid surface. Among the phenomena visualized at
single-particle resolution are mixing/separation of dissimilar nanoparticles,
control of packing through variation of polymer chemistry, and mutual
organization/orientation of rod-like nanoparticles. Videos document in time how
the nanoparticles organize themselves. A further project goal is to build
electron microscope devices that mechanically stress a liquid surface laden with
nanoparticles, forcing them to re-organize, opening routes to more perfect
packings or even the formation of surface patterns when two or more different
types of nanoparticles are used. In developing and applying the new imaging
method, a Ph.D. student and a post-doctoral student are gaining skills at the
disciplinary intersection of polymers, nanoparticles, microscopy, and
interfaces. The collected images and movies of nanoscale processes offer a
visually appealing introduction to nanotechnology and soft matter research that
is integrated in K12 and public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles attached to liquid interfaces as
Gibbs monolayers are key to numerous technologies, and more generally, these
systems provide excellent models for probing two-dimensional (2D) assembly
processes. However, nanoparticles are too small to resolve in an optical
microscope, and little is known about their behavior at liquid interfaces.
Different than larger particles, the flexible polymeric ligands that stabilize
nanoparticles often approach or even exceed the particle size; how these ligands
promote and stabilize nanoparticles on a liquid surface has scarcely been
explored. A new in situ scanning electron microscopy (SEM) method can visualize,
to the single particle level and in real-time, the microstructures and dynamics
of densely packed interfacial nanoparticles, even those that are undergoing 2D
crystallization and jamming. Here, this method addresses several outstanding
problems in interfacial nanoparticle assembly, including the role of ligands in
modulating interfacial nanoparticle interactions, the influence of nanoparticle
shape on monolayer assembly, the phase behavior of nanoparticle interfacial
mixtures, and the development of electromechanical devices for in-situ
manipulation of nanoparticle-decorated liquid interfaces. While the SEM method’s
foundational experiments relied on the unique properties of ionic liquids, using
a variable pressure SEM the need for such special liquids can be lifted, vastly
expanding the range of nanoparticles, liquids, and ligands accessible to
imaging. With the insights gained in this study, possibilities for interfacial
nanoparticle technologies are being greatly expanded, with microstructures,
dynamics, and physical properties made predictable for the first time. Further,
the improved understandings are leading to novel behaviors that will create new
technologies in areas such as 3D printing, selective molecular sieving, and
nanoscale surface patterning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.