* 2104731
* Designing a Multifunctional Nanoculture System for High-throughput in situ Assessment of Microbial Communities
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Tagbo Niepa, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 321,373.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop
new biomaterials and tools to cultivate microorganisms and study them in
conditions that closely mimic the environment in which they naturally grow.
Current methods rarely do this, so scientists study microbes that can grow and
not those present but unable to grow in nonnatural conditions. Therefore, most
microorganisms are poorly studied, even if known to exist. This has impeded the
scientific discovery of novel materials made by microorganisms that have
potential applications in health care, environmental remediation, or industrial
use. In this research, microbes isolated from various natural sources will be
enclosed in capsules that are smaller than the width of a hair. The composition
of capsule will be designed to facilitate the growth of the microbial species
enclosed and their communication with the outside environment. This new
‘nanoculture system’ will be used to study how the enclosed microbial
communities communicate and interact with ‘outside’ microorganisms a natural
environment, like that in the gastrointestinal track. This will be tested by
feeding the encapsulated microbes to mice without gut microbes and determining
if the nanoculture system can restore gastrointestinal health. The results of
this research will result in new capabilities to grow microorganisms and develop
new materials from these understudied microbes with potential to restore balance
to the gut’s microbiomes. The project will expose high school students to the
field of biotechnology and develop their technical skills and seed their
professional networks as strategies to inspire future careers in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to harness a microfluidic-based technique to develop a
multifunctional nanoculture system as a high-throughput assessment tool for
microbial community dynamics. The nanocultures are nanoliter cultures made of
poly(dimethylsiloxane) membranes, which can be manipulated for tunable
permeability. The mechanical, transport, and magnetic properties of the
nanocultures can facilitate the long-term storage and incubation of the
microbial communities in environmental conditions. The nanocultures are thus
microdevices capable of eliminating growth rate bias associated with
interspecies competition and preserving microbes against biological and chemical
insults. The soft-shelled microcapsules can harbor, culture, and store a
multitude of microbes for purposes including community dynamics study, growth of
challenging species, and the delivery of defined communities for microbiome
restoration. A technology will be built to sequester and monitor the dynamics of
synthetic or defined microbial consortia in environmental conditions.
Specifically, a functional housing will be designed to characterize the
unintended ecological impacts of the synthetic communities and to investigate
the advantages of their controlled delivery in manipulating various microbiomes.
The feasibility of the functional nanocultures for delivering a probiotic
producing IL-2 in a mouse model of total body irradiation will be determined.
The intellectual merit stems from the body of knowledge that the proposed work
seeks to generate. Upon completion of the proposed research, we expect to have
vertically advanced microbial-based technology by providing an alternative
strategy to quickly and reliably assess the persistence, stability, and safe
delivery of a synthetic community capable of impacting microbiomes relevant to
human health. Finally, the proposed project is a transformative education model
that will engage students and faculty from underrepresented groups. It will
promote activities to help students develop new technical skills, participate in
conferences, craft their professional development plan, and help 9-12 and
undergraduate students embrace the STEM career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.