* 2104629
* The Influence of Mental Representations of Social Agents on Social Decision Preferences
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Rick Dale, Moreira, Joao F
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Carolyn
Parkinson at the University of California, Los Angeles, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating how mental
representation of social agents affect decision processes involving these
others. Defined as decisions that have direct or indirect social consequences,
social decision-making has received much scientific attention over the past two
decades. However, existing social decision-making research is impoverished
insofar that very little is known about how the features of social targets
implicated in social decision-making influence decision processes. Humans
represent a wealth of information about others that profoundly shapes thought
and behavior, yet it is unknown how these representations—dynamic mental models
of others—impact decision preferences. Indeed, classic work from social
cognitive psychology and neuroscience indicates that representations guide
behavior in context, suggesting that mental representations likely play an
important role in shaping social decision preferences. The current study aims to
use computational methods to analyze functional magnetic resonance images and
text data to (i) probe mental representations of common social decision-making
targets (parents, friends) and (ii) relate structural features of these
representations to social decision behavior. This project stands to make
important theoretical contributions towards social decision-making research and
contribute to ongoing efforts to build unifying and generalizable models of
social decision-making. Notably, because social decision-making behavior has
widespread impacts—ranging from individual well-being to aggregate societal
phenomena—this project could inform future efforts to promote individually and
societally adaptive social decision behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will employ eminent computational methodologies to test how mental
representations of real-life social partners shape social decision preferences
as a function of the motivational goals and needs fulfilled by said agents. By
combining multivariate pattern analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) data with natural language processing (NLP) and computational models of
behavior, this project will comprehensively measure mental representations of
everyday social partners and identify their relationship to social decision-
making preferences. Concretely, this will involving (i) probing the neural
representations of different kinds of social agents using fMRI, (ii) determining
how neural representational overlap shapes social decision preferences, and
(iii) use NLP tools on written content of social agents to help identify the
representational content that drives differences in social decision preferences
across social partners. This research will hopefully help lay the groundwork for
the gradual establishment and refinement of unifying quantitative models of
social decision-making, aiding both basic and applied scientific endeavors in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.