* 2104611
* Knowledge Co-Production for Collaborative Environmental Management
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Cara Steger, Steger                  Cara           E
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 11/30/2022
* USD 107,400.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Karim-Aly Kassam at Cornell University,
this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating knowledge co-production processes and how they enable or constrain
social learning, with the aim of contributing to more empirically-informed
theories of collaborative environmental stewardship. As global environmental
change continues to accelerate and intensify, science and society are turning to
collaborative environmental management to facilitate transitions to
sustainability. Collaborative approaches such as knowledge co-production bring
together diverse actors from different sectors of society to work towards
solutions for social-ecological problems. Knowledge co-production processes have
been shown to facilitate social learning, foster adaptive capacity, and support
collective action outcomes by building trust and enabling communication among
the diverse members of a management team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this research is to integrate local, Indigenous, and scientific knowledge to co-
create a holistic understanding of past and future environmental change. The
case study is located in and around a protected area that is experiencing rapid,
large scale change from the construction of a dam. Using a combination of
sophisticated remote sensing analyses and ethnographic inquiry, this work will
examine (1) how different groups think about and value the protected area (e.g.,
governmental, scientific, Indigenous groups), (2) what anticipatory strategies
emerge for addressing the changes occurring there, and (3) how participants
experience social learning throughout the knowledge co-production process. This
research will generate new understanding of how different socio-cultural groups
conceptualize and value their environment, which can help us understand critical
anthropogenic drivers of environmental change in this system and around the
world. Second, we will compare and contrast local narratives of change with
measurements derived from remote sensing analyses, revealing areas of
complementary understanding as well as critical gaps between scientific and
Indigenous knowledge. Third, we will employ cognitive modeling exercises in
conjunction with participatory scenario planning to co-generate strategies for
anticipating and responding to future environmental change â€“ thus refining these
methods for use in other systems. Finally, this project will advance our ability
to conceptualize and measure social learning, for which methods are urgently
needed. Workshops with community members, an open-access educational case study
on transdisciplinary science, a project report, and at least two peer-reviewed
journal articles will contribute to achieving these
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.