* 2104598
* The Development of Children's Punishment Behavior Across Social and Motivation Contexts
* SBE,SMA
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Julia Marshall, Marshall, Julia
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 11/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Katherine McAuliffe at Boston College, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist examining
whether the emergence of third-party punishment—a key cooperative behavior in
human societies—varies depending on social and motivational context. Previously,
researchers have documented how both children and adults are willing to engage
in third-party punishment across societies; they will make personal sacrifices
to punish transgressors even when unaffected by the transgression. A key
question emanating from this work is whether we punish all transgressors equally
or whether we are particularly likely to enforce norms in certain intergroup
contexts. For instance, are we especially likely to punish an outgroup
transgressor compared with an ingroup transgressor? Previous efforts to address
this question have yielded mixed results, with some work finding that we punish
in-groups more than out-groups and other work finding the opposite pattern of
results. The present proposal seeks to clarify this area of research by
considering how different motives may relate to people’s willingness to punish
transgressors in intergroup contexts. Specifically, this research tests the
specific theoretical proposal that in-group punishment is motivated by a desire
to enhance cooperative interactions—so called, consequentialist motives—and out-
group punishment is motivated by a desire to inflict harm on others—so called,
retributive motives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these aims, the studies
use a multi-methodological approach that draws on previously-established
developmental paradigms. Study 1 builds on ample theorizing suggesting that
individuals should punish ingroup members more than outgroup members if
punishment stands to deter bad behavior (i.e., consequentialist punishment).
Study 2 tests a corollary hypothesis that children will punish outgroup members
more than ingroup members if punishment only aims to harm and does not
precipitate any positive societal benefits (i.e., retributive punishment). Study
3 brings these two aims together in a single study to examine whether children
punish ingroup members more in consequentialist contexts and outgroup members
more in retributive ones. Together, findings from these studies will bring
important new evidence to bear on the core question of why we punish others. By
leveraging our understanding of the various motivations underlying punishment,
we can begin to make sense of the previous mixed findings from this literature
and provide a clarifying framework for researchers interested in understanding
variability in punitive behavior. The present studies also stand to shed light
on the nature of prejudice and intergroup relations. Specifically, these studies
are positioned to illustrate the ways in which punishment, even at an early age,
may be used both as a tool to deter antisocial behavior within groups as well as
a means of inflicting harm between groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.