* 2104661
* MuSR and multi-probe studies of spin-charge interplays in emergent quantum phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2026
* USD 485,084.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is a prominent
macroscopic manifestation of quantum phenomena, which can be applied to quantum
computing devices, loss-free power-transmission, high-field magnets and high-
speed trains. Superconducting mechanism for simple metals, such as Sn and Al,
was explained by the theory of Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer (BCS) in 1957.
However, since the discovery of cupper-oxide systems in 1986, many
"unconventional" superconductors (USC) were found to exhibit signatures
unexpected in BCS theory. Many of them are in the proximity to materials showing
Mott metal-insulator transitions (MIT). Strong interplay between electric
(charge) and magnetic (spin) interactions seems to be crucial for the USC and
MIT phenomena. By performing muon spin relaxation, neutron scattering and
scanning-tunneling microscopy measurements on selected systems, and by
interpreting the results using Uemura-plot phenomenology developed by the PI
since 1989, the present project aims to elucidate charge-spin interplays and
unveil essential mechanisms of USC and MIT. The project also aims to clarify the
role of dimensionality and topology on phase transitions of these systems and
selected novel magnetic systems. Involving students and young researchers, these
projects help develop human resources in international collaborations at major
accelerator-based facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emergent quantum materials, such as
unconventional superconductor (SC), Mott transition, Skyrmion and topological
systems, exhibit novel quantum phenomena based on intertwining interplays of
spin, charge, geometry and topology. Muon spin relaxation (MuSR) is a strong
probe for studying these systems, with unique sensitivity to superfluid density
in SC's and dynamic spin fluctuations, static order parameter, volume fraction
and local spin correlations in magnetic transitions. By performing MuSR studies
in combination with complementary measurements by neutron scattering and
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM), the PI aims to test and clarify: (1) a
hypothesis of highly entangled spin-charge gap, analogous to the magnetic
resonance mode, existing in non-superconducting Mott transition systems
Ba(Co,Ni)S2 and Ni(S,Se)2; (2) magnetic-field-induced change in the normal state
of Hg1201 high-Tc cuprates; (3) effect of topology in dynamic critical behavior
of MnSi and other Skyrimon systems; and (4) spin fluctuations in topological
Weyl semimetal Co3(Sn,In)2S2 with Kagome lattice. The PI also integrate these
experimental efforts with his phenomenology on unconventional SC's towards the
ultimate goal to advance comprehensive understandings of unconventional
superconductivity. In addition, Frontiers of Condensed Matter Physics (FCMP)
lectures and associated workshops organized by the PI facilitate motivated
graduate students / researchers from over the world to study forefront CMP
researches on superconductivity and magnetism with leading
contributors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.