* 2104158
* OAC Core: A Machine Learning Assisted Visual Analytics Approach for Understanding Flow Surfaces
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Danny Chen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2024
* USD 515,907.00

Among the popular integration-based techniques for fluid flow visualization,
line-based techniques have made significant advances over the years, providing a
sharp contrast to surface-based techniques. Surface-based flow visualization is
often regarded as one of the most challenging problems in scientific
visualization. Flow surfaces can provide better illustrative capabilities and
much-improved visualization compared to flow lines. However, existing surface-
based flow visualization methods face substantial challenges related to surface
selection, visualization, and analytics, calling for creative ideas and enabling
solutions. The overarching goal of this project is to develop a machine
learning-assisted visual analytics approach for understanding three-dimensional
complex flow surfaces. The project contributes to the state-of-the-art flow
visualization by providing end-to-end solutions that introduce an innovative
deep learning approach to surface feature learning, investigate a new template-
based visual interface for flow surface exploration, and explore occlusion
reduction and relationship interrogation via visual transformation. The team
will work with domain experts and apply the proposed solutions to study
cardiovascular flow, aligning with the NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance the national health, prosperity, and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underlying the proposed work is a novel data-
driven and user-centric approach for surface selection and exploration. The
project will develop a new framework that supports (1) selection of
representative surfaces through feature learning, projection, and clustering
powered by graph neural networks, (2) exploration of surface patterns via a
principled vocabulary-based method for shape-invariant partial flow surface
querying and matching, and (3) comparative analytics of flow surfaces for
studying seeding sensitivity or variability via a river-like visual metaphor.
Research results will be evaluated through comparison against existing methods,
assessment by domain experts, and a formal user study. Furthermore, for
cardiovascular flows the project will investigate the hemodynamics of aortic
dissection and intracranial aneurysm for solution validation. The project
outcomes include (1) source code that implicitly learns surface features using
graph neural networks, (2) a surface shape database based on the universal
alphabet, and (3) an educational tool for teaching and learning flow surfaces.
The general approach will impact other fields of study, including machine
learning for visualization, shape analysis, visual analytics, and visualization
in education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.