* 2104104
* Elements: Spatial Ecology Gateway
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* James Sheppard, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Spatial ecology is the study of how landscape characteristics influence the
distribution and movement of organisms within their environment. The Spatial
Ecology Gateway (SEG) enables researchers, students and wildlife managers to
upload biotelemetry data, typically GPS readings, and construct home ranges that
allow them to interpret animal space use. Applications of the SEG can include
classroom projects, basic research into problems in wildlife ecology,
environmental impact studies and mitigation of adverse outcomes such as habitat
fragmentation or increased human-wildlife interaction resulting from new
development. The SEG insulates users from the underlying computational details
so that they can focus on their science rather than mastering the technology.
Users of the SEG have the option to generate two-dimensional (2D) or, where
applicable, three-dimensional (3D) home ranges. Users are also provided with
less computationally intensive tools to perform exploratory
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEG is built using the HubZero platform, an
open-source software platform for building websites that support scientific
activities and leverages the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE) for more computationally demanding tasks. Data can be pulled
directly into the SEG from the online community platform Movebank using their
REST API. The SEG deploys the Brownian Bridge Movement Model (BBMM), Potential
Path Volumes (PPV) and Continuous-Time Movement Modeling (ctmm) methods for home
range construction. Tools for exploratory analysis of animal trajectories
include net squared displacement, movement path tortuosity and relocation
sampling rates versus deployment time. Users can apply basic filtering to their
data sets to restrict analyses to specified time ranges or particular animals.
The SEG insulates users from having to decide computational details such as
choice of resource, number of compute cores or wall clock time. Rather, these
decisions are made using logic built into the gateway and based on extensive
benchmarking studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure within the NSF Biosciences Directorate, and by the Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems within the NSF Computer and Information
Science and Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.