* 2104492
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Detachment Fault Cycle at the Mid-Cayman Spreading Center
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Robert Sohn, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2025
* USD 477,081.00

Continuous paving of new seafloor at the center of the oceans is one the
fundamental processes that shape Earth’s surface. Where plates spread apart
relatively quickly, new crust is formed as molten rock rises to the surface, and
cools to form solid crust. Where the plates move apart more slowly less molten
rock fills the gap, and instead, plate separation is taken up by motion on long-
lived faults called detachments. Creation of new oceanic seafloor by slip on
these kilometer-scale faults is poorly understood, and is associated with
hydrothermal vent systems that provide metal-rich fluids, which create ore
deposits and support thriving deep-sea ecosystems. One of the best ways to
understand the behavior of these faults is to study the earthquakes that they
generate. This project will use earthquake data recorded by a network of
seafloor seismometers, deployed on a detachment fault system where two plates
are spreading apart in the Caribbean Sea, at the Mid-Cayman Spreading Center.
The results will help us understand the final stages of the ‘life cycle’ of an
oceanic detachment fault, by monitoring the faulting, magmatism, and
hydrothermal fluid flow in the subsurface. This project supports the training of
a graduate student at the University of California San Diego, and a postdoctoral
investigator at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. It also supports the
training of undergraduate students, through participation in a sea-going
research expedition and summer programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to understand the processes that govern the
late stages of the detachment faulting life cycle, and the processes by which
the fault system is abandoned, in particular. Oceanic detachments undergo a life
cycle of slip and abandonment that lasts millions of years, and commonly expose
upper mantle rocks on the seafloor in kilometer-scale domes called oceanic core
complexes. Although they form in magma-poor settings, detachments often host
high-temperature hydrothermal systems, and interactions between hydrothermal
vents and ultramafic rocks generate fluids with distinct compositions.
Detachment faults are associated with a delicate interplay between tectonic,
magmatic, and hydrothermal processes, but how such interactions evolve over the
~2 Myr life cycle are controversial. This project will use a local
microearthquake survey of the Mt. Dent massif on the Mid-Cayman Spreading
Center, to constrain the tectono-magmatic processes associated with the late
stage of the life cycle. A network of ocean bottom seismographs will be deployed
for 6–12 months to detect microearthquake arrivals, which will be used to
generate hypocenter and focal mechanism catalogs, and also to test new full-
waveform methods for detecting and locating
hypocenters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.