* 2104007
* Elements: Crowdsourced Materials Data Engine for Unpublished XRD Results
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yinghui Wu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2024
* USD 554,395.00

Although data-driven analysis has been heralded as a new paradigm in fundamental
material science such as X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis, high-value material
datasets are often not made public and are underutilized. This project designs
and develops CRUX, a crowdsourced data infrastructure and services to curate,
discover, share, and recommend unpublished XRD data and analytical results. CRUX
promotes underutilized high-quality material science data by allowing the
sharing and exploration of unpublished data with state-of-the-art crowdsourcing,
knowledge harvesting, and machine learning techniques. CRUX provides a
crowdsourced knowledge base to allow scientists and the general public to share
and access unpublished data resources. It also provides (a) a novel search
engine that supports simple keyword search, can provide relevant data resources
when the exact keyword matching does not exist, and self-evolves to improve the
search quality, and (b) a "data feed" service to allow users to easily receive
and track updates of specific data resources of interest. The developed
infrastructure and tools enable an open, collaborative, and sustainable platform
that can facilitate exchanging of unpublished XRD data and discoveries, unlock
new research problems (e.g., predictive analysis of materials compositions with
multi-phase data), and inspire the novel design of machine learning pipelines
(e.g., deep neural networks) for data-driven materials science. CRUX will make
materials data resources available and shareable for a broad community including
materials scientists, data analysts, software developers, and the general
public, and thus promote long-term collaborative research, software development,
and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed CRUX system enables (1)
coherent representation of materials data, metadata, and knowledge in terms of a
three-tier knowledge graph model; (2) scalable XRD metadata curation and
information extraction techniques to promote high-value unpublished XRD data
sources for data-driven materials research; (3) adaptive, self-improving search
and recommendation techniques to recommend relevant datasets upon user requests
and feedback, with sustainability beyond the time of the project; and (4)
interactive and exploratory search techniques to explain and recommend the
relevant datasets beyond the scope of initial queries. CRUX will be evaluated
with established human-in-the-loop knowledge bases and active machine learning
algorithms by cornerstone materials research such as the discovery of new high-
temperature ferroelectrics. The research community will be able to share XRD
data resources (analytical results, machine learning models, processing data)
via "one-click" upload, search for high-quality data resources, and (re)discover
new resources for machine learning pipelines. CRUX enables several components to
advance data-driven materials research, including a materials knowledge graph
model, automatic data integration, and exploratory query engine that support
"Why" and "What-if" analysis for XRD analysis. Developed solutions will benefit
data-driven material science in general. For example, researchers can make use
of unpublished two-phase data to predict new materials compositions, identify
solubility limits through parameterization by machine learning tools, and refine
machine learning models with more sophisticated techniques such as deep neural
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.