* 2104630
* Probing interactions of working- and long-term memory
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,06/30/2023
* John Serences, Adam, Kirsten
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 132,250.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. John Serences at the University of
California San Diego, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating the interaction of working memory and long-term
memory. Working memory refers to the ability to hold information temporarily in
mind over the short term. Long-term memory refers to the ability to encode and
retrieve information over longer periods (from moments to decades). Researchers
have taken great pains to separately measure each kind of memory, in part
because they naturally tend to cooperate (e.g., compare holding the letters XZK-
FGC-KZPW vs. DOG-CAT-BIRD in working memory). To estimate working memory
capacity without support from long-term memory, laboratory studies often use
contrived stimuli (e.g., arbitrary color-location pairings). This reductionist
approach has revealed that working- and long-term memory have unique behavioral
signatures and rely on dissociable neural mechanisms. However, this approach
skews our understanding of how working memory functions. In everyday life, to-
be-remembered items are rarely devoid of meaning and multiple memory systems are
used in tandem (e.g., when asked at trivia to write an alphabetical list of
Beatles members, you must first retrieve the information from long-term memory
and then manipulate it with working memory). Thus, the interaction of working-
and long-term memory is critically important to human memory, and the objective
of this research program is to better understand when and why these canonically
dissociable memory systems interact. Because working- and long-term memory are
intertwined in everyday life, cognition can fail due to difficulties with one or
both constructs. Accordingly, this basic science work also has implications for
understanding co-occurring working- and long-term memory deficits in normal
aging and in clinical populations, as well as implications for how working- and
long-term memory work in tandem in educational settings (e.g., when students
encounter novel information they must hold in working memory and then later
recall).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on decades of research on the separable
neural mechanisms that support working- and long-term memory, the project will
use fMRI to test competing predictions about the interaction of active working
memory maintenance signatures in cortex (i.e., decoding the identity of items
held in mind) with neural signatures of support from long-term memory (i.e.,
hippocampal activation). The first two experiments address competing accounts of
the capacity limits of active, cortical working memory codes and how hippocampal
activity may support WM when this capacity limit is exceeded. The remaining two
experiments address competing accounts of activity-silent working memory â€“ a
recently popularized idea that rapid synaptic plasticity within cortex can
support working memory maintenance in the absence of persistent activity. This
project investigates the alternative account that working memory behaviors may
rely upon hippocampal-dependent cortical reinstatement of active codes if
persistent activity is lost. The proposed research will leverage fMRI and
multivariate modeling to inform competing theoretical accounts of working- and
long-term memory. Regardless of the outcome, the findings will inform and extend
existing theories of human memory, and the methods developed and refined in the
proposed work have the potential to inform future questions (e.g., the ability
to decode the identity 4 items held in mind would be useful for other open
questions in the memory literature).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.