* 2104829
* Socio-political drivers of performance in community water systems and their implications for advancing safe drinking water access
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Gregory Pierce, Dobbin, Kristin B
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 09/30/2022
* USD 69,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Gregory Pierce at University of California
Los Angeles, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the socio-political drivers of community water system
performance in California and the implications for equitable access to safe and
affordable drinking water. Achieving the human right to water is an important
policy priority in California, yet, with nearly a million Californians impacted
by unsafe water and as many as a third of Californians impacted by unaffordable
drinking water rates, clearly much work remains to be done to achieve this
vision. Existing research and policy solutions on this topic focus heavily on
engineering and other technical approaches to solving the drinking water crisis,
yet mounting evidence indicates that social and political factors also play a
key role in shaping outcomes. This research aims to address this gap by
examining the role of democratic representation, elections, and institutional
design in community drinking water provision. The project will develop several
system performance metrics and link them to governance considerations such as
competitive elections and diversified board representation. Finally, the project
will develop case studies to bring these findings to bear on emerging policy
solutions. In doing so the project aims to contribute a more nuanced
understanding of both the challenges and opportunities for advancing drinking
water equity in California and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By linking
governance characteristics with institutional outcomes this project will not
only address the governance gap in drinking water scholarship but also advance
key debates in the local and environmental governance literatures. Key
hypotheses in theories of representative bureaucracy, electoral accountability
and institutional analysis have all been subject to decades of conflicting
findings. Using California as a heuristic case, generalized linear models will
be used to link socio-political characteristics with various measures of system
performance. Using multiple measures of performance will allow for the testing
of competing hypotheses without a priori setting them up as mutually exclusive,
opening the door to identifying trade-offs between different drivers and facets
of performance. These findings will then inform three qualitative investigations
that will contextualize the results and identify opportunities and barriers for
their application to potential solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.