* 2104106
* Collaborative Research: Elements: EXHUME: Extraction for High-Order Unfitted Finite Element Methods
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Kurt Maute, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 05/31/2024
* USD 316,331.00

Unfitted finite element methods allow for the simulation of physical systems
that are difficult if not impossible to simulate using classical finite element
methods requiring body-fitted meshes. For instance, unfitted finite element
methods can be directly applied to the simulation of physical systems exhibiting
a change of domain topology, such as the movement of blood cells through a human
capillary or the flow of blood past the heart valves between the four main
chambers of the human heart. Unfitted finite element methods also streamline the
construction of computational design optimization technologies that optimize the
geometry and material layout of an engineered system based on prescribed
performance metrics. However, the computer implementation of an unfitted finite
element method remains a challenging and time-consuming task even for domain
experts. The overarching objective of this project is to construct a novel
software library, EXHUME (EXtraction for High-order Unfitted finite element
MEthods), to enable the use of classical finite element codes for unfitted
finite element analysis. EXHUME will empower a large community of scientists and
engineers to employ unfitted finite element methods in their own work, allowing
them to carry out biomedical, materials science, and geophysical simulations
that have been too expensive or too unstable to realize using classical finite
element methods. EXHUME will also improve the fidelity of design optimizations
being performed in academia, national laboratories, and industry on a near daily
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfitted finite element methods simplify the finite
element solution of PDEs (Partial Differential Equations) on complex and/or
deforming domain geometries by relaxing the requirement that the finite element
approximation space be defined on a body-fitted mesh whose elements satisfy
restrictive shape and connectivity constraints. Early unfitted finite element
methods exhibited low-order convergence rates, but recent progress has led to
high-order methods. The key ingredient to success of a high-order unfitted
finite element method is accurate numerical integration over cut cells (i.e,
unfitted elements cut by domain boundaries). EXHUME uses the concept of
extraction to express numerical integration over cut cells in terms of basic
operations already implemented in typical finite element codes, an integration
mesh, and extraction operators expressing unfitted finite element basis
functions in terms of canonical shape functions. EXHUME generates integration
meshes and extraction operators outside of the confines of a particular finite
element code so it may be paired with existing codes with little implementation
effort. A key goal of the project is demonstration of EXHUME by connecting it to
existing research codes and the popular FEniCS toolchain for finite element
analysis. An effort parallel to software development explores accuracy versus
efficiency trade-offs associated with 1) approximations made during extraction
and 2) novel numerical quadrature schemes for cut cells. The breadth of EXHUME's
technical impact is ensured by several factors: 1) the ubiquity of PDEs across
nearly all disciplines of science and engineering, 2) the library's
interoperability with existing finite element codes, and 3) the generic nature
of the EXHUME+FEniCS demonstrative example, which can be applied to arbitrary
systems of PDEs. By simplifying the setup of PDE-based computational models,
EXHUME+FEniCS enables classroom demonstrations simulating complicated physical
scenarios without letting the technical details of numerical methods distract
from the scientific principles being taught.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.