* 2104141
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Criticality, Localization and Dynamics in Quasiperiodic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Romain Vasseur, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 179,823.00

Nontechnical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the motion
of particles (such as electrons) in quasicrystalline systems. Most solids are
crystalline (i.e., their atoms are arranged in a regular array) or amorphous
(i.e., their atoms are distributed essentially randomly). In the 1980s, a third
type of solid, called a quasicrystal, was discovered. Atoms in quasicrystals
follow deterministic, structured patterns; however, these "quasiperiodic"
patterns do not repeat in space unlike those of a
crystal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How electrons in a material move and interact,
giving rise to electrical and heat conductivity, as well as phenomena like
magnetism, depends strongly on whether they are in a crystalline or a random
background. Electrons in quasicrystals exhibit even richer behavior, with new
classes of phase transitions in their magnetic properties and conductivity. We
do not yet have a general framework to describe these effects. This project aims
to develop such a framework and apply it to various recently discovered
phenomena in quasiperiodic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide technical training to graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher in
an area of high national priority. The PIs will organize a virtual symposium and
host virtual public lectures to bring the exotic physics of quasicrystals to a
broad and diverse audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a general framework
for exploring quantum phase transitions, localization phenomena, and dynamics in
systems with quasiperiodic spatial modulation. Quasiperiodic systems are of
great experimental relevance, given their importance in cold-atom settings and
recent advances in synthesizing metallic quasicrystals, as well as the advent of
Moire materials. These systems exhibit phenomena such as Anderson localization
as well as unconventional magnetic phases. However, our understanding of this
physics is limited by the lack of a generally applicable computational
framework, comparable in power to the field-theoretic methods that describe
crystalline or random systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore
the physics of localization and quantum criticality in quasiperiodic systems
using a combination of real-space techniques, in a way that is tailored to the
unique patterns of approximate repetitions of quasiperiodic potentials. The
techniques include real-space renormalization-group methods as well as
semiclassical methods and tensor-network-based numerics. The phenomena to be
explored include Anderson and many-body localization, magnetic quantum
criticality, superfluid-insulator transitions, and quantum impurity problems in
the presence of quasiperiodic potentials. In addition to training graduate
students and a postdoctoral researcher, this project will bring the physics of
quasicrystals to a broader audience by means of a virtual conference and public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.