* 2104594
* Intersectionality and Implicit Bias
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Paul Connor, Connor, Paul Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jonathan Freeman at New York University,
this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating implicit evaluations of multiply categorizable social targets. A
large scientific literature suggests that individuals possess implicit
evaluative biases with regard to a range of social categories (e.g.,
automatically associate social categories such as ‘Black’ or ‘White’ with
negative or positive valence), yet little is known about how implicit
evaluations respond when multiple social categories are perceived simultaneously
within the same social target (e.g., when an onlooker perceives an old Black
female or a young White male). This is an important gap in our knowledge,
because in the vast majority of human interactions, individuals are multiply
categorizable. Therefore, understanding how implicit evaluative biases respond
to multiply categorizable social targets is likely vital to understanding how
those biases shape and affect individuals’ lives, and to the extent that
understanding is missing, efforts to identify and ameliorate the social impacts
of implicit bias may be limited. The present research is aimed at building that
understanding from the ground up, and gaining a firm evidentiary foothold
regarding the underlying cognitive processes involved. This knowledge will be
vital toward being able to accurately predict where, when, to what extent, and
with respect to whom implicit evaluative bias is most likely to manifest, all
questions that are crucial toward the development of interventions aimed at
identifying and reducing implicit bias, and to creating institutions and systems
that can effectively counteract and nullify its harmful effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project will adopt a novel approach to
understanding how implicit evaluations operate in the presence of multiply
categorizable social targets. Using an associative learning paradigm previously
employed in Professor Freeman’s lab, the present research will seek to create
implicit biases ‘from thin air,’ by training participants to associate multiple
novel social categories with pro- or anti-social behaviors. Following this, the
researchers will observe how implicit evaluative biases are displayed toward
novel targets simultaneously displaying each of the behavior-associated
categories (likely via Evaluative Priming Tasks, as in previous research
conducted in Professor Freeman’s lab). By doing so, the present project will
document, for the first time, the basic cognitive processes by which perceivers
combine separate implicit evaluative biases in the presence of multiply
categorizable social targets. Following this initial step, the present research
will seek to investigate a number of potential moderating factors governing
these core underlying processes via a series of experiments, including the
visual salience of categories, perceivers’ attention to categories, and
perceivers’ relative levels of bias with respect to
categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.