* 2104447
* RUI: CAS: Quinone-Based Macrocyclic Systems for Supramolecular Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jay Wackerly, Central College of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 235,040.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Jay W. Wackerly of Central College plans to
design and synthesize a new class of "host" molecules with "catch-and-release"
capabilities. The "host" molecule has a cavity into which a smaller "guest"
molecule can fit. Two unique features of this new class of hosts are: 1) the
modular framework that enables control of the size, shape and electronic
properties of the host for selective binding of a specific guest target, and 2)
the switchable electronic property that permits the binding of target to be
turned on and off. The binding properties and the reversible capture and release
of electron-rich guest molecules and negatively charged ions, such as halide and
phosphate ions, will be investigated. The research aims to gain a deeper
fundamental understanding of intermolecular interactions and provide insights to
the design of molecular receptor for water purification and waste treatment. The
project will provide research training opportunities to undergraduate students,
including students of underrepresented groups. The results of research will be
integrated into undergraduate laboratory course and scientific demonstrations in
the middle and high school science classrooms to arouse students’ interest in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One notable aspect of these supramolecular host
macrocycles to be developed is that they can change their electronic state when
subjected to a redox stimulus due to the presence of two parallel facing quinone
rings. This class of structures was given the name "cambiarene" from the Latin
word "cambiare" meaning "to change". This research will explore how the embedded
quinone rings can be modulated to give rise to different structural, electronic,
and binding properties. The upper-rim of the macrocycle, which contains the
quinone rings, will be lengthened and shortened from the original form to
investigate how different sized guests can be accommodated within the cavity and
how strongly guests bind with special attention being paid to the contributions
from anion-pi interactions. The lower-rim of the macrocycle will be modified to
control the cavity size and the distance between the parallel quinone rings.
Additionally, the pendant groups of the macrocycle will be modified to increase
the solubility properties of the cambiarenes. This project should allow for the
development of new small molecule and macrocyclic synthetic methodology, a
greater understanding of the anion-pi interaction, and the establishment of the
cambiarene as a useful supramolecular host molecule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.