* 2104997
* Land Use Legacies in Agroecosystems
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Elise Laugier, Laugier, Elise Jakoby
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 148,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Dan Cabanes at Rutgers University, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating
land use legacies in agroecosystems. Agricultural land use is one of the most
powerful anthropogenic forces influencing Earth’s systems. Although most
historical scientists agree that agriculture has been shaping landscapes for
millennia, it remains difficult to quantify the timing and intensity of past
land use as well as its long term (legacy) effects. The lack of clarity
concerning past land use not only obscures our understanding of past human-
environment relationships, it also impairs our collective ability to understand
the long-term resilience capacities of vital ecosystem functions with real-world
consequences for modern populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
advances human-environmental interaction research by examining the effects of
known historical agricultural land use (legacies) on modern soil microbotanicals
(phytoliths) and establishing the quantitative relationships between them. The
project combines geospatial, geochemical, paleoenvironmental, and ethnographic
methods as part of an integrated approach. The research take place where this is
continuous records of agriculture and is ideal for examining the long-term
dynamics of semi-arid agroecosystems. The overall goal of this research is not
only to define the precision with which phytoliths can be used to investigate
ancient land use, but also to empower future research by unlocking a potentially
valuable source of information on human-environmental
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.