* 2104177
* A ZINC-HISTIDINE, IRON PHOSPHATE, AND ZINC HYDROXIDE BIO-COMPOSITE IN CUTTING AND PUNCTURING TOOLS
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert Schofield, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do small animals like ants and
scorpions so easily puncture human skin, while humans would have a difficult
time biting through similar skin, even with their vastly stronger jaw muscles?
The answer is that organisms with small muscles focus their tiny forces using
very sharp mouth parts, stings and claws. But, sharp tools are easily damaged,
and if an organism is not strong enough to cut with blunted tools, damage and
wear may be fatal. Because of this pressure, special materials may have evolved
to help small organisms make sharp tools and keep them sharp. Humans may learn
from these materials, and use this knowledge to improve human-made materials. A
good candidate for such a material was recently discovered in scorpion mouth
claws. This material may minimize and even “heal” damage and wear of the cutting
edges. This grant will confirm and further study the composition of this
scorpion material by disassembling the material nearly atom-by-atom using Atom
Probe Tomography. The material is thought to contain two different minerals,
iron phosphate, and zinc hydroxide, as well as a protein component that contains
about 10% zinc. The hardness and other mechanical properties of the new material
will be investigated using techniques that can measure these properties for tiny
samples. In addition, the behavior of the sharp edges during cutting will be
studied using a testing device that is integrated into an electron microscope
and cuts and punctures with the claws. The scorpion material is strengthened by
zinc-histidine cross links, which act like cross beams strengthening a building,
but these cross links are sometimes broken under the pressures of cutting. One
possible reason for the large quantities of extra zinc is to quickly repair
broken zinc-histidine cross links. In addition, the zinc hydroxide may fill in
and bond opposite sides of developing cracks. The electron microscope will allow
visualization of wear, damage and self-healing during cutting, and the testing
machine will measure the forces required for repeated puncture. The scorpion
material will be compared to other materials like human-made blades and tips,
and the researchers will investigate how the scorpions make the material by
examining scorpions at various stages of development. In addition to potential
contributions to materials technology and materials science, this project will
further the understanding of the importance of materials in biology, bridging
the fields of material science and organismal biology. A graduate student and
dozens of undergraduates will also receive research training through this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small
animals often overcome force limitations using very sharp mouth parts, stings
and claws. But, sharp tools are easily damaged, and if an organism relies on
sharp tools for defense or food acquisition, damage and wear may be fatal. The
project will investigate a recently discovered complex biomaterial in scorpion
mouth claws that may have evolved to produce sharp structures while minimizing
and possibly “healing” damage and wear. Atom Probe Tomography will be used to
confirm and extend the preliminary findings, which suggested that the material
contains two different biominerals, iron phosphate, and zinc hydroxide, as well
as a histidine - rich protein that binds Zn in ~10% concentrations.
Nanoindentation will be used to measure hardness, modulus of elasticity and
damping (loss tangent), and a puncture/cutting tester will be installed inside a
Scanning Electron Microscope in order to visualize how the material wears during
the puncture/cutting process, and whether the claw tips and edges have self-
healing properties. The self-healing hypothesis is that broken zinc-histidine
bonds re-establish in a manner similar to the minute-scale healing of zinc-
histidine bonds recently discovered in mussel byssal threads. The rate of
repeated punctures in the puncture testing machine, and repeated indentations
with the nanoindenter, will be varied in order to investigate self-healing. One
possible explanation for the presence of zinc hydroxide is that it acts as a
ready supply of zinc for this self-healing mechanism, helping bonds re-establish
quickly. A cyclical breaking and re-establishing of many zinc-histidine bonds
could act as a damping mechanism, absorbing energy that might otherwise be
available for fracture. Finally, scorpions will be examined at various stages of
development in order to begin to understand how they produce this complex
material. In addition to the potential of inspiring new materials technology and
materials science, this project will further the understanding of the importance
of materials in biology, bridging the fields of materials science and organismal
biology by translating material property differences into differences in
required force and muscle mass. A graduate student and dozens of undergraduates
will also receive research training through this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.