* 2104179
* Spatially Defined Radical-Containing Polymers for Enhanced Charge Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jodie Lutkenhaus, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 570,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Drs. Emily Pentzer and Jodie Lutkenhaus from Texas
A&amp;M University will advance the fundamental knowledge of how the placement
of groups that can transfer electrons (dubbed “redox-active groups”) on polymers
and particles impacts their ability to store and produce electrical energy. This
will be accomplished by preparing polymers with controlled spacing between
redox-active groups, then determining how the structure of these polymers impact
their ability to move electrical charges. The advanced knowledge produced
through this work may lead to ground breaking advances for energy, electronic,
and medical applications, such as enabling organic polymers to replace the metal
components of batteries. In addition to the scientific research, undergraduate
students, graduate students, and a postdoctoral researcher will be trained to
address complex problems and be productive members of a collaborative STEM
workforce; educational videos and hands-on demonstrations will be produced and
shared; and high school women will be mentored through the US National Academy
of Engineering EngineerGirl website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three different
classes materials will be synthesized and used to identify the relationship
between structure and electrochemical properties. One organic redox-active group
will be used for these studies (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO)),
and the knowledge gained should be applicable to other redox-active units. In
the first class of materials, the organization of the TEMPO units around a
polymer backbone will be varied; in this class, the number of atoms between the
TEMPO units will remain the same but their spatial orientation around will be
different. In the second class of materials, the spacing between TEMPO units on
a polymer backbone will be varied; in this class, the number of atoms between
the TEMPO units will be changed. The third class of materials that will be
prepared are solid spherical particles that are decorated with either TEMPO
groups or short polymer chains that contain TEMPO groups; these decorated
particles will be added to the TEMPO-containing polymers. The different
structures of the three classes are expected to change how the TEMPO units
interact with each other in a solid film, and thus how electrical energy can be
stored. The physical and electrochemical properties of the materials will be
thoroughly characterized and the work will likely produce knowledge on how
material structure correlates to transfer of electrons and ions in polymer-based
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.