* 2104267
* CRII: CIF: Automated and Robust Image Watermarking: A Deep Learning Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Xin Zhong, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Digital image watermarking refers to the process of covertly embedding
information into a cover-image and extracting it from it the marked-image; it is
used in various application areas ranging from covert communication to
authentication to security. Although many handcrafted watermarking schemes are
available, these traditional methods run into difficulties due to the limited
scope inherent to manual design. To implement image watermarking which adapts to
the demands of increasingly diverse application scenarios, this project aims to
develop novel schemes based on ideas from deep learning (DL). Two major problems
will be addressed, namely (i) minimizing the requirement of domain knowledge,
and (ii) achieving robustness without prior knowledge. Outcomes of this project
will contribute to a new generation of robust and intelligent watermarking tools
that can support cutting-edge applications such as camera scans and secured
Internet-of-Things device on-boarding. The integration of the proposed research
activities into university curriculum development and other educational programs
will contribute to STEM education at various levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to advance the state-of-the-art in DL—based image watermarking
through the development of image watermarking schemes that achieve a robust
generalization of watermarking rules without requiring information about
labeling, the original images, or distortions. The research agenda is structured
around two complementary research activities: (i) DL—based automated image
watermarking with similarity measures of distance functions, discriminator
classifiers, or metric learning; and (ii) DL—based robust image watermarking
that explores invariant image latent spaces and automatic rectification. The
schemes to be developed will be tested on different applications to confirm
their practicality. These research activities are expected to advance our
understanding of watermarking on a number of fronts, namely (i) how to design
deep learning components (such as architectures and layers) and novel algorithms
(through similarity measures) to fully generalize image features and functions
for image watermarking processes; (ii) how to design DL components to achieve
robustness to different types of distortions in image watermarking, without
requiring prior knowledge or adversarial examples; and (iii) how these designs
can enable various novel watermarking application scenarios and use
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.