* 2104264
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Accelerating Privacy Preserving Deep Learning for Real-time Secure Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,548.00

Currently, to draw insights from data, the owner needs to send them to a cloud
server to perform complex Machine Learning based analytics. To enable data
security, the data is encrypted by the owner and sent to the cloud server where
it is decrypted to perform analytics. For privacy sensitive applications such as
healthcare, finance, etc., this leads to data security concerns as the decrypted
data on the cloud may be snooped by malicious actors. To address this concern,
this proposal will develop techniques to efficiently perform Machine Learning
(ML) analytics on encrypted data, without a need for decoding, thereby enabling
end-to-end privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop
optimizations targeting Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) to address the
challenges such as conflicts in parallel access to shared objects, irregular
memory accesses, low data reuse, etc., which are prevalent in many application
domains. Moreover, the parameterized FPGA Intellectual Property (IP) cores for
the key kernels of privacy preserving Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) such as Number
Theoretic Transform (NTT), rotation, multiplication, etc., that will be
developed in the project will allow application developers to easily implement a
wide variety of privacy preserving Machine Learning/Deep Learning models.
Additionally, the proposed acceleration techniques are applicable to
applications which rely on post-quantum lattice based
cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work is in
efficient use of emerging data center and cloud platforms for accelerating
Homomorphic Encryption (HE) based DNNs for real-time secure applications.
Successful completion of this project will lead to a significant increase in the
capabilities of privacy sensitive applications by enabling them to utilize
public clouds in a trusted and secure manner. The project will identify and
expose underrepresented and underserved students to STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, Mathematics) through various programs at the University of Southern
California. The proposed research will also constitute materials appropriate for
inclusion in graduate and undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
software developed in the project will be posted on github at:
https://github.com/pgroupATusc. Software releases will be maintained for a
period of not less than 3 years after the conclusion of the
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.