* 2104881
* Renewal: Simple Molecular Systems at Ultrahigh Pressures
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Russell Hemley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 471,346.00

Non-technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Pressure is not only simple parameter
familiar in many aspects of everyday life, but it is also an effective tool that
can be used to create exotic materials not accessible under ordinary conditions.
In many cases, altogether new materials can be synthesized when everyday
substance are subjected to extreme pressures in the laboratory, for example at
the kinds of pressure found in the core of Earth, or 2 million times atmospheric
pressure. An example is superconductivity – the ability to conduct electricity
without resistance – in newly discovered materials that contain a great deal of
hydrogen. Indeed, these materials have been shown to superconduct at, and
possibly above, room temperature. This project investigates these and related
materials, both fundamentally and with the goal of making room-temperature
superconductors that could be used in modern technology. More broadly, this
study of these and related materials at high pressure is expected to inform a
broad range of scientific fields, from chemistry and physics, to materials
science and engineering, to planetary science and astrophysics. The findings
could also lead to improved mechanisms of hydrogen storage and separation that
could impact future energy needs. The techniques developed at national user
facilities are made available to the scientific community. An important
component of the proposed project is the education and training of the next
generation of researchers, particularly those from many groups that are
underrepresented in scientific and technical disciplines, for example at the
University of Illinois Chicago, which is a Minority-Serving Institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the
study of fundamental interactions in simple elemental and molecular systems to
pressures above 300 GPa (3 Mbar). A full range of state-of-the-art experimental
and theoretical techniques are used to investigate the structural and transport
properties of selected materials, with a focus on low-atomic number (Z)
materials that exhibit very high-temperature superconductivity and other exotic
physical properties. Theoretical and computational methods are used to predict
stable compositions and structures at high pressures, and advanced high
pressure-temperature P-T methods are employed to synthesize and characterize
these materials in-situ. The focus of this work is hydrogen-dominant materials,
such as superhydrides, that our group has shown to exhibit very high Tc
superconductivity in the vicinity of, and possibly above, room temperature, at
megabar pressures. Theory and computation are used to interpret the results and
guide subsequent synthesis and characterization. This proven joint theoretical-
experimental ‘materials by design’ approach that led to our previous discoveries
are applied to address new questions that include expanding the range of
compositions and extreme conditions of pressure-temperature-magnetic field
explored and understanding underlying transport mechanisms, including quantum
effects expected for these low-Z systems. The full range of relevant
experimental and theoretical techniques, including new modeling and simulation
methods, are brought to bear on the study of these materials. In particular, new
and emerging capabilities at national user facilities are applied to probe the
structural, electronic, and transport properties of materials with new
integrated approaches. The work has the potential to advance our understanding
of matter at extreme conditions, and thereby improve our picture of the
fundamental interactions that govern the behavior of materials, as well as lead
to the creation of new useful materials for practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.