* 2104159
* Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education in Geological and Paleoclimate Studies at the University of Houston
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Julia Wellner, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This award will support the acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer
(IRMS) in the Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at the University of
Houston. The instrument will expand analytical capabilities, enhance analytical
accuracy and precision, increase sample throughput, and enable currently
unavailable analyses at the University of Houston. Its highly improved
sensitivity and precision allow measurements of clumped isotopes in carbonates,
as well as traditional stable isotope characterization of light elements (C, H,
O, N, and S) in gases, rocks, and other matrices. It will improve the research
program of each PI, which covers a wide range of areas in geological and
paleoclimate studies, their abilities to mentor and teach graduate and
undergraduate students, and collaborations with other institutions. Postdocs,
undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in hands-on training
opportunities with this instrument, which are fully integrated with novel
scientific projects and other educational activities. Through hands-on trainings
and related courses, the instrument will be an invaluable tool for engaging
undergraduate and graduate students in stable isotope geochemistry, in
particular those historically underrepresented students (women and minorities)
in STEM fields. It will infuse undergraduate and graduate students with
interdisciplinary knowledge, and serve students, postdocs, and faculty from
different departments and colleges at the University of Houston, local
educational institutions, and research organizations. More importantly, through
outreach activities, it will enhance geoscience education for local K-12
students, motivate them to consider building careers in geoscience, and raise
public awareness of science in general in the greater Houston
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested IRMS instrument will form an integral
component of research into fundamental geological processes on Earth and other
planetary bodies, paleoclimatic effects on human evolution and migration,
paleoenvironment and glacial history. It will foster current and future exciting
interdisciplinary research by making precise isotopic measurements, and enable
new fields of discovery in broad areas of Earth sciences. In organic
geochemistry and astrobiology, isotopic signatures of light alkanes and clumped
isotopes of carbonates from geological environments and laboratory experiments
are used to elucidate their reaction pathway and formation condition, and
constrain their origin. In geoarchaeology and soil science, clumped, triple
oxygen, and traditional stable isotopes are used to reconstruct past climate and
past environments to better understand the context in which humans and hominins
evolved. In speleothem science and limnology, the use of conventional stable
isotopes of speleothem and lake sediments with two recently developed proxies
can provide a comprehensive understanding of paleoclimate and paleoenvironment.
In marine and glacial geology, past ocean water temperatures in west Antarctica
are calculated using the stable isotope records from foraminifera, collected
from sediment cores in locations where circumpolar deep water may be melting the
base of major ice sheets, to better understand glacial history. Through current
collaboration, the isotopic signatures of prehistoric skeletons will be combined
with archaeological details and genetic analyses to identify the kinship system
and origin of social inequality within ancient populations in Europe and
Southeast Asia. Altogether, the related research projects point to the
potentially high-impact science that a state-of-the-art IRMS with appropriate
peripherals would allow at the University of Houston. The scientific findings
will place the University of Houston on the leading edge of stable isotope
geochemistry research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.