* 2104700
* CRII: CNS: A Hybrid Software Defined Networking-Information Centric Networking Framework for the Reuse of Computation at the Network Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Spyridon Mastorakis, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2022
* USD 174,736.00

The adoption of next-generation applications, such as Augmented Reality and
Internet-of-Things (IoT), is expected to grow rapidly in the years to come. The
number of IoT devices is expected to reach 75 billion by 2025, while the scale
of potential use-cases (e.g., smart cities with hundreds of thousands or
millions of residents) is also expected to grow. In such use-cases, users may
request the processing of data with temporal, spatial, or semantic similarity by
servers physically close to them. The repeated processing of considerably
similar data may result in the same processing outputs and thus the execution of
duplicate (redundant) computation. This project advances our understanding of
the notion of “computation reuse”, where the processing outputs are
reused/shared among processing requests for similar data, having the potential
to: (i) reduce the time for the processing of similar data and thus the overall
latency perceived by next-generation applications; and (ii) eliminate the
execution of redundant computation, so that the available computing resources
are effectively utilized. Our project will result in a novel network framework,
so that requests for the processing of similar data are identified and forwarded
to the same servers, facilitating the reuse of computation in realistic
infrastructure deployments. The research outcomes of this project will be
incorporated into university course curriculum, while this project will also
offer opportunities that broaden participation and diversity in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance the state-of-the art in
edge computing architectures in order to facilitate the reuse of computation
through a novel, hybrid network framework based on Information-Centric
Networking (ICN)/Named-Data Networking (NDN) and Software-Defined Networking
(SDN). The proposed framework capitalizes on the best of both ICN/NDN and SDN to
realize a service-centric, computation reuse-aware, and “softwarized”
architecture through: (i) the semantically meaningful ICN/NDN naming and
stateful forwarding plane for the seamless and adaptive task forwarding towards
edge servers that can reuse similar previously executed tasks; and (ii) the
separation of forwarding and control planes and the programmable (logically)
centralized SDN intelligence for the orchestration of the computation reuse
semantics. This project will tackle fundamental challenges in the design and
development of network systems for the realization of computation reuse in
realistic edge computing environments, where multiple edge servers may be
available for redundancy, fault tolerance, and load balancing purposes,
facilitating the pervasive edge computing deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by Networking Technology and Systems(NeTS)program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.