* 2104734
* Engineering Responsive Chemical Heterogeneity in Protein Vesicles for Simultaneous Delivery of Diverse Cargoes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Julie Champion, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 438,521.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here creates
protein vesicles, tiny hollow containers made from proteins, that can bind to
specific types of cells and carry three different kinds of therapeutic drugs
inside cells. The functional demonstration of this concept will target breast
cancer cells and deliver a combination of protein, nucleic acid and
chemotherapeutic molecules that could be uniquely effective against them. This
is significant because these vesicles have the potential to address challenges
with drug resistance and metastasis by simultaneous triple drug delivery. Beyond
engineering protein vesicles, the proposed work will ask both fundamental and
practical questions that will build key knowledge of the vesicle assembly
process and properties and extend this work into other areas and vesicles made
from other types of molecules. One of the advantages of protein vesicles is
their ability to present a range of proteins on the surface, which can target
different types of cells, and carry a variety of cargoes, so that many other
drug delivery applications could be envisioned, such as vaccines and
immunotherapies. Broad impact could also be realized by other uses including
biosensors, artificial cells, and small bioreactors. In addition to societal
benefits of the research on critical diseases, the PI will implement activities
to recruit and retain women, especially women from underrepresented groups, in
STEM at education levels ranging from middle school to graduate. Middle school
girls will visit the lab as part of summer camps and field trips. The research
will provide the basis for technical training and critical personal mentoring of
female graduate and undergraduate students. It will also provide meaningful
research experience, professional development, and mentoring to underrepresented
Atlanta high school students. The results from this work will be shared in the
chemical engineering introductory course and the PIâ€™s protein engineering
elective at Georgia Tech, and at K-12 school visits, to inform and inspire
students to pursue and persist in STEM degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand,
engineer, and employ self-assembled protein vesicles made from globular,
functional proteins for therapeutic delivery. Specifically, the vesicles will be
made from full-size therapeutic or targeting proteins that also carry three
different classes of therapeutic cargos in the lumen or membrane: nucleic acids,
small molecules, and additional proteins. Objective 1 will incorporate
responsive elements and distinct chemical environments into protein vesicles by
modifying the amino acid sequences of the vesicle building block proteins. The
ability to modify the protein sequence, with both natural and non-natural amino
acids, will enable tuning to ensure the cargos are released and function when
and where needed. Objective 2 will understand how these sequence changes affect
vesicle self-assembly, properties and stability using techniques including
dynamic light scattering, transmission electron microscopy, and absorbance and
fluorescence spectroscopy. This knowledge will help researchers rationally
design synthetic, recombinant, or hybrid molecules capable of forming self-
assembled structures with responsive properties and cargo loading. Objective 3
will use this knowledge to create functional protein vesicles capable of
simultaneous, receptor targeted delivery of protein (YopJ), nucleic acid (anti-
p-glycoprotein siRNA) and small molecule (doxorubicin) cargoes to breast cancer
cells (epidermal growth factor receptor positive) in vitro as proof of concept.
Delivery will be demonstrated via flow cytometry, confocal microscopy, and cell
viability and function assays. The research will provide the basis for technical
training and critical personal mentoring of female graduate, undergraduate, and
Atlanta high school students. The PI will also implement activities to recruit
and retain women, especially women from underrepresented groups, in STEM at
education levels ranging from middle school to
graduate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.