* 2104002
* Elements: Developing an integrated modeling platform for tectonics, earthquake cycles and surface processes
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Eunseo Choi, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 04/30/2024
* USD 443,830.00

This project develops user-friendly and sustainable code that can simulate
lithospheric deformations coupled with landscape evolution and earthquake
cycles. Natural hazards such as earthquakes, flooding, landslides, and volcanoes
sit at the intersection of geologic and human time scales; the ability to
simulate interactions among diverse geologic processes provides a baseline to
study how global changes are perturbing these processes on human time scales.
The goal of the project is to view earthquake cycles and landscape evolution as
a system coupled with long-term lithospheric deformation. Multiple research
communities including geomorphology, structural geology and earthquake physics
are expected to benefit from the new modeling capability this project enables.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The product software extends existing open-source code,
DES3D (Dynamic Earth Solver in 3D). With internal enhancements and scalable
performance enabled by parallel computing technology, the software functions as
a reliable integrated modeling platform that can explore interplay between
tectonics, surface processes and earthquake cycles. The project includes
measures to improve user experience with the product code; Web-based input file
generation, useful documentation and tutorials readable and executable online
will make the product code accessible and easy to use. To facilitate sustained
development and maintenance of the product code, modern software engineering
practices are adopted. Container-based technology is built into the product code
to create reproducible packages of a model without user intervention. To ensure
that the product code will be a valuable addition to the existing
cyberinfrastructure, this project will actively leverage expertise from
collaborators who have conducted related research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the
Geophysics Program, the Tectonics Program, the Geomorphology and Land-Use
Dynamics Program of the Division of Earth Sciences, and the Division of
Integrative and Collaborative Education and Research within the NSF Directorate
for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.