* 2104599
* Broadening Participation in STEM: The Social Proximity of Mentorship Model
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Sophie Kuchynka, Kuchynka, Sophie
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Luis Rivera
at Rutgers University, Newark, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the utility of a scalable undergraduate
near-peer mentor-mentee relationship program that yields positive psychological,
persistence, and performance outcomes among underrepresented group members
(URGs; Black, Latinx, Native American, and women) pursuing STEM. The research
goal is to test the effectiveness of the near-peer mentorship program in
achieving four societally relevant outcomes valued by NSF: (1) increase
participation of URGs in STEM, (2) improve STEM education at the undergraduate
level; (3) develop a diverse STEM workforce among the United States to increase
economic competitiveness; and (4) enhance infrastructure for research and
education by partnering with eight different higher education institutions in
New Jersey. After three decades of research efforts, STEM pathway participation
gaps are still observed between URGs and non-URGs in STEM. One possible reason
is that psychological, performance, and persistence gains among these groups may
be limited to those participating in STEM retention programs. This indicates the
need to expand successful practices within ongoing support programs to the
broader URG population across institutions. The undergraduate student near-peer
mentorship in the project represents a scalable solution to the lack of
mentorship often experienced by undergraduate URG students in STEM. Instead of
relying on faculty members or staff, advanced undergraduate students represent a
largely untapped pool of potential mentors that can be encouraged to mentor
lower-level students at little or no cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes a mentoring model, the Social Proximity of Mentorship (SPM), that
centers mentor-mentee relationships between advanced undergraduate near-peer
mentors and lower-level undergraduate students. Based on the SPM model, the main
objective is to demonstrate the utility of a scalable undergraduate mentor-
mentee relationship program that yields positive STEM outcomes via social
psychological closeness, relationship comfort, and psychosocial support among
both mentees and mentors. The SPM model proposes that mentor-mentee relationship
processes and outcomes are bidirectional. The academic and career status
proximity between upper-level and lower-level undergraduate students should
promote mutual feelings of psychological closeness and relationship comfort,
which presents a unique opportunity for strong psychosocial support. These
relationship factors buffer situational threats stemming from numeric
underrepresentation, cultural stereotypes, and bias that, in turn, uniquely
undermine STEM belonging and identity. The project’s specific aims are (1) to
show that URG mentees and mentors assigned to a near-peer relationship, compared
to a faculty relationship, will report stronger psychological closeness,
relationship comfort, and psychosocial support, and (2) to demonstrate that URG
mentees and mentors assigned to the near-peer mentorship condition will exhibit
stronger STEM belonging, identity, performance, and persistence gains across
three-time-points, compared to URG students assigned to the control conditions.
To meet these goals, a longitudinal experiment will track mentor-mentee
relationships among undergraduate near-peers, faculty-undergraduate mentorship,
a control group of upper-level students, and a control group of lower-level
students across two semesters. STEM-related psychological processes and
performance outcomes will be measured in both undergraduate mentors and mentees.
The ultimate goal is to establish a scalable mentorship program with URG
students that could be implemented across higher education
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.