* 2104771
* Probing Exotic Phases of Ultra High Mobility Two-Dimensional Electrons
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Mansour Shayegan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 680,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;A major research area in solid-state
science and engineering is the study of how the electrons in a solid interact.
The interaction stems from the repulsion between electrons because of their
electric charge, as well as their spin and other degrees of freedom. It leads to
exotic, often unexpected, phases of matter. To study these phases and phenomena,
it is important to minimize the imperfections, such as impurities and defects,
so that electron-electron interaction is the dominating factor. The goal of this
project is to experimentally explore and understand the new phases that arise in
electron systems with the least amount of imperfections. Results of the research
are communicated through publications and conference presentations to the
specialized as well as general science and engineering communities. While the
subject of this project is fundamental, progress in this area benefits society
in the long term as it may lead to novel, transformative concepts for electronic
devices and information processing systems, such as a quantum computer, whose
operation relies on quantum and/or interaction phenomena. The project also
incorporates a high quality and comprehensive educational component as it
includes the education of students in critical, state-of-the art areas of
science and technology, including the fabrication, characterization, and physics
of very high-quality, thin-film semiconductor structures. Well-trained students
in these fields are invaluable resources for the US as well as for the rest of
the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project
encompasses experimental investigations of electron interaction physics in
quantum-confined GaAs/AlGaAs semiconductor structures with ultra-high-quality,
as quantified by their record-high mobilities and new many-body states. The
program includes studies of both fabrication via the molecular beam epitaxy
technique, and of the electronic transport properties at low temperatures and
high magnetic fields where electron correlation phenomena dominate. The emphasis
of the work is on two-dimensional electron and hole systems confined to
selectively doped GaAs quantum wells. The two-dimensional electron systems have
the highest mobility among all solid-state materials, while the larger effective
mass and the strong spin-orbit interaction in two-dimensional hole systems add
additional, novel twists to their electronic properties. Several exotic phases
of these interacting two-dimensional carrier systems are studied during the
course of this project; these include the fractional quantum Hall effect,
composite fermions, Wigner crystal, and stripe and bubble phases. Competition
between the fractional quantum liquid and the Wigner crystal at large
perpendicular magnetic fields (small Landau level filling factors), as well as
many-body states in excited Landau levels are being
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.