* 2104925
* CRII: CNS: Auction Mechanism Design for Energy-Efficient High Performance Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Kishwar Ahmed, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2022
* USD 174,770.00

High performance computing (HPC) systems (such as supercomputers) are generally
large infrastructures containing thousands of server nodes that can perform
computations in a fast and efficient manner. HPC systems can consume an enormous
amount of power during their operation. For example, current top-ranked
supercomputers can consume tens of megawatts of power during peak operation. As
a direct consequence of power consumption increase, energy cost has become a
major component of the overall cost of the operation of an HPC system. To
achieve energy sustainability in HPC, this project plans to develop novel models
to reduce energy cost and contribute to the power system stability. There are
three primary objectives of this project: (1) develop machine learning models to
predict the power and performance of parallel applications; (2) develop an
auction mechanism model to reduce HPC system’s energy cost via collective energy
reduction of HPC users, while incorporating the renewable energy generation into
the model; and (3) experiment and validate the proposed auction mechanism model
via simulation. Overall, the project is expected to reduce the energy cost of
large-scale systems, as well as to achieve power grid energy conservation and
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute towards advancement
of the state-of-the-art in energy-efficiency of HPC, as well as to balance the
energy-performance trade-offs in HPC. In doing so, this project will increase
HPC system’s participation in sustainable computing. The proposed research will
enable HPC systems to closely interact with the power grid system, and enable
feedback-based energy reduction based on electricity price variation and
renewable energy generation. This project will increase research participation
of both graduate and undergraduate students. Additionally, the project will
train and educate students in the area of parallel and high performance
computing, and energy-efficient computing. Furthermore, through various outreach
activities and research involvement, the project plans to promote diversity in
computing by involving underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.