* 2104229
* Black Holes, Geometric Inequalities, and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Marcus Khuri, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 344,317.00

The goal of this project is to study several important related conjectures in
general relativity. This geometric theory of gravity proposed by Einstein is
fundamental to our understanding of the large scale structure of the universe,
and has many practical applications such as to the fine tuning of global
positioning system (GPS) technology. The PI will seek to establish families of
geometric inequalities relating mass, charge, angular momentum, and horizon
area, which probe the grand weak cosmic censorship conjecture. This conjecture
asserts that whenever singularities arise in spacetime (which is a generic
phenomenon) they must always be shrouded inside a black hole event horizon; this
is intimately tied to whether general relativity is a proper deterministic
theory. Special black hole solutions with symmetry (referred to as stationary
axisymmetric and electro-vacuum) play a large role in our understanding of the
theory, and this project seeks to classify them in higher dimensions relevant to
string theory. Furthermore, new criteria for gravitational collapse and black
hole formation will be studied, and the PI will also examine proposed
definitions of quasi-local mass in order to determine whether they are
mathematically and physically viable. Lastly, fundamental questions concerning
the shape (topology) of the cosmos will be addressed, including whether we live
in a finite or infinite universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently the PI, in
collaboration with Bray, Kazaras, and Stern has found a new and simple proof of
the positive mass theorem, a result which has played a seminal role in
mathematical relativity since its initial proof by Schoen, Yau, and Witten 40
years ago. This new approach, which has also been generalized to the spacetime
and hyperbolic settings, yields an explicit lower bound for the mass in terms of
quantities associated with (spacetime) harmonic functions, and suggests a
strategy to establish the conjectured stability or almost rigidity for this
theorem. Based on an initial collaboration with Bray, the PI has completed a
systematic approach to treating the full family of Penrose-type inequalities by
reducing each to a canonical system of elliptic PDE, thus placing the entire
range of these geometric inequalities within reach. Together with Yamada and
Weinstein, who initiated the study of harmonic maps with prescribed
singularities associated with the axisymmetric 4D Einstein equations in the
1990s, the PI has developed the tools necessary to substantially generalize the
4D results to allow for exotic topologies in higher dimensions as well as a wide
range of symmetric space targets. This work suggests that it is possible to
obtain the full classification of stationary axisymmetric black holes within
vacuum and supergravity. In joint work with Alaee and Yau, the PI has begun a
study of the proposed Bekenstein bounds based on the Wang-Yau quasi-local mass;
these inequalities concern the entropy/information contained within a
relativistic body and have wide ranging implications from thermodynamics to
computer science. This initial study has provided the foundations to address the
full Bekenstein conjecture, and is closely related via the approach to the
trapped surface/hoop conjecture dealing with the conditions under which black
holes may form. In addition, joint work with Anderson has established what may
be considered as the first step of Bartnik's minimal mass extension conjecture,
and the PI's methods indicate what should be a successful strategy for the
remaining parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.