* 2104555
* The contributions of the environment and social interaction to language emergence
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Mahesh Srinivasan, Lu, Jennifer
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 217,800.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Mahesh
Srinivasan at University of California Berkeley, and in collaboration with Dr.
Terra Edwards at University of Chicago, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating the roles of the body and
social interaction in language emergence. Over the last few decades, we have
learned about the origins of language through stunning naturalistic observations
of children who lack exposure to conventional language models. Such situations
often arise within the deaf population, where the majority of deaf children do
not have access to a perceptible linguistic system, like a sign language.
Despite these impoverished linguistic environments, children develop systematic
gestural systems, known as “homesign,” to communicate. These examples of
language emergence and change have been attributed to the nature of children’s
own learning mechanisms. But there is also a social and interactional dimension
that has not been systematically explored within the field of language
emergence, particularly with respect to how children and their parents jointly
establish reference and the role of parents’ social and non-linguistic responses
in the development of homesign systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research addresses the emergence of language among DeafBlind children who vary
in their access to language input and environments, and compares this situation
with that of homesigners and deaf native signers. Although there is a new
emerging protactile sign language (a sign language that is communicate within
the tactile channel) within a community of DeafBlind adults in the US, this new
language has not yet been acquired by children, and only some DeafBlind children
have the opportunity to learn this language. Studying DeafBlind, homesigning,
and deaf native signing children will allow us to ask the following theoretical
questions: 1) When there is a large gap between a hearing, sighted parent and
child’s perceptual experiences of the world, how do they converge on mutual
understanding and establish common ground to communicate? How do signing,
homesigning, and DeafBlind children compare in the development of their
communication systems? 2) When DeafBlind children receive protactile language
input, how do they change the language based on their learning and perceptual
needs? 3) What kinds of assumption do homesigning and DeafBlind children exhibit
about language and meaning? This research program will involve mixed methods,
including psycholinguistic experiments, language elicitation tasks, coding of
language and social interactions, and surveys. This research will also inform us
whether parents’ social and non-linguistic cues are essential for driving the
development of communication systems and demonstrate how children change their
language input to make it easier to process and learn. It is an incredibly rare
opportunity to find a cohort of DeafBlind children at a such a young age, and
there is no previous work on children’s acquisition of protactile language.
DeafBlind children, in particular, are greatly impacted during this
unprecedented time of social distancing and isolation. This work will inform
teachers and early intervention practitioners on how to best provide social and
linguistic input for DeafBlind children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.