* 2104181
* CRII: CNS: Supporting Mixed-Criticality Real-Time Systems on Heterogeneous Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kecheng Yang, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2024
* USD 207,000.00

With the thriving applications in modern computing systems, there is a trend
toward designing and implementing such systems in a consolidated manner for both
scalability and sustainability. This trend leads to: first, applications, or
tasks, of different criticalities that are supported on a common shared hardware
platform; second, such platforms consist of computing processors that have
different functionalities and capabilities, or heterogeneous processors. These
may significantly impact the temporal predictability of the system, which is
crucial for real-time systems where temporal guarantees must be validated prior
to runtime. This project will conduct exploratory research on the real-time
scheduling of mixed-criticality (MC) tasks on heterogeneous processors. The
real-time scheduling analysis will provide provable guarantees on the temporal
behaviors of the system. This research will investigate holistic methods and
techniques that address the consolidation in both aspects of tasks and
processors. This work will result in new system models that represent the MC
tasks and the heterogeneous processors in an integrated manner. Based on the
models, new scheduling algorithms will be developed to efficiently allocate the
computing resources while the required temporal guarantees for the MC tasks are
satisfied. System prototypes will be implemented to demonstrate and evaluate the
effectiveness of the models and algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new
models, algorithms, and prototypes will advance the understanding of both MC and
heterogeneous scheduling in real-time systems, and will enable consolidated
real-time system designs. This further benefits the efficiency, scalability, and
affordability of a wide range of applications in internet of things (IoT) and
cyber-Â¬physical systems (CPS) where temporal constraints commonly exist. As
being conducted in a large Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), this project will
promote science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) education and research
for students from underrepresented groups and broaden their participation in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.