* 2104317
* Repurposing Crystalline Materials for Strong Terahertz Generation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeremy Johnson, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 366,169.00

The discovery of new materials is driving technology development in many fields,
such as renewable energy and communications. Researchers often record useful
characteristics of materials in searchable databases. These databases are
valuable because materials designed with one purpose in mind could find
completely different applications. How to discover these unrealized applications
is a both a great challenge and an opportunity. This project will combine data
mining with computer-based modeling to predict how efficiently any given
material will generate terahertz (THz) light. High quality crystals of promising
candidates will be grown and tested. This approach will lead to new state-of-
the-art high-intensity terahertz generating materials, in turn enabling advances
in biological research, chemical monitoring, and wireless communications. This
project will help to train a new generation of students in the interdisciplinary
areas of data science and materials development. The PI directs the Talmage
Research Internship program to provide research experiences to undergraduate
students from colleges without strong research programs. The co-PI coordinates a
freshman mentoring program to ensure a diverse group of undergraduate students
can begin and continue to participate in research that leads to productive
careers as researchers in chemistry and material
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and discovery of advanced solid
materials with useful properties and functionalities is essential to the
advancement of many fields, including spectroscopy, catalysis, electron
transport, energy storage and release, and air and water purification. For these
applications, the microscopic properties of molecular building blocks, along
with specific surface geometries, molecular packing, and molecular orientation
in the solid state govern the function of the material. Traditionally, it can
take years to identify, crystalize, and develop THz generators. The research
team uses data mining tools to search structural databases and identify
materials with unique solid-state properties, which can be optimized for
applications that differ from their original reported use. Combining data mining
with first-principles calculations enables the identification of extremely
promising materials to maximize success rates in materials development. This
powerful combination enables the identification of ideal candidate molecules
with high molecular hyperpolarizabilities that pack with high densities and
favorable interactions giving non-centrosymmetric head-to-tail configurations
for efficient THz generation. The most promising candidates will be synthesized,
crystallized, and tested for THz generation efficiency. The research teamâ€™s
strategy greatly accelerates the materials development process by allowing the
team to use crystallographic data and first-principles computations to calculate
linear and nonlinear optical properties at near IR and THz frequencies, enabling
the team to predict the strength of THz generation, as well as the generated THz
spectrum for essentially any material in the Cambridge Crystallographic Data
Centre (CCDC) database. The research team demonstrates that data mining combined
with first-principles calculations can maximize success rates in materials
development, which will be applicable to many research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.