* 2104570
* IIBR Instrumentation: Coordinated innovations in radio telemetry (CIRT) for wildlife
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Paul Flikkema, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 605,380.00

An award is made to Northern Arizona University to advance wildlife telemetry
data collection and tag detection through coordinated innovation across multiple
technological domains. Small birds and animals are important actors in
ecosystems. Their populations are declining in many areas of the world, but the
causes are not well-understood, motivating methods to track their locations and
habitats. However, obtaining high fidelity data on the location and activity of
small wildlife continues to be a challenge. Their small size precludes all but
the smallest and most simple telemetry devices, or tags. Guidelines suggest that
70% of bats, birds and terrestrial species should carry tags that weigh less
than 0.75 g, 4.4g, and 12.5 g, respectivelyâ€”about the mass of 1 to 10 paper
clips. These mass constraints continue to dictate the use of tiny Very High
Frequency (VHF) radio transmitters for small-species localization. Moreover,
studies of larger species often continue to rely upon VHF radio tags due to cost
constraints. The transmitted radio pulses from these small VHF tags are very
challenging to detect and localize. This research will improve the quality of
wildlife telemetry data and advance the spatiotemporal understanding of movement
and behavior. The developed technology will be open-sourced to enable adoption
by the wildlife biology and ecology research communities, with dissemination
through a workshop for wildlife professionals. Additionally, increasing public
awareness is a core goal of this program; this will be achieved through
participation in community and K-12 educational outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop an optimal tag detection algorithm and
software implementation that will enable automated detection while maintaining
compatibility with legacy tracking receivers. These methods will improve the
range of reception and enable automated detection of telemetry devices. Tags
will be reconceived to use both new wireless-system-on-chip technology and
transmission methods to improve detection range and reliability, and enable in-
the-field interaction with researchers. Finally, the research will develop
movement guidance methods for both human trackers and unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV)-based tracking systems to reduce detection and localization time and
effort. The efforts in these three research foci will be coordinated to optimize
overall data collection speed and quality. The resulting algorithms and
integrated systems will be lab and field tested to demonstrate outcomes with
quantitative performance criteria and success metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.