* 2104548
* Collaborative Research: NGSDI: Foundations of Clean and Balanced Datacenters: Treehouse
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Irene Zhang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 04/30/2024
* USD 530,069.00

Computing requires energy. Most computing is done in centralized hubs called
datacenters. Datacenters consume an estimated 1-2% of worldwide electricity
production. Datacenter computing, and its energy use, is projected to continue
to grow rapidly, perhaps as fast as doubling every few years. This is simply not
sustainable. The Treehouse project aims to improve the energy efficiency of
datacenter computing by making datacenter computing energy use accountable to
users at a fine-grained level and by reducing unnecessary waste in the most
frequently used parts of datacenter computation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Treehouse
improves datacenter energy efficiency in several ways. Treehouse introduces a
new computational abstraction that allows new energy optimizations by both
application developers (by making application energy use visible at a fine-
grained level) and systems designers (by identifying when energy-efficient
optimizations can be safely performed without compromising user goals for
application performance and reliability). Additional strategies include reducing
unnecessary software bloat, reducing resource stranding, and new algorithms to
exploit the opportunity posed by new types of hardware with complex tradeoffs
between performance and energy use.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Beyond better energy
and resource management, Treehouse provides end users the tools to understand
and reduce their individual carbon use from cloud services. This can
fundamentally change the way the cloud computing industry thinks about
datacenter energy use. Datacenter operators can provide new energy efficient
computing models at lower cost. Treehouse software systems and protocols will be
open source. Through outreach and new educational materials, Treehouse will
pioneer the training of a new type of energy-aware engineer to meet societal
needs for an energy-efficient computing infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Treehouse will produce software artifacts, hardware designs, and the
results of running those programs and artifacts. These materials will be
available for public use under a permissive open source license, archived in
multiple locations, and available at the project website
treehouse.cs.washington.edu for at least five years after the completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.