* 2104933
* Understanding and controlling low angle grain boundaries in additively manufactured metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yinmin Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 441,850.00

NON-TECHANICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing (AM), or 3D
printing, with its ability to integrate materials synthesis and manufacturing
into a single print, is attractive for a broad range of technological
applications and may help usher industry 4.0 revolution. However, a fundamental
understanding of the processing-structure-property relationship in most AM
materials remains lacking. Nearly all AM materials are made of numerous crystals
called grains. Grains form interfaces when attached to each other. These
interfaces can often control materials properties. It has been particularly
challenging to understand and control grain interfaces in AM materials, which
may help us to achieve stronger and more bendable materials. This project
advances understanding of the relationship between processing, interfaces
between these grains, and resultant mechanical properties in a model 3D-printed
material through an integrated experimental and computational effort. The
ability to control these interfaces via 3D printing could allow the creation for
high-performance structural materials for various engineering applications. The
involvement of under-represented undergraduate research through Samueli
Diversity Program and collaborations with national laboratories provide
educational and career advancement opportunities for young scientists in
advanced manufacturing and materials science fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHANICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to understand and control low angle grain boundaries (LAGBs) in
AM metals and alloys. The research focuses on pure metals fabricated by laser
powder-bed-fusion (L-PBF), which often contain a substantial fraction of LAGBs
that can lead to high strength, high ductility, and high thermal stability. The
project aims at establishing mechanistic understanding of interconnections
between laser processing parameters, interfacial microstructures (e.g., LAGBs),
and resultant mechanical properties. The research comprises of two major
thrusts: Thrust 1 involves controlled fabrication of model materials with
various fractions of LAGBs. An inverse pole figure orientation mapping using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is used to characterize interfacial
structures and correlate their characteristics to the deformation kinetics
parameters and in situ synchrotron x-ray diffraction experiments. Thrust 2
strives to develop processing sensitive models to correlate complex processing
parameters and its thermal history with the observed microstructures. The
processing model is tightly coupled with microstructure characterizations to
reveal the fundamental relationship between the laser scan strategies and
processing parameters and resultant microstructures. The mechanistic insights
obtained by these studies could guide the optimization of laser processing
conditions to create high performance structural materials for diverse
applications. Collaborations with national laboratories enhance the graduate
studentâ€™s research experience. Partnership with the Samueli Diversity Program to
engage undergraduate students from under-represented groups into these research
activities increases the diversity of the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.