* 2104976
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Natural Bio-organic Resistive Random Access Memory Based Synaptic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Feng Zhao, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 353,310.00

Two essential challenges faced globally by computing systems today are
tremendous energy consumption and electronic wastes. One potential solution to
simultaneously address these two issues is by “brain-like” and “green”
neuromorphic computing with energy-efficient operation and biodegradable
disposals. Neuromorphic computing systems require hardware components capable of
mimicking human synapse - the basic building block of biological neural
networks, while natural bio-organic materials derived from living or once-living
organisms such as plants, animals or microbial materials are renewable,
sustainable, biocompatible, biodegradable, and abundant in nature. The proposed
research will advance the development of nanoscale, ultrahigh-density and wafer-
level manufacturing of natural bio-organic materials based resistive random
access memory through nanofabrication and machine learning, and implementation
of bio-organic materials based resistive memory in neural networks with high
accuracy and efficiency for “green” neuromorphic systems. This project has great
impacts on US and global societies and provides many societal benefits. The
neuromorphic systems using bio-organic materials based resistive memory are
desirable for stretchable, flexible and wearable electronics in personal health
and biomedical applications, and address the sustainable and environmental
issues brought by excessive exploitation of non-renewable resources for
electronics and disposal of electronic devices. The interdisciplinary nature of
this research project covers the understanding and practice in nanotechnology,
non-volatile memory, neuron and synapse, neuromorphic computing systems and
machine learning, which provide a perfect venue for integration of research and
education. Minority, female and high school students will be mentored to perform
research in nanotechnology and machine learning. A virtual reality based
interactive system will be developed to provide trainings of resistive memory
and synaptic device fabrication in a virtual cleanroom environment. Workshops
will be organized for broadening dissemination and community outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to address technological challenges
hampering the development of bio-organic materials based resistive memory and
artificial synaptic devices. These challenges include the fabrication of
nanoscale, high-density and scalable bio-organic materials based resistive
memory and synaptic devices and incorporation of these devices in the neural
network with high accuracy and efficiency. In this project, advanced
nanotechnology and nanofabrication techniques will be developed to fabricate
nanometer-sized crossbar electrodes for nanoscale and high-density bio-organic
materials based resistive memory. Machine learning algorithms will be employed
to study the correlation of biomaterial film process and property, device
switching characteristics and synaptic behaviors. Synaptic architectures based
on nanoscale bio-organic materials based resistive memory will be developed to
emulate synaptic plasticity and synaptic efficacy. Implementation of bio-organic
materials based resistive memory and synaptic devices in neural networks and
evaluation of the learning capability will be carried out by leveraging a
coherent hardware and software co-design. This project is potentially
transformative and will achieve a breakthrough in the realization of nanoscale,
ultrahigh-density and wafer-level manufacturing of resistive switching memory
and artificial synaptic devices based on natural bio-organic materials. The
research outcomes will expedite device development by accurate process
optimization and establish a fundamental understanding of natural bio-organic
materials based resistive switching memory and synaptic devices when used in the
neural networks for “green” neuromorphic computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.