* 2104918
* Lattice dynamics and phase transitions in multifunctional oxide nanomaterials studied by ultraviolet Raman spectroscop
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Dmitri Tenne, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 486,000.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, science and technology of
electronic materials have moved towards artificially engineered thin films and
multilayer structures at nanometer scales (one billionth of a meter). Nanoscale
materials exhibit physical behavior drastically different from that of
macroscopic materials, thus opening new opportunities for novel device
applications. This project studies nanoscale ferroelectrics and multiferroics, a
class of materials both interesting for fundamental research and practically
important due to high potential for applications in various devices, such as
computer memories, microwave electronic devices or in next-generation
transistors. The research is closely integrated into the educational program at
Boise State University, involving undergraduate and graduate students in
research and training, thus making them well prepared for careers in physical
sciences and materials engineering. Such graduates are on demand by electronics
and materials industries, such as Micron Technology, Hewlett Packard, and other
high-tech companies in Boise metropolitan area. The project promotes an active
use of the state-of-the-art instrumentation for educational purposes and
supports the development of new graduate programs. It broadens the involvement
of students from under-represented groups in the cutting-edge scientific
research. The project enhances Boise Stateâ€™s strength in condensed-matter
physics and materials science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Complex metal oxides are a vast class of materials that
have a wide variety of functional properties attractive for novel device
applications. Among these functionalities are ferroelectricity and
ferromagnetism, properties of materials to possess spontaneous electric
polarization or magnetization, which can be switched by applying electric or
magnetic field, respectively. Ferroelectrics and multiferroics, materials that
exhibit both magnetic and ferroelectric ordering, have been in the focus of
intensive research activity in the last several years, driven by potential new
functionalities for novel device applications arising from the coupling between
the electrical and magnetic order parameters. Artificially engineered thin films
and multilayer structures at nanometer scales are of particular interest, due to
new physical phenomena and properties dramatically different from those of
homogeneous bulk ferroelectrics. This project utilizes variable-temperature
Raman spectroscopy with ultraviolet excitation to address several issues of
major importance for understanding the behavior of nanoscale ferroelectrics and
multiferroics, focusing on size effects in ferroelectric nanomaterials and
temperature-strain phase diagrams in thin films and heterostructures of novel
materials predicted to have ferroelectric and multiferroic properties in
strained thin film form. These results are used to test the predictions of
thermodynamic and first-principles theories and combined with thorough
characterization of structural, electrical and magnetic properties, leading to a
more comprehensive understanding of nanoscale ferroelectricity and
magnetoelectric coupling. The proposed research will be closely integrated into
the educational program at Boise State University, actively involving
undergraduate and graduate students in research and training and promoting the
continued effective use of the state-of-the-art optical instrumentation for
educational purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.