* 2104294
* Dynamic protein-based biomaterial designs for bionic coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Cristian Staii, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 525,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves a new
biomaterials strategy to protect living cells. Cells experience many types of
environmental stress when they are grown in culture dishes, and can easily be
killed when they are injected through a syringe. Cellular stress can also cause
changes in cell functions and even trigger diseases. This project utilizes
modified silk, a natural and inexpensive protein biomaterial as a barrier to
isolate the cells from their surroundings and protect the cells from being
stressed and damaged. Ultrathin coatings on cells will be used for cell
protection under unfavorable conditions to maintain normal cell functions. The
results should provide insight into new biomaterial systems and interfaces for
successful cell and tissue engineering. The work will also provide education and
research opportunities for a broad range of students including underrepresented
minorities, post-graduate entrepreneurship students, and materials science and
engineering students at Tufts and beyond via dissemination. The project will
provide both virtual learning tools, modules via YouTube videos, and hands-on
research opportunities to underrepresented minority students in the Boston area
through collaborations with UMass Boston, Roxbury Community College and Bunker
Hill Community College. These partnerships will provide a unique opportunity for
underrepresented minority students to gain hands-on experience with these
systems to study biomaterial designs and cell
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to develop a new family of protein polymers that self-
organize in a customizable layer-by-layer fashion, offer versatility in material
properties (e.g., mechanics, crosslink type and degree, and provide shape-change
features) and can be assembled and utilized with biological systems (e.g., as
cell coatings). Nanocoating cells holds promise for protection against harsh
environmental and processing conditions by isolating the cells from their
surroundings within a physical barrier. The project focuses on a core strategy
of building upon tough, selectively designable silk-like protein systems, with
the utilization of selective chemistries to match structure-assembly-function
biomaterial goals. The plan is to program these designs to modulate mechanics,
dynamic shape changes and cell surface assembly, to establish new systems for
versatile control of self-assembly that can be programmed for robust mechanical
properties in the context of sensitive biological systems such as cells, enzymes
and other biological entities. The strategies presented here provide potential
benefits for surface engineering of cells, 3D printing, and preservation.
Nanocoated cells would find use in clinical and biotechnology applications
during in vitro and in vivo manipulation, where cells are exposed to a variety
of stresses including proteolytic enzymes, immune attack, or hydrodynamic forces
in bioreactors, in the host, or during injection-based delivery or 3D
bioprinting. The work will also provide a focus for training underrepresented
minority groups in techniques connecting material science and cell/tissue
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.