* 2104781
* Localizing and Manipulating Exotic Quasiparticles in Quantum Hall Antidots
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Dmitri Averin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 528,873.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In solid-state structures, quantum
information can be stored and processed based on properties of quantum states.
This project studies sub-micrometer diameter holes in two-dimensional atomic
crystals, called "antidots", where the quantum states can have useful properties
very different from those of electrons, including fractional charge and
statistics. Such states potentially allow robust quantum information
applications, and can be used to form artificial molecules. This project
combines theoretical and experimental efforts to create and manipulate quantum
states in antidot structures, and it could lead to the development of novel
qubits. The technical aspects of this research combine material science,
nanotechnology, electronics, cryogenics, theoretical condensed matter physics,
and quantum information, and will provide students involved in the project with
a unique opportunity to obtain experience in all these fields, and form the next
generation of a “quantum-smart” workforce. The project also plans to develop an
online, freely accessible software kit, “The World of Anyons”, to bring to the
public an intuitive understanding of all aspects of the physics at the heart of
this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) electron systems host exotic
quantum Hall (QH) states, including fractional QH states supporting abelian and
non-abelian anyons, and excitonic states in double-layer QH systems. Being able
to localize and manipulate quasiparticle excitations of these quantum states
facilitates the study of the strongly interacting systems, and potentially leads
to novel quantum devices which operate based on their non-trivial topological
properties. This project studies the localization and manipulation of quantum
Hall quasiparticles on QH antidots realized in graphene and its double-layers.
In this approach, topologically protected QH edge modes are structured into
discrete confining loops that localize the QH quasiparticles which carry the
characteristics of the underlying incompressible QH liquid. This project
explores: 1) robust localization of abelian anyons and understanding the
decoherence and other basic physics elements of the individual QH antidots; 2)
localization of non-abelian anyons and excitonic quasiparticles on individual
antidots; 3) coupling of the antidots into the multi-antidot structures, and
demonstration of anyon exchange and braiding in DC transport through a triple-
antidot structure. The QH antidot approach to quantum gates is based on the
adiabatic transfer of the individual topological excitations, which is the basis
for the quasiparticle exchange statistics. This study advances the understanding
of correlated electron systems and exchange/braiding properties of localized
quasiparticles, and should provide direct insight into the stability of quantum
coherence in topological braiding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.