* 2104126
* Connecting Indigenous and Western Knowledge Systems for Student Success in STEM
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Marty Matlock, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2023
* USD 99,976.00

This EPSCoR workshop proposal supports the development, implementation,
evaluation, and dissemination of two virtual Gatherings to Transcend Barriers to
Success (GTBS) at the University of Arkansas in May 2021, and at Idaho State
University in September 2021. These Gatherings will provide a platform for
dialogue with current NSF programming focused on the development of Native
American STEM students and professionals and their communities. This project
builds on findings from a three-year Keck Foundation project entitled,
“Transcending Barriers to Success (TBS): Connecting Indigenous and Western
Knowledge Systems to Tackle Grand Challenges,” and engagement models deployed in
other EPSCoR jurisdictions. The Gatherings have the enthusiastic support of the
EPSCoR community. Workshop products will include a University of Arkansas
Resiliency Center monograph, a Bannock Shoshone higher education STEM pathway
monograph, an iterative “Connecting Indigenous Knowledge and Western Science”
bibliography, and a project report. All four products will be valuable resources
for EPSCoR jurisdictions seeking new and innovative ways to engage indigenous
students, professionals and communities. Products will combine oral reflection
and text narratives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gatherings will be rooted in the
concept of “Two-Eyed Seeing” which stresses the importance of viewing the world
through an indigenous eye and a western eye to see together and advance the
progress of science, prosperity, health and well-being. Since 2000, an
increasing number of relevant frameworks link indigenous and western knowledge
systems, including: traditional ecological knowledge, biocultural restoration,
cultural ecosystems, co-management, native science, culturally responsive
education, and collective continuance and community engagement in response to
climate change. Funds of Knowledge and Cultural Wealth Theories provide broader
frameworks. The Gatherings will catalyze research and education capabilities
derived from indigenous knowledge and western science resulting in new
contributions to scientific discovery, innovation, learning, and knowledge-based
prosperity in numerous EPSCoR jurisdictions and nationally. The Gatherings will
make visible and relevant connections between indigenous knowledge and western
science leading to reforms in curricular and educational practice that are
supportive of STEM success for indigenous and all students. Developing durable,
continuing partnerships between indigenous communities and campuses will advance
these reforms and supports into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.