* 2104455
* CRII: CPS: A Decentralized and Differentially Private Framework for Sensing, Operations and Respond Logistics in Large-Scale Vehicle Fleets
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Murat Yildirim, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 173,977.00

Modern vehicle fleets are equipped with increasing levels of sensor
instrumentation that generate large quantities of data on asset conditions and
operational awareness. In recent years, there has been a growing literature on
methods that harness this data to provide predictive insights for operations.
Taken individually, these methods provide limited improvements to fleet-level
decision making. There are significant and dynamic interdependencies in large-
scale vehicle fleets that include (i) continuous asset-to-asset interactions in
degradation and failure risks, (ii) interactions across vehicles related to
operational coordination and use of shared resources (e.g. mission requirements
and spare part resources), and (iii) interactions between spare part logistics,
maintenance and operations. Additional layers of challenges are introduced
through stringent requirements for data residency, privacy, and computational
scalability. This NSF project provides a unified predictive-prescriptive
framework for vehicle fleet management that integrates (i) sensor-driven
predictions on dynamically evolving asset failure probabilities and operational
risks, with (ii) adaptive robust optimization models for fleet-level operations,
maintenance and respond logistics. Intellectual merits of the project include
formulation of sensor-driven risks within decentralized and differentially
private mixed integer optimization models; and a parallel development of
tailored solution methods. Broader impacts of the project include dissemination
of research findings through publications, coursework, conferences and
workshops. The project will support summer internships and undergraduate
research opportunities, specifically for students from underrepresented
communities, to educate the next-generation of engineers for vehicle fleet
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harnessing the true value of sensor data in a
fleet management application, requires an integrated and detailed modeling of
fleet level interactions, along with a seamless integration of sensor-driven
sensing, and decision-making capabilities. To address this challenge, this
proposal aims to develop a decentralized and differentially private framework
for sensor-driven fleet management. In particular, the proposed project (i)
integrates sensor-driven asset remaining life distributions within a joint
decision optimization model to identify optimal operations, maintenance and
spare part logistics schedule, (ii) dynamically models the perceived asset
remaining life, failure risks and other operational uncertainties within an
adaptive robust reformulation of the fleet management model, and (iii)
reformulates the decision model within a decentralized and differentially
private coordination mechanism. Significant computational challenges will be
addressed through decentralized solution algorithms that leverage on the
structure of the proposed decision optimization
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.