* 2104729
* CRII: IIS: HCC: Interplay of Emotions and Self-Efficacy of Novice Students during Programming Tasks: A Multi-Modal Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Syedah Zahra Atiq, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,955.00

Computer programming is an increasingly necessary skill for computing and
engineering students that is often found early in an undergraduate program.
However, learning programming is a difficult undertaking that can induce a wide
array of emotions that may impact students' learning and belief in their
abilities to learn programming. This, in turn, may affect their persistence and
eventual retention in both individual programming courses and computing-related
degrees and careers. This project looks to better understand how individual
students' backgrounds and beliefs about their abilities shape their emotional
responses to programming challenges, and how those responses in turn affect
their beliefs. The work will lead to better models of how people learn
programming and inform the way programming is taught to undergraduate students,
and may be especially beneficial to students from groups who often experience
more negative emotions and lower self-efficacy than students overall, including
women and minority students. In the longer term, the project will contribute
towards workforce development and broadening participation in computing and STEM
in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use novel ideas to advance
the understanding of non-cognitive factors (emotions and self-efficacy) as they
relate to learning introductory programming for undergraduate students. The
overarching research question is: how do students' emotions and self-efficacy
beliefs interact with each other during programming tasks? The work will also
tease out how that interplay varies for students across differences in gender,
ethnicity, and prior experience with programming, drawing on the diverse sample
provided by doing the work at one of the largest public universities in the
United States. To do this, the project team will conduct two rounds of data
collection and analysis. During the first round, the validity and reliability of
two data collection instruments (the Achievement Emotions Questionnaire for
programming and Computer Programming Self-Efficacy Scale) will be established.
In the second round the team will collect data using the validated scales, along
with real-time biometric data and interviews. Triangulating these data will help
build both theoretical and computational models of the interplay between
emotions and self-efficacy in the context of learning programming at the
undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.