* 2104986
* Mechanics of Granular Materials: Rigidity, Nonlocality, and Activated Failure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Karen Daniels, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 324,167.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular materials are integral to
many parts of our daily lives, from the coffee beans that fuel our mornings, to
the pharmaceutical pills that heal us, to the coal that fuels our power plants.
Yet, this class of materials remains very difficult to successfully handle in
industrial contexts, to provide hazard estimation on our landslide-prone
hillsides, or to ensure stability of civil infrastructure such as embankments or
levees. Through this project, the PI will perform controlled laboratory
experiments aimed at determining the processes by which a stable granular
material begins to flow. Large datasets measuring the details of loading and
slipping for individual particles will allow us to test the efficacy of, and
draw connections between, a variety of approaches drawn from both the
engineering and physics communities. Together with the NC State Science House,
they will organize an annual workshop called LEAP! (Launch your Excellent
Adventures with Physics) to both provide high school girls with hands-on
exposure to cutting-edge physics, and train physics researchers in the
translation of their research to publicly-accessible formats, and also to our
labâ€™s collaborators working on industrial and geophysical applications. Finally,
they will continue work with undergraduate researchers, including a particular
emphasis on recruiting and supporting students from under-represented and
historically marginalized groups. These activities will equip their trainees to
find jobs in education, industry, or governments as their interests align, with
key expertise in both experimental techniques and data science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a granular
material loses rigidity, it collectively rearranges its particles and internal
forces, subject to known constraints. The material does not transition to a new
configuration spontaneously, but must cross some threshold, frictional or
energetic. Through this project, the PI will perform experiments on slow flows
in order to determine the mechanical process by which a granular material begins
to deform/flow from one valid state to another, and how this series of states is
selected. For a given configuration of particles, the internal forces are not
simply determined by the external load: many degenerate solutions are possible.
This indicates that approaches drawn from statistical physics will be necessary
to capture granular phenomena. The group aims to test multiple frameworks and
seek connections between engineering approaches to the problem (nonlocal
rheology, Mohr-Coulomb failure) and those of statistical physics (jamming,
rigidity percolation, athermal statistical ensembles). They will drive the
material to lose rigidity both by mechanical forcing from a boundary, as well as
by internal forcing from particle-scale activity, in order to make these
connections. Experiments will provide fundamental knowledge key to a variety of
applications: geotechnical engineering and hazard estimation; bulk materials
handling in the pharmaceutical, agricultural, and mining industries; and solar
system exploration missions. Together with the NC State Science House, the PI
will organize an annual workshop called LEAP! (Launch your Excellent Adventures
with Physics) to both provide high school girls with hands-on exposure to
cutting-edge physics (including granular materials), and train physics
researchers in the translation of their research to publicly accessible formats.
Finally, they will continue work with undergraduate researchers, including a
particular emphasis on recruiting and supporting students from under-represented
and historically marginalized groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.