* 2104742
* CRII: CPS: A Bi-Trust Framework for Collaboration-Quality Improvement in Human-Robot Collaborative Contexts
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Weitian Wang, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 173,490.00

Collaborative robots have been widely employed to assist humans in an increasing
number of areas. Just as human-human collaboration, the trust in human-robot
teams has a property of bidirectional. However, few studies have been conducted
on both human-trusting-robot issue and robot-trusting-human issue in a unified
framework for human-robot collaboration. The project addresses this challenge by
developing a new systematic Bi-Trust framework to integrate humans’ trust in
robots and robots’ trust in humans into the human-robot collaboration process.
With the established Bi-Trust framework, a trust-level-based computational
collaboration model is created to optimize and plan robot actions. The proposed
approaches will reduce uncertain failures and improve the collaboration-quality
of human-robot shared tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a systematic Bi-Trust framework for human-robot teams and create new
computational models of trust dynamics and trust-level-based collaboration in
order to enhance the human-robot partnership. The proposed research activities
include: (1) investigating the factors that affect humans’ trust in robots and
analyzing humans’ trust using multimodal physical and physiological data; (2)
developing a new Bi-Trust framework entailing computational human-trusting-robot
model and robot-trusting-human model for human-robot teams and establishing a
computational human-robot collaboration model via the trust-local-maximum
method; and (3) applying the Bi-Trust framework in real-world human-robot
collaborative contexts and assessing its effectiveness. The findings of this
project will improve the collaboration-quality for human-robot teams in
collaborative contexts such as the new generation of smart manufacturing and
potentially benefit the national economic growth by fostering increasing
robotics and AI workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.