* 2104589
* Understanding the Evolutionary Origins of Theory of Mind: Computational Modeling of Conserved Cognitive Mechanisms Across Primates
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Laurie Santos, Horschler, Daniel James
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 01/31/2023
* USD 73,197.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Laurie Santos
and Dr. Julian Jara-Ettinger at Yale University, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist investigating how humans and non-human
primates understand the minds of others. As humans, understanding what other
people think, feel, desire, and believe is central to successfully navigating
our social world. However, we still know little about the extent to which our
ability to represent others’ mental states is shared with other animals,
impeding our understanding of human cognitive evolution and slowing the
development of treatments for mental disorders involving deficits in these
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deficits in theory of mind (ToM) are core
components of developmental and neuropsychiatric disorders including autism
spectrum disorder, antisocial personality disorder, and schizophrenia, and have
profound effects on social relationships, effective communication, and moral
reasoning. Animal models have recently advanced our understanding of the
neurophysiological mechanisms underlying diseases that affect social decision-
making (e.g., Parkinson’s disease) and approaches for their treatment. However,
outstanding questions about the cognitive mechanisms underlying primates’ ToM
judgments have impeded the development of an animal model of ToM. This project
draws on computational methods developed for modeling human ToM to overcome
these challenges. By computationally modeling non-human primate (NHP) ToM for
the first time, this project will elucidate which cognitive mechanisms humans
and NHPs share when making judgments about others’ mental states. Additionally,
the fellow will computationally identify new experimental designs that can
powerfully distinguish between competing representational hypotheses about NHP
ToM and will test free-ranging rhesus macaques to empirically evaluate these
designs. This work will (1) contribute to our fundamental understanding of the
evolution of ToM and the cognitive mechanisms that guide social behavior and (2)
advance a NHP model of human ToM which will aid in our understanding and
treatment of ToM-related mental disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.