* 2104984
* INT: Collaborative Research: Detecting, Predicting and Remediating Student Affect and Grit Using Computer Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Ivon Arroyo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 90,192.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Integration (INT)
projects refine and study emerging genres of learning technologies that have
already undergone several years of iterative refinement in the context of
rigorous research on how people learn with such technologies; INT projects
contribute to our understanding of how the prototype tools might generalize to a
larger category of learning technologies. This INT project integrates prior work
from two well-developed NSF-sponsored projects on (i) advanced computer vision
and (ii) affect detection in intelligent tutoring systems. The latter work in
particular developed instruments to detect student emotion (interest, confusion,
frustration and boredom) and showed that when a computer tutor responded to
negative student affect, learning performance improved. The current project will
expand this focus beyond emotion to attempt to also detect persistence, self-
efficacy, and the trait called 'grit.' The project will measure the impact of
these constructs on student learning and explore whether the grit trait (a
persistent tendency towards sustained initiative and interest) can be improved
and whether and how it depends on other recently experienced emotions. The
technological innovation enabling this research into the genre of broadly
affectively aware instruction is Smartutors, a tool that uses advanced computer
vision techniques to view a student's gaze, hand gestures, head, and face to
increase the "bandwidth" for automatically detecting their affect. One goal is
to reorient students to more productive attitudes once waning attention is
recognized.

This research team brings together a unique blend of leading interdisciplinary
researchers in computer vision; adaptive education technology and computer
science; mathematics education; learning companions; and meta-cognition,
emotion, self-efficacy and motivation. Nine experiments will provide valuable
data to extend and validate existing models of grit and emotion. In particular,
the team will gather fine-grained data on grit, assess the impact of tutor
interventions in real-time, and contribute thereby to a theory of grit. Visual
data of student behavior will be integrated with advanced analytics of log data
of students' actions based on the behavior of over 10,000 prior students (e.g.,
hint requests, topic mastery) to provide individualized guidance and tutor
responses in a timely fashion. This will allow the researchers to measure the
impact of interventions on student performance and attitude, and it will uncover
how grit levels relate to emotion and what impact emotions and grit combined
have on overall student initiative. By identifying interventions that are
sensitive to individual differences, this research will refine theories of
motivation and emotion and will reveal principles about how to respond to
student grit and affect, especially when attention and persistence begin to
wane. To ensure classroom success, the PIs will evaluate Smartutors with 1,600
students and explore its transferability by testing it in a more difficult
mathematics domainÂ with older students.