* 2104326
* Study of Disorder and the Emergence of a Robust Insulating Behaviour in Topological Kondo Insulator, Samarium Hexaboride
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Cagliyan Kurdak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 331,685.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nature has provided a fascinating insulating
material with many unique properties, mainly that it is the only electrical
insulator whose properties do not vary much with increasing impurities or
disorder. Research on this material, called samarium hexaboride, is important
not only because of its unique properties but that it is at the intersection of
two scientific fields ‐ correlated electron systems and topological materials.
Understanding why this material has robust insulating behavior is the main goal
of the project. Achieving this understanding will lead to new kinds of transport
phenomena, such as unique one‐dimensional conduction through dislocations that
should not be possible and which are difficult to observe in other topological
materials. Novel transport methods will be developed in this work to explore
this unique material that can be broadly used by other groups studying many
other materials. Furthermore, this strange insulator, samarium hexaboride, is
also an ideal material for studying the emergent properties of topologically
protected surface electrons. This is important because this can pave the way for
testing new and innovative spintronic and superconductor‐topological insulator
hybrid devices. The educational component of this project provides excellent
training for graduate and undergraduate students. The principal investigator
will participate in outreach activities that are designed to excite K‐12
students about STEM fields. A unique, comprehensive physics study manual
intended for all physics graduate students is being developed to help students
to transition into graduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The robustness of insulating behavior against disorder,
which was recently discovered using inverted resistance measurements, makes
samarium hexaboride one of the most unique topological materials to study. This
project investigates bulk and surface conduction in samarium hexaboride and its
dilute alloys using inverted resistance, Hall, and Corbino measurements. To
study surface conduction, an alternative transport analysis is employed to
eliminate contributions to transport from subsurface cracks. One of the main
objectives is to understand the gap formation and the underlying reasons for the
robustness of bulk transport. To quantify the effects of disorder in this
material, the research team is performing transport experiments on La‐, Fe‐,
La‐, Ga‐, and Eu‐doped samples within a dilute doping range from 0.1 to 5%. In
addition to point defects, this project looks at extended defects, including
one‐dimensional dislocations, which can form conducting channels in topological
insulators. If successful, the experimental realization of transport through a
single one‐dimensional dislocation would allow the investigation of a new kind
of topologically protected conduction mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.