* 2104477
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Diet Alteration in a High Altitude Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Brian Stewart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 24,903.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines the dynamic adaptive mechanisms and
cultural interactions that have contributed to large-scale sustained human
occupations of high-altitude environments. High-elevation environments exceeding
2500 meters above sea level pose severe biological, ecological, and logistical
challenges for human adaptation. While it is recognized that humans have used
such settings on an ephemeral basis for thousands of years, catalysts of
sustained year-round human occupation of such places remain a matter of debate.
This project examines this issues in a region with an average elevation of over
4500 meters above sea level and focuses on the introduction of cold-adapted
domesticated species which are believed to have contributed significantly to
permanent human occupation. However, the prehistoric archaeology of the area is
in its infancy. Such high-altitude zones can provide anthropologists with
appropriate laboratories to examine the impact of novel technologies and
interactions on people living in high-elevation extremes. It is to such regions
that scholars must turn to discover the causes and process of human engagements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a theoretical framework blending risk-reduction and
optimization-based models of high-altitude foragers with culture contact
dynamics, the doctoral student and colleagues develop hypotheses that attempt to
capture the range of risk-management strategies adopted by local occupants given
the region's formidable natural constraints. These hypotheses are evaluated via
an integrated program of excavation at a site with a well-stratified cultural
sequence. The project addresses major questions of culture-historic importance
for understanding the sustained long-term occupation at high elevations and
documents an entirely new and potentially unprecedented cultural
complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.