* 2104610
* A Naturalistic and Experimental Investigation of Cheating in High Schools
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Gail Heyman, Waltzer, Talia
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Gail Heyman
and Kang Lee at The University of California, San Diego, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating adolescents’
evaluations of and engagement in academic dishonesty, and the social factors
that guide them. Explaining psychological mechanisms that promote integrity
during adolescence, a crucial developmental period, can support efforts to
foster the next generation of civic members in our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present research takes a new theoretical
approach to explaining cheating: That students are more likely to cheat in
specific cases where they evaluate cheating as acceptable, and those evaluations
are shaped by social messages from teachers and peers about cheating. To
understand the content and consequences of these social messages on academic
cheating and integrity, this project implements a multi-method investigation of
adolescents’ experiences surrounding academic integrity. Specifically, the
project examines: (1) What messages about academic integrity are students
exposed to from their teachers and peers? (2) Do these social messages guide
students’ evaluations of specific cases of cheating? and (3) Do students’
evaluations relate to their decisions about whether to cheat? Study 1 employs
naturalistic classroom observations and prompted conversations about cheating to
capture students’ lived experiences and identify relevant correlations. Study 2
experimentally tests these correlations by adapting the naturally-occurring
messages to influence students’ evaluations and decisions about cheating in a
behavioral task. This research makes important advances in the debate about
judgment-action relations by shedding light on whether adolescents’ beliefs
about cheating guide their actions. This project also provides an empirical
foundation for future research on promoting integrity (e.g., intervention
studies), and adds to our broader knowledge on adolescent identity development,
social learning, and moral development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.