* 2104928
* Finding an informed approach to oligonucleotide ligand screening to enable antiviral materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Valeria Milam, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 224,994.00

PART 1: Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As bio-inspired ligands for
various biological targets, aptamers present key promising advantages over
antibodies including their low immunogenicity, animal-free generation,
reversible denaturation, and longer shelf-life. Moreover, while research and
financial investments in therapeutic antibody development and manufacturing have
clearly overshadowed that of aptamers, oligonucleotide ligands still hold
promising potential as advantageous targeting and even inhibition agents for
challenging viral targets whose rapid spread and mutation capabilities can
unfortunately outpace traditional therapeutic developments. In the absence of a
priori rules to identify potential binding motifs within a self-hybridized
oligonucleotide for a non-nucleotide target, finding the right aptamer (or set
of aptamers) for a particular target is a daunting search problem, much like
finding the right move in a game of Chess or Go, largely because the candidate
sequence space is staggeringly large. Thus, in the absence of any chemical
guidelines, researchers traditionally choose instead to simply maximize the
sequence diversity among candidate aptamers by employing screening libraries
consisting of large heterogeneous populations (~109 or more) of random DNA or
RNA sequence members in a resource-intensive screening process called SELEX
(Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential Enrichment). Here, the goal of
the proposed work is to develop a pipeline of candidate DNA aptamers for spike
protein. To undertake this ambitious goal for this pilot project we will pioneer
an integrated experimental and informatics approach to rapidly and reliably
identify DNA oligonucleotide ligands from informed, designer libraries for a
viral protein target called the spike protein. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and financial investments in
therapeutic antibody development and manufacturing have clearly overshadowed
that of lesser known, oligonucleotide-based ligands called aptamers. Aptamers,
on the other hand, hold promising potential as advantageous targeting and even
inhibition agents for challenging viral targets whose rapid spread and mutation
capabilities can unfortunately outpace traditional therapeutic developments. In
the absence of design rules, finding the right aptamer (or set of aptamers) for
a particular target is a daunting search problem, much like finding the right
move in a game of Chess or Go, largely because the candidate sequence space is
staggeringly large. Thus, in the absence of any chemical guidelines, researchers
traditionally choose instead to simply maximize the size (~109 or more different
sequences) of screening libraries in a resource-intensive, evolutionary
screening process called SELEX (Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential
Enrichment). To overcome these challenging technical and scientific bottlenecks
inherent to this popular aptamer screening platform, we propose to pioneer an
integrated experimental and informatics approach to rapidly and reliably
identify DNA oligonucleotide ligands from designer libraries for a viral protein
target called the spike protein. The proposed integrated
experimental/computational aptamer discovery approach is intentionally adaptable
using a “lessons-learned” approach to pave the aptamer discovery pathway for
viral targets, particularly as viral strains readily mutate. This work will
offer unique, multidisciplinary student training opportunities in the
experimental and computational aspects of the work. If successful the PIs
believe this pilot project will lay the fundamental groundwork for future
accelerated bio-inspired ligand discovery to enable desirable bioactivity of
materials systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.