* 2104078
* Collaborative Research: Framework Implementation: CSSI: CANDY: Cyberinfrastructure for Accelerating Innovation in Network Dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2025
* USD 841,385.00

Efficient analysis of dynamic networks is highly important in diverse
multidisciplinary real-life applications, such as data mining and analytics,
social and biological networks, epidemiology, cyber-physical infrastructures,
transportation networks, surface mining, and cybersecurity. Although numerous
software exists for analyzing static networks, a comprehensive
cyberinfrastructure that supports innovative research challenges in large-scale,
complex, dynamic networks is lacking. This multi-university proposal addresses
this gap by developing a novel platform, called CANDY (Cyberinfrastructure for
Accelerating Innovation in Network Dynamics), based on efficient, scalable
parallel algorithm design for dynamic networks and high-performance software
development with performance optimization. For broader impact and outreach
activities, the investigators will (1) collaborate with multidisciplinary
research groups to evaluate the effectiveness of the developed platform,
algorithms and software tools; (2) host workshops, webinars, and tutorials to
educate research community about the cyberinfrastructure; (3) disseminate
project outcomes via a dedicated website, keynote and invited talks, demos, and
high-quality publications in peer-reviewed journals and conferences; and (4)
train next generation data scientists in the development of CANDY platform, by
engaging women and underrepresented minority students, including high school
students and rural communities in Missouri, Hispanic and African-American
communities in Texas, and First Nation (Native American) community in
Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the first parallel,
scalable, extendable, and user-friendly software platform for updating important
properties of dynamic networks. It will also provide the requisite
functionalities and tools to modify existing algorithms or create new ones,
catering to basic, intermediate and advanced users with different levels of
expertise. The CANDY cyberinfrastructure platform will be implemented on
different architectures, such as distributed memory, shared memory, and graphics
processor units providing user-friendly interfaces. Significant research and
development innovations include: (1) a novel hierarchical taxonomy of network
analysis algorithms that allows for layered specification of parallel algorithms
based on multiple parameters; (2) templates for creating new scalable algorithms
for dynamic network analysis; (3) algorithms to partition the streaming set of
nodes and edges into network snapshots at changing points; and (4) invariant-
based quantifiable performance metrics for analyzing large-scale dynamic
networks. As a case study, the developed software will be evaluated on two
disparate domains -- fast processing of genomic data on dynamic trees, and cost-
effective operation of complex mining engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.