* 2104087
* Moduli Spaces and Applications of Constructible Sheaves
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Zaslow, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,045.00

This work lies at the interface of mathematics and theoretical physics, and the
findings will be relevant to both communities. More specifically, the project
will establish and elucidate connections between the mathematical subjects of
sheaves, cluster varieties, and combinatorics, and advance physical mathematics
by finding wave functions for a class of objects in string theory. The broader
impacts of this project lie in the professional development of the PI's graduate
students and postdocs, the dissemination of research through talks and the
Northwestern Geometry/Physics seminar, and through the PI's many outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common thread within the project is an
understanding of a moduli space of objects in a category defined by a Legendrian
subspace. In collaborative work with Linhui Shen, the PI will use cluster theory
to determine generating functions for all-genus open Gromov-Witten invariants of
certain Lagrangian three-folds filling Legendrian surfaces, given the data of a
framing. These generating functions are interpreted as wave functions for branes
wrapping the Lagrangians. They can be reinterpreted as Cohomological Hall
invariants for a symmetric quiver determined by the framing, a phenomenon called
"framing duality." A second research direction is to count the number of nodal
curves of genus-g in a g-dimensional family inside a toric surface. The idea is
to create a Beauville-type integrable system (curves and their Jacobians) and to
use, in this novel setting, the reasoning employed by the PI and Yau to count
curves on K3 surfaces, namely: find the Euler characteristic of the total space.
Another viewpoint is to compute with tropical geometry. This project is joint
with Helge Ruddat. Finally, using the graphical methods developed by the PI with
Casals, in joint work with Ian Le, the PI plans to reframe the Deodhar
decomposition diagrammatically. The techniques apply to other kinds of
decompositions as well, beyond double Bruhat cells. The PI will also study the
closely related topic of the skeleta of Richardson
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.