* 2104941
* Fundamental Mechanisms in Stress-Aided Variant Selection of Nanoscale Precipitation
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Yao Fu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 09/30/2024
* USD 425,201.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nickel-based superalloys possess
combined high strength and corrosion resistance during service at elevated
temperatures. Due to these important characteristics, they have been widely used
in high-performance combustion engines, such as gas turbines, thermal and
nuclear power plants. In order to achieve superior mechanical properties at high
temperatures, precipitation hardening has been widely employed to strengthen
superalloys. This program will focus on understanding and controlling the
orientation of precipitates with respect to the alloy matrix, i.e., variant
selection, in a nickel-based superalloy. The modulated mechanical properties by
selected variant during the stress-assisted aging process will be also
investigated. Insights gained from the program will advance the understanding of
strengthening mechanisms as well as provide related industries with new guidance
to improve the mechanical properties of alloys. The program will not only
promote the progress of science but will also advance the national prosperity,
and welfare due to the contribution to the aerospace, thermal and nuclear
industry, where the enhanced performance of high temperature gas turbine
components can significantly increase the efficiency of aircraft engines and
power plants. In addition, this award will encourage women and underrepresented
groups in engineering and enhance community and outreach activities through
creative learning modules and workshops among other university programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical
properties of metallic materials are closely related to their internal
microstructure. In particular, the morphology of precipitate particles including
their shape, orientation and distribution can critically determine the
properties of phase-separated alloys. Variant selection refers to the formation
of a particular precipitate orientation with respect to the alloy matrix. Using
Ni-based alloys as an example, the formation mechanisms of variant selection of
coherent nanometer-sized precipitates at the nucleation and early growth stage,
and the corresponding modulated mechanical properties will be investigated. We
aim to answer the following fundamental questions: -How can one control the
initiation of variant selection through varying important materials and
processing parameters; -How to achieve anisotropic strengthening by selecting
variants of which the desirable slip systems are in the preferential direction?
The technical effort is featured by a closely integrated computational and
experimental approach to (1) clarify the effect of materials parameters in
variant selection at the nucleation and early growth stage during
thermomechanical treatment, (2) fabricate single-crystalline samples, and (3)
investigate the anisotropic strengthening during tensile and creep deformation.
This program will be focused on nickel-based alloys due to its wide-spread
applications. However, the fundamental mechanism elucidated is applicable to
most alloys that contain coherent precipitates, e.g., novel refractory
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.