* 2104739
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Continuous Directed Evolution and CRISPR-Cas9 as a Combinatorial Approach to Engineering Plant Metabolism
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Bryan Leong, Leong, Bryan J
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 04/30/2023
* USD 116,500.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Bryan Leong is “Continuous Directed Evolution and CRISPR-Cas9 as a
Combinatorial Approach to Engineering Plant Metabolism”. The host institution
for the fellowship is the University of Florida and the sponsoring scientist is
Dr. Andrew Hanson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants are workhorses of today’s society
that provide food, fiber, fuel, medicines, and more. Humans have long bred
plants for such purposes, but traditional breeding has various limitations. It
often relies on traits taken from wild species or on mutagenesis to achieve the
desired outcomes. Obtaining new functions can be difficult using current
approaches, but recent advances have made this more feasible. Better plant
enzymes can be developed by continuous directed evolution, which involves
inserting the enzyme into a microbe and coupling microbial growth to improved
function of the enzyme. The microorganism with the better enzyme grows faster,
enabling discovery of new enzyme variants that are, for example, herbicide-
resistant or that can enhance accumulation of valuable chemicals. CRISPR-Cas9
allows editing of plant genomes without lasting transgenes. This editing process
can return the improved enzyme variants to plants for downstream applications.
This project is a proof-of-principle to combine the development of better enzyme
function through continuous directed evolution and CRISPR-Cas9. These two
technologies stand to revolutionize agriculture. The training objectives include
developing expertise in synthetic biology to complement existing skillsets,
actively participating in scientific outreach to the public, and refining
communication skills. Broader impacts include helping to organize Fascination
with Plants day at the University of Florida and volunteering for the Scientist
in Every Florida School program to introduce students to ongoing research in
their community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans use plants for food, fiber, fuel,
medicines, industrial chemicals, and other purposes. While humans have
genetically improved plants by various methods, there is still enormous
potential for further improvement by metabolic engineering. Using transgenic
plants in this engineering carries a stigma, however. Synthetic biology tools
like continuous directed evolution and CRISPR-Cas9 are now opening new frontiers
in plant metabolic engineering. Enzyme fitness landscapes can be quickly
explored using continuous directed evolution to incorporate multiple beneficial
mutations in succession. CRISPR-Cas9 has revolutionized genome editing and led
to powerful new technologies like TargetAID that can precisely edit base pairs
in specific genes. This project will use the power of continuous directed
evolution and seamless editing by CRISPR-Cas9 in Arabidopsis in a proof-of-
principle combined approach. Continuous directed evolution will be used to
evolve herbicide resistance in Arabidopsis enzymes in microbes, followed by
introduction of those resistance mutations into Arabidopsis using TargetAID and
CRISPR-Cas9 with no lasting transgenic cassettes. This combined approach will
then be applied to engineer feedback-insensitivity into Arabidopsis amino acid
biosynthesis enzymes. Data generated in this project will be submitted to the
appropriate public repositories and results will be published in open access
journals whenever possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.