* 2104456
* Archaeological Investigation of the Climatological, Political, and Demographic Drivers of Conflict
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Brian Codding, McCool, Weston
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Brian Codding
at the University of Utah, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating the environmental and social drivers of
prehistoric conflict in the North American southwest. This project will help to
develop an archaeological research program to evaluate the multivariate drivers
of conflict. Developing formal quantitative models will allow archaeologists to
engage with conflict research on a broad social science frontier. This research
will develop and test general hypotheses that can explain variability in
prehistoric conflict and produce a large high-resolution dataset that can be
accessed by future researchers. Further, the project will contribute to
southwestern archaeology by investigating conflict in a region that has been
systematically understudied and improving data quality for the largest
southwestern archaeological database. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change,
political instability, and demographic pressure are all factors responsible for
promoting conflict in the modern world. It is less clear whether these phenomena
drove violent behavior during human prehistory and the degree to which these
variables promote conflict over centuries or millennia. This project will
address these issues by (1) developing computational tools to measure variation
in prehistoric conflict and storing the resulting data on a centralized online
platform, (2) developing general models that bridge individual motivations with
macro-scale patterns to evaluate the drivers of conflict, and (3) testing model
predictions using an archaeological case study. This project will help to
develop an archaeological research program to evaluate the multivariate drivers
of intergroup violence. Developing formal quantitative models will allow
archaeologists to engage with conflict research on a broad social science
frontier. This project will train graduate and undergraduate students in the
generation of large quantitative databases and the methods used to test research
hypotheses. It will also train one postdoctoral fellow in spatial modeling,
which will aid in his pursuit of a tenure-track position in scientific
archaeology. This project will also work with the University of Utah
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program to recruit students who are
underrepresented in STEM and train them in archaeological, osteological, and
statistical methods, as well as introducing them to the prehistory of the
project area. The project will work with the American Indian Resource Center to
recruit American Indian students to work on the project. This is particularly
important as the project area is adjacent to the Navajo Nation. Project results
will be distributed to the public through interactive web applications hosted on
the project web site and public presentations at the Natural History Museum of
Utah, which is visited by over 45,000 K-12 students and educators annually, many
of whom travel from rural, Tribal, and refugee
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.