* 2104869
* Collaborative Research: Visualizing statistical force networks in colloidal materials far-from-equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Safa Jamali, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 374,986.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suspensions of particles in liquids
are found everywhere around us in foods, consumer products, natural settings,
biological systems, and construction materials. The physical and mechanical
properties of these materials, their shelf life, and their function are heavily
influenced by how the particles interact with each other. Better design of
materials requires an understanding of how particle interactions give rise to
certain types of mechanical behavior. The particles in these systems come in all
shapes and sizes, and often possess rough edges as opposed to being completely
smooth and spherical. Understanding how to handle and process such types of
colloidal materials provides significant economic and technological advantages
to our nation. When colloids are forced to flow in highly concentrated slurries,
the particles aggregate and collectively resist motion, leading to large
increases in pressure and catastrophic failure in equipment. This project uses
advanced network science concepts, experiments, and simulations in concert to
study such types of jammed suspensions in a series of flow scenarios. The
insight gained from this work will benefit a wide range of academic researchers
and industrial practitioners that utilize dense particulate systems. Basic
concepts related to soft matter physics will be disseminated broadly to K-12
students and the general public through summer camps and citizen science on
social media. Moreover, state-of-the-art results generated from this project
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate curriculum, and in
workshops designed to engage minority and underrepresented
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dense
particulate materials are ubiquitous in many manufacturing fields, such as
pharmaceuticals, consumer and food products, and the energy industry.
Understanding the multiscale nature of flowing dense suspensions will advance
the bottom-up design of novel and superior materials. This project provides
foundational understanding in the physics of dense suspensions, by generating a
statistical description of the force networks that are responsible for stress
propagation from particle-level to macroscopic scale. The central hypothesis is
that the spatiotemporal signatures in load-bearing networks can be tuned using
particle friction and dynamics. The PIs will combine experiments and simulations
to investigate the nature of network morphology and relaxation in colloidal
suspensions undergoing flow hysteresis, creep, and rapid cessation of flow.
Experiments involve the use of confocal rheometry, which is a high-resolution
and high-speed technique that measures flow stresses while directly imaging the
movement of individual colloids. The experimental observations will be combined
with computer simulations that incorporate detailed fluid physics between
roughened surfaces. These techniques enable the analysis of clusters at the
network level, including how they evolve and change in flowing systems. In dense
flowing suspensions, giant networks are thought to persist and control the
mechanics of the entire system. This project will study particle networks when
non-ideal particles are separated by thin layers of fluid, validate granular
models that connect mesoscale cooperativity lengths to flow rheology, and
utilize colloidal properties to deliberately change the network patterns
responsible for unexpected flow properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.