* 2104498
* Collaborative Research: Zwitterionic polymers for mucosal penetration
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Margarita Herrera-Alonso, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 112,500.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses direct
measurements of molecular interactions to inform the development of polymers to
penetrate the mucosal barrier. Mucus provides a barrier to protect tissue from
invasion by bacteria, viruses, allergens, and irritants. Interestingly,
transmucosal drug delivery is a promising alternative to other more invasive
methods as it has good patience compliance and is able to target particular
organs while offering improved drug bioavailability. The success of mucosal
delivery methods thus requires highly sensitive measurements to inform materials
synthesis strategies. This collaborative project will use total internal
reflection microscopy experiments to directly measure interactions between mucus
films and particles coated with zwitterionic polymers. Zwitterionic polymers are
those that carry an equal number of positive and negative charges, similar to
lipids present on the surfaces of cells. The team uses these measurements, which
provide nanometer-scale resolution, to inform of the interactions between
chemically different zwitterionic polymers and mucus, and to extract the
importance of polymer chemistry on mucopenetrability. Educational impacts of
this work are focused on training of students at graduate and undergraduate
levels. Efforts to retain undergraduate underrepresented minorities are
undertaken through mentoring for student members of the Hispanic Association of
Colleges and Universities. Outreach activities center on involvement in
recruiting activities and summer research opportunities for undergraduates
through The Colorado-Wyoming Alliance for Minority Participation (CO-WY AMP).
Focus is also placed on hosting undergraduate students in the laboratory and to
participate in K-5 STEM education via the SABES (STEM Achievement in Baltimore
Elementary Schools) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research centers around the development of
zwitterionic polymers and particles with controllable mucopenetration. To
understand carrier-mucus interactions and mucus transport, we propose a series
of coupled aims which integrate synthetic biomaterials design of polymers will
well-defined molecular characteristics and the direct kT-scale measurements of
their mucus interactions and mucus transport. Control over molecular properties,
including zwitterion dipole orientation and molecular weight, will enable us to
carry out a comprehensive examination of the effects of these characteristics on
their performance as effective mucopenetrating drug carriers. Simultaneously, by
employing Total Internal Reflection Microscopy (TIRM) we will directly and non-
intrusively measure kT and nanometer scale interactions between particles and
mucus, with and without boronic acid targeting moieties. Ultimately, these
studies will provide critical knowledge to inform the design and optimal
performance of ZI particles in an iterative fashion. In short, the proposed work
will combine the synthetic and self-assembly expertise of the Herrera-Alonso lab
with the expertise of the Bevan lab on TIRM measurements to understand how ZI NP
chemistry and structure lead to different interactions with mucus and diffusive
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.