* 2104464
* Kinetically Trapping the Self-Assembly and Photophysical Properties of Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Ivan Aprahamian, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 528,743.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry and Condensed Matter Physics Programs in the Division of
Materials Research, this research examines the effect that tiny amounts of
light-sensitive inclusions, such as small molecules, (i.e., switchable dopants)
have on the long-range helical structure, and hence, photophysical properties of
liquid-crystals (LCs – the same type of material found in Liquid Crystal Display
(LCD) televisions). The Aprahamian group studies the fundamental factors that
govern the interactions between the switchable dopant and host LC to gain
insights into how to better control such phenomena. The aim of the project is to
understand if this strategy can be used in programming the optical properties of
the LCs. This knowledge in turn advances applications ranging from active smart
surfaces, to sensors, color filters, and responsive reflectors. Aprahamian and
his group also participate in educational and outreach activities that i) engage
high-school and undergraduate students from different educational levels and
backgrounds in research, and ii) increase public knowledge and appreciation of
important chemical concepts. For example, the PI’s group uses interactive
demonstrations to explain to the public how fluorophores work. The group’s
public outreach and participation in STEM-related events, such as the Dartmouth
Science Day, help disseminate the group’s work to broad audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;Adaptive liquid crystals
(LCs) are used in a myriad of applications ranging from active smart surfaces to
sensors, color filters, and responsive reflectors. Chiral switchable dopants are
usually at the heart of these applications, though the nature of the
interactions between them and the host LC, and how these interactions control
the self-assembly and helical twist of the chiral LC, which are responsible for
the LC’s photophysical properties, is poorly understood. With the help of this
grant from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Condensed Matter Physics
Programs in the Division of Materials Research the Aprahamian group conducts
structure-property analyses to develop an understanding of the intermolecular
interactions and structural parameters that control both the helical twisting
power (i.e., the ability of a chiral dopant to twist a nematic phase) and the
change in helical twisting power upon switching of chiral photochromic dopants
(i.e., hydrazones). The group also uses the bistable hydrazone photoswitches to
kinetically trap the self-assembly of the LCs, and hence, the colors reflected
from their surfaces. Overall, this research enhances the toolbox and
capabilities available to practitioners, thus allowing for the realization of
the numerous applications that adaptive LC materials are slated for.
Additionally, Aprahamian and his group are involved in outreach activities that
strengthen and extend the group's informal and formal science education
partnerships and networks with local schools and science
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.