* 2104513
* RUI: Fundamental Investigation on Flexible High Temperature Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Praveen Sekhar, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2024
* USD 408,546.00

This project addresses the need for a flexible wireless gas sensing device at
high temperature for wide variety of applications including the use by first
responders. Monitoring environmental conditions surrounding a first responder
and relaying the information to the on-scene commander and incident command
quickly is essential to assess true situational awareness of the health and
performance of the first responder. Specifically, during forest fires and
terrorist attacks, the environmental monitoring system is typically expected to
provide real-time data on gas phase exposure endured by the first responders to
the incident managers enabling them to make the best decisions possible in
situations where time is critical. The availability of a flexible ceramic based
on Yttria-Stabilized Zirconia that can withstand high temperature have opened up
possibilities to realize new devices. In partnership with the local industry,
the investigators are pursuing electrical characterization of the flexible
substrate to implement functional devices such as high temperature gas sensor
and antenna. By leveraging the integrated device, firefighters will be better-
equipped to face some of the world’s deadliest situations, helping preserve life
and property for civilians and the firefighters themselves. The research results
will directly impact first responders operating under extreme environments and
circumstances such as forest fires, terrorist attack, earthquake, etc. The
project is offering extensive research experience for undergraduate engineering
students in order to prepare them for future workforce tackling complex
challenges. The project is intending to address one of the biggest educational
challenges in the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics community:
keeping students engaged in science and engineering. The industry and academic
investigators involved in this project are designing creative and interactive
lab modules on wireless systems to engage under-represented high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The university-industry project is exploring the
feasibility of a compact and integrated high temperature wireless sensor system
on a new and ultrathin flexible substrate with a dual intent of providing
comprehensive undergraduate research experience and training. The investigators
are pursuing fundamental electrical investigations to characterize the flexible
substrate for high temperature gas sensing and communication applications. The
suitability of the substrate as an integrated device platform is being assessed
by implementing a high temperature antenna. Subsequently, the antenna
integration with a high temperature gas sensor and a high temperature voltage-
controlled oscillator is being implemented. Antenna performance evaluation is
being assessed by performing high-temperature tests, thermal shock tests,
bending routines, and microstructural examinations. Field readiness of the
device is being evaluated by testing return loss, radiation pattern, gain, and
efficiency in anechoic chamber at various temperatures in an industry setting.
High temperature gas sensor to monitor toxic gases that might arise from forest
fires is being implemented on a flexible platform. Long-term testing and
independent validation of the antenna and gas sensor performance are being
carried out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.