* 2104639
* Development of a Multi-Cue Biomaterial for Traumatic Tissue Injury
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Leyla Esfandiari, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials have immense potential
for a countless number of applications, but limitations currently exist on the
integration and adaptive functionality of the materials. For instance, there are
a large number of events and signals that occur following a traumatic injury,
including electrical, chemical, and physical signals that are used to
communicate with cells and the surrounding environment that current materials
are unable to replicate. Therefore, this project seeks to develop a novel
biomaterial scaffold with customized chemical, electrical and physical signaling
to be provided to the injury site. Electrical signaling will be provided by
movement of the scaffold, called piezoelectricity, or by targeted “on-demand”
ultrasound. This tunable, piezoelectric material represents a leap forward to
materials that can better reproduce the requirements necessary of a biomaterial.
The multi-functional, piezoelectric biomaterial will be fabricated,
systematically characterized, and developed into a three-dimensional construct
for future applications such as nerve regeneration. This study will greatly aid
in the development and characterization of piezoelectric biomaterials for the
future, and particularly multi-function materials capable of providing
customizable signals. In addition, this work seeks to broaden interest in
science by hosting a workshop for local Cincinnati high school students where
students will have an opportunity to learn about piezoelectricity and material
science. Overall, by developing robust biomaterials with enhanced signaling
capabilities that better replicate the native environment, this class of
material has the potential to revolutionize personalized medicine and deliver
countless future therapies from the lab into the
clinic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel
biomaterials capable of delivering the required signals to both cells and the
microenvironment to replace or restore tissue in injury and disease states
remain challenging to develop. A new class of multiple-cue material is greatly
needed for a variety of applications including tissue engineered therapies, in
vitro models of injury and disease, and fundamental studies of cell and tissue.
To address this challenge for more relevant materials, this project will develop
a biomaterial capable of delivering the relevant electrical, chemical, and
physical signals to cells and the microenvironment to promote regeneration and
integration of tissue. To accomplish this, the research project will: 1)
Electrospin an aligned, biocompatible poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-
trifluoroethylene)(PVDF-TrFE) piezoelectric, nanofiber scaffold with a high
surface area and porosity that is functionalized with tissue-specific,
decellularized extracellular matrix (ECM). 2) Quantitatively determine the
electric potential of the scaffold resulting from mechanical deformation on the
cellular and tissue level, in addition to quantification of location specific
ultrasonic stimulation, which can be applied on demand as the scaffolds generate
electric current in response to mechanical deformations. The resulting neuronal
and Schwann cell phenotypic response to biomaterials and electric current
produced will also be examined. 3) Utilize the electrospun PVDF-TrFE mesh
scaffold to create 3D guidance conduits to address wound repair in nerve injury
and assess the mechanics and total piezoelectricity of conduits while
maintaining biocompatibility with cells. In the long-term, this research
develops a transformative class of biomaterial and provides a mechanistic
understanding of piezoelectric polymers and their effect on cells and
tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.