* 2104782
* Collaborative Research: Research: Assessing Empathic Formation in Engineering Design
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Allison Godwin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 01/31/2025
* USD 309,432.00

Empathy is essential for identifying, designing for, and meeting user needs and
can motivate engineers to meaningfully engage with and respond to diverse
viewpoints and values. Thus, educators need tools for developing empathy in
engineers. Yet, measuring empathy is challenging because it manifests uniquely
in different contexts. To begin addressing the need for an engineering-specific
measure of empathy, we developed and pilot-tested an assessment instrument. Our
prior work suggested a need to improve how empathy is measured across all
aspects of the design phases and to account for variation in empathy for
distinct user groups. Thus, in this study, our primary objective is to refine
this instrument and to ensure its validity, reliability, and fairness for
assessing empathic formation in undergraduate engineering design across multiple
contexts, design phases, and participants. We will integrate and account for
these perspectives in the expansion of the instrument, thus ensuring that the
instrument captures a diverse group of instructor perspectives and needs. Thus,
this study will support a critical need for a valid tool for assessing empathy
in engineering design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empathy can provide the “spark of
human concern for others,” thus bolstering efforts at integrating empathy into
engineering curriculum and help students’ empathic growth with and for users.
Thus, a measure of empathy can help students care, understand, and help users in
need. In this study, we will iterate on an instrument for assessing empathy with
a diverse group of engineering design instructors to identify potential
refinements of the instrument needed to improve its alignment with their
contexts, collect student data to ensure potential instrument refinements that
accurately represent student experiences, and design a revised instrument that
accounts for these novel insights. We will test the revised instrument for
validity via the triangulation of quantitative and qualitative data with a large
sample of students. Finally, we will use the instrument to identify differences
in empathic formation associated with various instructional design contexts and
practices, thus generating new knowledge on best practices for promoting
empathic formation in engineering design. Our team brings prior research in
empathic design, distinct engineering backgrounds, and expertise in multiple
research methodologies which will ensure research rigor and quality. Our
collaborators are design educators and thus will help ensure the instrument is
useful for engineering design courses across disciplines and across university
sites. The advisory board includes experts in empathy, design, and psychometrics
who will provide external evaluation and guidance to ensure that the instrument
represents the state of the art of research on empathy in engineering design. By
providing the community with this measure, we can facilitate the integration of
empathy and assessment of empathy in engineering classroom contexts, which can
positively impact the experience and retention of pro-socially motivated
students in engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.