* 2104281
* Probing Microbe-Material Interactions towards In situ Gut Microbiome Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Scott Medina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 204,837.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human body is colonized
by trillions of bacteria, fungi, protozoa and viruses; collectively referred to
as the microbiome. The bacterial microbiome, particularly in the human
gastrointenstinal tract, play critical roles in nutrient metabolism, immune
training and prevention of infections. Yet, despite a clear link between the
bacterial microbiome and human health, it remains difficult to determine the
functional role each bacteria plays in human physiology and disease. This is
largely due to a lack of accessible tools that allow researchers to carefully
study and manipulate the microbiome composition within the gut. This project
will study how microbes interact with biologic materials to improve the design
of new materials-enabled tools for microbiome engineering. To achieve this, the
team will explore the interactions of gut microbes with carbohydrate- and
peptide-based biomaterials, determine how these microbe-material interactions
alter microbiome communities, and utilize the insights gained to design new
biomaterials that can control gut microbiome ecology. Findings from these
studies will lead to a deeper understanding of how the microbes in our
gastrointestinal tract interact with foreign materials, and in doing so yield
transformative new biomaterial technologies that can be used to better study,
diagnose and treat gut infections, disorders and diseases. Integration of this
research program with the Penn State Center of Excellence in Industrial
Biotechnology and the CSL Behring Fermentation Facility, which together educate
students in the production of microbial-derived products, will engage and train
a modern and diverse STEM workforce in emerging areas of materials science,
glycobiology and microbial biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to
establish a rational design framework for the development of biomaterials that
can enable precision, in situ engineering of gut microbiome ecology. To achieve
this, the research team will investigate the sequence-dependent interactions of
probiotic microbes with carbohydrate- and peptide-based biomaterials, and
elucidate how these microbe-material interactions shape the gut microbiome
community. Fundamental to this work is the use of carbohydrate-peptide
biocapsules, recently developed by the PIâ€™s lab, that can kill pathogens on
contact and replace them with defined probiotic payloads. Using these materials
as research platforms, this project will investigate how glycan composition and
structure impacts microbial physiology, elucidate structure-activity
relationships governing the bactericidal properties of polypeptide material
coatings, and identify the physicochemical properties controlling the delivery
of biocapsules to various gut compartments. Knowledge gained from this work will
advance the development of biomaterials to probe and manipulate microbial
ecology in the complex gastrointenstinal tract. Further, this work may identify
the role biomaterials can play in manipulating the microbiome and their
potential in advancing the design of new tailored bacteriotherapies against gut
disorders. This research program will be integrated with the Penn State Center
of Excellence in Industrial Biotechnology to offer unprecedented training
opportunities for participating students at the interface of materials science,
glycobiology and microbiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.