* 2104185
* Women’s Political Participation in a Transitioning Democracy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Maro Youssef, Youssef, Maro
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 143,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF’s Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Rhacel
Parreñas at the University of Southern California (USC), this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating the role of
women in politics during a democratic transition. Existing research on women’s
political participation during democratic transitions generally concludes that
women participate in revolutions and the early years of democratic transitions
but stop shortly after. The United States,in particular, supports women
political candidates and politicians, which likely improves their ability to
remain politically active. Women politicians who get elected during democratic
transitions deserve to be studied because they provide a model of increasing
women’s political participation—not through political appointments, but rather
through elections. The researcher will employ and train junior researchers to
conduct policy-relevant research and communicate the research’s findings through
written and oral policy briefings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on women’s
long-term political participation during political transitions has tended to
subscribe to one of two major sets of assumptions. First, much research assumes
that women do not gain political influence beyond revolutions and the initial
years of democratic transition. In contrast, the literature that argues that
women become influential in the long term tends to focus exclusively on post-
civil war contexts. Second, there is a growing scholarly literature on
coalitions. Yet, much of the literature focuses on places where political actors
form coalitions under relatively stable political conditions. Third, there are
scholarly and activist debates about the role and impact of assistance during
democratic transitions. Findings from this research can shed light on women’s
political participation during democratic transitions and on coalition work
across party lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.