* 2104830
* Investigating the Long-Term Impacts of Pandemic Disease
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Sharon DeWitte, Wissler, Amanda
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
under-represented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Sharon DeWitte at the University of South
Carolina, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating the long-term impacts of pandemics on population health and
demography by studying how the 1918 “Spanish” influenza pandemic influenced the
health of influenza survivors and how sex and race mediated these changes. The
results of this project will be used to support public health measures that will
mitigate the negative impacts of Covid-19. Novel data on gendered and racial
health disparities will be generated, increasing knowledge of health inequality
in the past, and contributing to current discourse on health disparity and the
social determinants of health. Characterizing how pandemic influenza influences
mortality among various populations will help inform predictions of how future
outbreaks will affect modern society. Results on how demography influenced long-
term survival in 1918 will be used to understand how sex and race may affect
health and mortality of Covid-19 survivors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has the following research goals: understand how overall population health
changed after the pandemic and characterize how sex and social race influenced
health and survival. Previous studies on the 1918 flu pandemic have relied
primarily on documentary evidence – such as hospital or death records – or on
viral RNA extracted from a handful of individuals. Researchers have been unable
to explore factors influencing mortality on a population scale from a biological
perspective. This project will use an untapped source of data: human skeletal
remains of individuals who survived the 1918 pandemic. This proposed project
takes a bioarchaeological approach, analyzing the skeletal remains of
individuals who died before and after the 1918 pandemic. Skeletal lesions
associated with increased morbidity and mortality will be analyzed alongside
ages-at-death using hazards analysis to assess if post-pandemic populations
lived longer or had less disease compared pre-pandemic populations. Differences
in survivorship and lesion prevalence will also be assessed by sex and social
race to examine if demographic factors influenced mortality and survival. The
findings of this research on how sex and social race influenced long term
survival in 1918 can predict how demography will influence health and mortality
in Covid-19 survivors in the upcoming years. The information learned from this
project will be disseminated through lectures increasing public literacy of the
roles sex and social race play in creating health disparity, educating the
public about virus transmission, and increasing public awareness of the ongoing
danger of epidemics in our highly interconnected
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.