* 2104796
* Active living emulsions driven by bacteria
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jacinta Conrad, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 524,825.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Swimming bacteria are
appealing components in a novel class of “active” emulsions: suspensions of
droplets whose motion is driven by bacteria. Such living active emulsions
represent a potentially transformative advance in biomaterials, as they
incorporate desirable properties of living systems – such as extreme mechanical
properties, complex catalytic capabilities, and self-healing – into engineered
materials that can be readily printed or shaped. Attaining these properties in
emulsions is challenging because it is not currently known how to predict the
bulk flow properties of emulsions from the motion of bacteria. This project will
develop the tools needed to program the mechanical properties of living active
emulsions by engineering the motility and adhesiveness of bacteria and address a
critical knowledge gap by providing understanding of how the motion of external
“swimmers” is transduced into collective droplet motion and “flowability” of
emulsions. The results from this project are expected to advance the design of
feedstocks for state-of-the-art materials processing and 3-D printing
applications. The team of PIs and student trainees will disseminate results to
Houston’s biomedical and materials communities through local meetings and
establish a seminar series for junior Texas researchers. They will also initiate
a multilingual public outreach event through the Texas Soft Matter Meeting and
develop new activities for their ongoing outreach programs for K - 12 students
through the University of Houston and for the public at the Houston Energy
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop the
fundamental understanding needed to program living active emulsions in which
directional rotation of suspended droplets is driven by bacterial motility. To
test the hypothesis that collective interactions between bacteria-driven
emulsion droplets can be used to modify and control the macroscopic mechanical
properties of emulsions, the PIs will integrate complementary expertise in soft-
matter physics (Conrad) and synthetic biology (Cirino) to address two specific
aims: (1) control droplet mobility via bacterial interfacial interactions, and
(2) link macroscopic rheology of living emulsions to microscopic collective
droplet motion. The team of PIs and undergraduate and graduate student trainees
will advance genetic tools for the non-model organism Marinobacter
hydrocarbonoclasticus SP1 and construct genetically modified bacteria with
tunable expression of surface features. Measurements of droplet motion driven by
engineered bacteria will be used to test models for the rotation rate and for
stochastic translational motion. The team will quantify pairwise interactions
between rotating droplets, measure rotation speed and correlation length in
concentrated emulsions, and relate length scales associated with collective
droplet motion to the bulk mechanical properties of active emulsions. These
studies will generate new insight into how the microscopic activity of bacteria
is related to the macroscopic emulsion mechanics, which will pave the way for
the development of living active emulsions as a new class of
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.