* 2104745
* Disruption of Plastic Flow in Metals by Adsorbed Organic Monolayers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Srinivasan Chandrasekar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2024
* USD 461,650.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support research
leading to new knowledge for structural metals that will improve their
durability, processing and re-use. By doing so, it will advance the science base
of critically important materials and manufacturing processes, and provide
technological benefits for industry sectors as diverse as energy systems, ground
transportation and aerospace. The project will explore a recently uncovered
phenomenon pertaining to metals - a large change in their fracture and plastic
flow behavior arising from application of even nanoscale organic films onto
their surface. It will study the changes produced in surface properties of the
metals (e.g., surface and interface energy, surface stress, strength) by the
films. Based on this study of the properties, and their relation to film
attributes, e.g., chemistry, chain length, adsorption, it will identify the
factors that control the flow and fracture phenomenon. The approach will combine
advanced experimental techniques such as high-speed imaging and image analysis
and nanoscale metrology, with atomistic modeling of interactions between organic
molecule structure and metal surface attributes. The findings will impinge upon
areas as diverse as materials processing, environmentally-assisted cracking and
wear – areas, where synergistic effects of mechanical loading and chemistry
often play a key role. Controllability of the mechanochemical phenomenon by
tailoring of the organic film chemistry will enable enhancements in material
removal (e.g., cutting, comminution) and surface deformation (e.g., friction-
stir processing) processes for metals. The research integrates several
disciplines including materials engineering, surface science and metrology. The
multi-disciplinary approach will also contribute to broadening the participation
of underrepresented minorities in research via involvement of summer students
from the National Technical Institute for the Deaf, foster multi-disciplinary
scientific collaborations, and positively impact engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will advance our understanding of chemical effects in surface
plasticity for metals through a fundamental study of a recently uncovered
mechanochemical effect - disruption of plastic flow and surface embrittlement by
adsorbed organic monolayers. By integrating a surface molecular probe (Self-
Assembled Monolayers (SAMs)) and high-resolution in situ deformation analysis,
with atomistic and continuum modeling of monolayer attributes and materials
behavior, the research will address two closely-related hypotheses on the
effect: 1) an adsorbed monolayer is sufficient to disrupt surface plastic flow
and induce a local ductile-to-brittle transition; and 2) energetics of the
monolayer-metal interface (surface stress vs. interface energy) controls the
surface flow and the flow-fracture transition. The hypotheses exploration is
guided by four objectives: 1) Utilize molecular self-assembly (SAMs) to anchor
various monolayers onto metal surfaces, and characterize their attributes. The
principal thermodynamic parameters of the surface, namely surface/interface
energy and surface stress, will be varied via molecule chemistry and chain
length; 2) Analyze the plastic-deformation response of the metal and associated
flow dynamics, with and without the organic films, under controlled mechanical
loading (e.g., simple shear, uniaxial tension) of specimens with high surface
area-to-volume; 3) Develop a model for explaining the mechanochemical effect due
to adsorbed monolayers – from changes in nanoscale surface properties to
mesoscale transitions in plastic flow; and 4) Integrate the experiments and
modeling to understand how adsorbed films influence surface plasticity in
metals, and what monolayer attributes control the mechanochemical effect. The
study will be conducted specifically with commercially pure aluminum and iron,
selected for their diversity in structure and deformation response, experimental
suitability and technological interest. The findings will be of value for areas
as diverse as materials processing, environmentally-assisted cracking and wear,
wherein synergistic effects of mechanical loading and chemistry often play a key
role. The education and outreach activities involves undergraduate students in
creating a video gallery of plastic flow/fracture phenomena for structural
metals and processing; a modest focus on entrepreneurship in graduate study; and
involvement of summer students from the National Technical Institute for the
Deaf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.