* 2104429
* Collaborative Research: In Vitro Epithelial Lubrication: Collective Motion, Mechanics, and Fluid Transport
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Thomas Angelini, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2024
* USD 204,744.00

The research supported by this grant will generate new knowledge about how human
epithelial tissues function and endure damage. Epithelial tissues are the thin
protective layers of cells that cover the inner and outer surfaces of organs.
Throughout the body, one of the main functions of epithelial surfaces is
lubrication. However, most of our understanding of epithelial lubrication comes
from the study of fluids at epithelial surfaces, neglecting the mechanical
behaviors of the cells themselves. This award supports fundamental research to
establish the connection between epithelial lubrication and the mechanical
behaviors of cells in monolayers. Pharmaceutical interventions are known to
alter the mechanical properties of cells and tissues. These will be used to
uncover the underlying mechanical contributions to epithelial lubrication. This
new knowledge will increase understanding of diseases of the epithelium and
identify new potential therapies. Therefore, results from this research will
ultimately benefit human health and society. This research brings together
several disciplines including tribology (the study of friction and wear), cell
mechanics, active matter physics, and physiology. The convergence of multiple
disciplines and the potential societal impacts of this work will aid in
broadening participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in research
and expand engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to
discover new principles of monolayer lubrication, guided by the central
hypothesis that the mechanically relevant timescales associated with cell motion
and intercellular fluid transport in monolayers generate multiple distinct
regimes of lubrication. The rationale for this work is that new perspectives on
epithelial tissue function and pathologies will emerge from rebuilding current
understanding of epithelial lubrication on a foundation derived from collective
cell motion and mechanics. The research team will classify and quantify
collective motion in different types of monolayer, establish how cell motion and
monolayer properties control indentation dynamics, and develop lubrication
curves with connections to collective cell motion and monolayer material and
transport properties. Living analogs to classic lubrication phenomena like fluid
"squeeze films," poroelasticity, boundary lubrication, mixed lubrication, and
hydrodynamic lubrication will be linked to collective cell motion, mechanics,
and intercellular fluid transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.