* 2104786
* Probing the Evolution of Granular Microstructures during Dynamic Annealing via Integrated Three-Dimensional Experiments and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Ashwin Shahani, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 572,428.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many metallic materials are
polycrystalline, in which a solid consists of many tiny crystals (“grains”) with
different orientations. In some cases, superior properties can be achieved when
the material is made in a single-crystal form, as in the case for jet-engine
turbine blades, shape-memory alloys, and solar cells. However, single crystals
are expensive and time-consuming to produce. Recently researchers have found
that single crystals can be produced through abnormal grain growth induced by
cyclic heat treatment, where the metal alloy is heated and cooled repeatedly.
During abnormal grain growth, a few grains preferentially grow by engulfing the
neighboring grains. The goal of this project is to discover why and how this
process occurs. The project integrates emergent research in experimental
characterization and simulations of the grain growth process, capitalizing on
the ability to watch the evolution of the polycrystalline microstructure in
real-time and leveraging high-performance computing to simulate microstructural
evolution. Developing the fundamental understanding of abnormal grain growth
could lead to a paradigm shift in the manufacture of single-crystalline
materials, and therefore it promotes global competitiveness in manufacturing and
technology and national prosperity. The project also promotes the development of
a highly trained future workforce; two graduate students are trained in state-
of-the-art techniques in experiments, modeling, simulations, and data analysis.
Outreach activities are carried out through the Females Excelling More in the
Math, Engineering, and the Sciences program and Washtenaw Elementary Science
Olympiad and include a virtual reality demonstration that allows students to
walk through an evolving microstructure during heat treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cyclic heat
treatment, in which precipitates are repeatedly formed and dissolved by thermal
cycling, holds promise for solid-state processing of single crystals and
otherwise large-grained materials via abnormal grain growth. However, its full
potential has not been realized due to the poor understanding of the mechanisms
underlying the process. The objective of this project is to advance the science
governing the growth of the abnormal grains during non-isothermal annealing. The
following fundamental questions are addressed: What is the mechanism by which
abnormal grain growth is initiated under dynamic thermal environment? Which
grains are most likely to become abnormal and what are their microstructural
signatures? How does the abnormal grain grow into new microstructural
neighborhoods? To answer these questions, emergent research in structural
characterization, phase-field and phase-field-crystal modeling, and graph theory
methods are synergistically integrated. High-resolution synchrotron-based X-ray
diffraction microscopy is utilized to visualize and quantify the evolution of
the grain and subgrain network in real-time and also enable microstructural
evolution simulations based on the measured space-, time-, and orientation-
resolved datasets as initial conditions. The resulting high-dimensional data is
then distilled into a network model that succinctly describes the granular and
the local driving forces for grain boundary motion, which significantly reduces
the computational cost of predicting the microstructural evolution. Scientific
understanding of abnormal grain growth upon thermal cycling ultimately informs
the process design of single-crystal fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.