* 2104255
* Field-Theoretic Simulations: Coherent States and Particle-Field Linkages
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Glenn Fredrickson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2025
* USD 463,126.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theory and computation, and
education to advance computer simulation of polymeric materials which are based
on polymers, long-chain-like molecules. Polymers are versatile materials that
have remarkably broad applications in textiles, plastics and rubbers, paints and
coatings, and consumer products including haircare products, cleansers,
detergents, etc. They are also increasingly important in new energy harvesting
technologies such as organic solar cells, as solid electrolytes in energy
storage devices such as batteries, and in advanced drug delivery and medical
devices. Perhaps surprisingly, the design of new polymers for such applications
proceeds by trial-and-error experimentation until the molecular design yields
the targeted properties and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
advance in-silico computational design of polymeric materials. One component of
the project will develop a new theoretical representation of polymers into a
computational platform that will enable the design of materials with thermally
reversible bonds. Such materials have unique properties such as self-repair when
damaged, or responsiveness to thermal or chemical stimuli, both important in a
variety of emerging applications. A second effort aims to link molecular
simulations at the atomic scale with simulations that employ a different
theoretical formulation and can reach scales of hundreds of micrometers. This
capability will enable chemical details to be embedded in the theoretical
models; the latter providing the link to polymer material properties. If
successful, this multiple length scale modeling platform could dramatically
accelerate the design of polymers for existing and new
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed research
include engagement by the project personnel in graduate, undergraduate, and
post-doctoral training in theoretical and computational polymer science.
Theoretically-oriented students will be exposed to broader soft materials
disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at the University
of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) in chemical engineering, materials, and
chemistry. Knowledge gained under the proposed project will be leveraged through
the Complex Fluids Design Consortium at UCSB, an industry-national lab-academic
partnership that is addressing the computational design of commercially relevant
polymer formulations. All participants will contribute to the vibrant education
and outreach programs of UCSB's Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theory and computation, and education to advance theory and modeling of
polymeric materials. This project will enhance the capabilities of the field-
theoretic simulation (FTS) method, permitting numerical investigations of field
theory models of polymers and soft materials without resorting to a mean-field
approximation. One project component builds a new platform for FTS based on
coherent-states polymer field theory, a long-neglected representation of
interacting polymers inspired by quantum field theory. The proposed work aims to
develop and optimize algorithms for simulations of coherent states models and
apply those algorithms to fundamental studies of reversibly bonding,
supramolecular polymers. Relationships will be explored between variables such
as bonding equilibrium constants, stoichiometry and polymer architecture, and
self-assembly behavior and thermodynamic properties. The unique structure of the
coherent-states framework will enable a new force-matching scheme for systematic
coarse-graining within FTS, applicable to both supramolecular and non-reactive
polymer systems. Another component of the proposed research is to develop a
workflow in which all-atom particle models are mapped to coarse-grained particle
models using relative entropy minimization; the latter models of a form to allow
analytical conversion to a fully-parameterized field theory. FTS can then be
used to access mesoscale structure and thermodynamic properties directly
connected to the underlying chemistry of the polymers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed research include
engagement by the project personnel in graduate, undergraduate, and post-
doctoral training in theoretical and computational polymer science.
Theoretically-oriented students will be exposed to broader soft materials
disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at the University
of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) in chemical engineering, materials, and
chemistry. Knowledge gained under the proposed project will be leveraged through
the Complex Fluids Design Consortium at UCSB, an industry-national lab-academic
partnership that is addressing the computational design of commercially relevant
polymer formulations. The all-atom to FTS workflow targeted by the project has
the potential to revolutionize in silico design of such formulations. All
participants will contribute to the vibrant education and outreach programs of
UCSB's Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.