* 2104191
* Collaborative Research: Coordinating Water Markets and Critical Infrastructure Management to Build Community Resilience to Extreme Drought
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Paul Block, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 01/31/2025
* USD 166,266.00

Droughts are among the most severe natural disasters in the US, challenging
agricultural and urban communities reliant on water supply, and freshwater
ecosystems threatened by low streamflow. These economic and environmental
impacts ripple through social systems as well, impacting public health due to
impaired water and air quality, and mental health due to revenue losses and
unemployment. Unfortunately, attempts to reduce multi-sectoral drought impacts
through demand-side and supply-side management are poorly coordinated.
Furthermore, drought management often is initiated too late, as water users
pursue short-term economic gains while droughts slowly develop. Improved drought
forecasts and better integration of early warnings into decision support systems
for water management are critically needed to reduce these temporal tradeoffs.
The goal of this project is to evaluate the potential gains of better
coordinated, forecast-informed drought management of water systems and their
institutional and physical infrastructure to simultaneously reduce community
impacts of drought and facilitate sustainable economic growth. This research
will support NSFâ€™s mission to advance national health, prosperity, and welfare,
as improved drought management can increase social, economic, and environmental
benefits for agricultural and urban communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on the drought-prone Upper Colorado River Basin, where
decreased snowmelt runoff resulting from climate warming and rapid urban growth
are intensifying water scarcity risks. Three scientific questions will be
addressed: 1) What are the economic and environmental impacts of droughts on
agricultural and urban communities under current water management practices and
the system of prior appropriation? 2) How can integrating forecast-conditioned
reservoir operations with water market strategies such as subsidized fallowing,
farmer-to-farmer water rights trading, and urban-to-agricultural option
contracts reduce these impacts, and what are the tradeoffs of alternative plans?
3) To what extent do such integrated plans reduce vulnerabilities to changing
climate extremes, and where they are still insufficient, what forecast skill or
additional adaptation mechanisms would be needed to attain satisfactory
performance? These questions will be addressed through panel regression models
and the development of a multi-objective optimization framework that jointly
conditions the operations of critical reservoir infrastructure and water market
transactions on seasonal climate forecasts. The outcome of this research will be
an integrated approach to developing alternative drought management policies
that stakeholders could consider implementing to achieve more sustainable
adaptation to changing drought extremes. The research team will work with
agricultural and urban stakeholders in the basin throughout the project to
facilitate the translation of this research into
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.