* 2104105
* Elements: Collaborative Research: Community-driven Environment of AI-powered Noise Reduction Services for Materials Discovery from Electron Microscopy Data
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Peter Crozier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,068.00

The goal of this project is to create cyberinfrastructure (CI) powered by
artificial intelligence (AI) for sustained innovation in materials science. Deep
understanding of materials is critical for progress in technologies related to
energy, communication, construction, transportation and human health. The
revolutionary progress of deep learning has been enabled by the availability of
open-source AI models and open-access benchmark databases. However, the existing
codebases and datasets relevant to image processing focus mostly on photographic
images. In order to promote the sustained development of AI technology that can
have significant impact in materials science, it is critical to provide data and
AI models that are tailored to this domain. The developed CI will address this
need by providing software to process images obtained from electron-microscopes,
a technique enabling atoms to be visualized, and has the potential to enable
transformative breakthroughs in varied and important areas of materials science.
The CI is explicitly designed to foster the growth of a sustainable community of
users and developers of AI technology at the intersection of the materials and
data science communities, and to empower materials scientists to simulate their
own datasets and develop their own AI models for scientific discovery. The
developed AI-powered CI will therefore enable transformative progress in atomic-
level understanding of materials, which will have broader impacts in health,
energy, environment, and biotechnology. The CI environment will contribute to
training materials scientists in AI technology, connecting them to the AI
community, and providing software, data, and support materials to initiate them
in AI-powered research. Educational and outreach plans are designed to
facilitate interactions between the materials science and AI communities.
Outreach activities specifically targeted to the general public, and to high-
school teachers and their students, will expose them to materials science,
electron microscopy, and AI. The project is committed to providing opportunities
to women and underrepresented groups and will prioritize diversity in
collaboration with the NYU Center for Data Science diversity
committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a fundamental understanding of atomic
level structure and dynamics is critical for transformative advances in
materials science. Aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy is a
primary tool to accomplish this goal. Unfortunately, the information content of
microscopy data may be severely limited by poor signal-to-noise ratios. This is
particularly true for radiation sensitive materials and experiments where high
time resolution is required to investigate dynamic kinetic processes. AI
methodology can exploit prior information about material structure by training
deep neural nets with extensive simulations. These approaches may significantly
outperform existing state-of-the-art methods, especially for non-periodic
structures, including defects, interfaces, and surfaces. The developed CI will
provide AI noise reduction services which will yield immediate advances and
impacts for zeolites, metal organic frameworks, protein-material interfaces,
liquid phase nucleation and growth, liquid-solid interfaces, and fluxional
behavior in catalytic nanoparticles. In addition, the project will advance
methodology for the design of AI-oriented CI. The CI is strategically designed
to create a holistic environment for the use and development of AI technology in
a specific scientific domain. It will attract domain scientists with little AI
expertise, by providing software where the AI technology is transparent to the
end user. Exposure to the technology will motivate the scientific community to
design and train their own models, which will be facilitated by the open-source
codebase in the AI repository. The open-access database combined with the
repository will attract AI practitioners with little domain expertise, by giving
them access to well-curated data and a clear specification of the relevant AI
tasks. These services will be jump-started and supported through multiple
educational and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.