* 2104093
* Cytoskeletal Mechanical Transduction of Force in Platelets Attaching in Flow
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2022
* David Bark, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2022
* USD 218,157.00

Platelets are blood cells that help to stop bleeding after injury by forming
adhesive bonds to other parts of the blood and body. They must be able to tell
the difference between bleeding and the ordinary forces encountered as they
tumble and bump along a healthy blood vessel. This is important so that
platelets don't cause a stroke by spontaneously forming blood clots in healthy
vessels. The biochemical signals governing clotting have been intensely studied,
but the response of platelets to mechanical loading is largely unknown. This
research will test whether force sensing is important in the 'decision' of a
platelet to participate in clotting. The project will identify mechanical cues
that trigger platelet responses and the internal signals that communicate the
responses inside the cell. Undergraduate and graduate biomedical engineers will
perform the research. Interactive demonstrations to K-12 students will improve
the environment for younger students to participate in science education. This
research will benefit society by discovering fundamental knowledge needed to
develop new therapies for occlusive thrombosis (stroke) and for some bleeding
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While mechanical sensing and mechanotransduction
(conversion of mechanical to biochemical signals) processes in nucleated cells
are beginning to be understood, little is known about the role and existence of
mechanotransduction in regulating anucleate platelet adhesive functions in
response to their hemodynamic environment. By investigating the platelet
actomyosin cytoskeleton, efforts of this work will aim to examine the
mechanochemical steps that support firm integrin-dependent platelet adhesion and
shape change under varied hemodynamic environments using specialized
microfluidic devices, high speed microscopy, single cell force measurements, and
nanoscale flow quantification. We aim to define the platelet hemodynamic forces
relative to outside-in-signaling processes that trigger ligand-dependent
integrin clustering, assembly of actin-based cytoskeletal complexes, and
cytoskeletal reorganization. Dynamic contractile patterns associated with myosin
II will be assessed to identify hemodynamic signals that lead to firm adhesion
and cell detachment. Lastly, biochemical and biomechanical signals involved in
these processed will be defined. This work will improve our understanding of how
platelets respond to changes in flow after their initial tethering/adhesion,
which is fundamental to processes that lead to normal hemostasis, relative to
bleeding or thrombosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.