* 2104299
* RUI: Characterization of Aerosol Effects within an Urban Lightning Climatology across a North American Climatic Gradient
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Tobias Gerken, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 449,955.00

Small atmospheric particulates, known as aerosols, have the potential to modify
the lifespan and intensity of thunderstorms and properties of lightning. This
research project takes a climatological look at how urban aerosols influence
thunderstorms at three distinct sites across the US: Washington DC, Kansas City
and Salt Lake City. The researchers will assess how background climate and
weather conditions shape variability in urban aerosol conditions and how this,
in turn, affects the intensity of thunderstorms. The broader societal impacts of
the award will be through the increased knowledge of high-impact urban weather.
As a Facilitating Research at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions award, the
project will also train the next generation of scientists by involving a
significant number of undergraduates in the research
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team specifically proposes to
characterize how urban and regional aerosol conditions vary within the larger
context of environmental controls on thunderstorms, and how this in turn may
amplify or dampen thunderstorm and lightning activity beyond what would be
expected from a thermodynamic/wind shear perspective alone. Lightning, aerosol,
air quality, and sounding data from 3 distinct urban areas across the United
States would be analyzed to achieve the following objectives: 1) Quantify how
aerosol concentration covaries with lightning production and atmospheric
environments, 2) Assess geographic expression of threshold relationships between
stability and lightning production, and 3) Compare urban thunderstorm
environments obtained from synoptic-scale classifications with typologies
derived from aerosols and local thermodynamics
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.