* 2104924
* Directed Ionic Transport in Poly(Ionic Liquid)-Grafted Nanoparticles in Polarizable Media
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Pinar Akcora, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 424,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
sustainable materials for their ion transport properties in solutions, which is
important for membrane applications for water treatment, as well as electrolytes
for energy applications. The PI aims to investigate the nanoscale dynamics,
transport, and structural behavior in ionic media of nanoparticles with attached
polyelectrolyte and poly(ionic liquid) molecules. The concept of polarization of
the ionic liquids and electrolyte molecular chains will be investigated; it can
find transformative uses for magnetic polyelectrolyte hybrids. The molecular
conformational behavior of polyelectrolytes as well as ionic transport in
poly(ionic liquid)-based copolymer-grafted nanoparticles and their morphologies
will determine the transport efficiency of the membranes. The PI plans to use
the project deliverables in undergraduate level chemical engineering courses and
will also work with high school science teachers to help course development on
nanotechnology. Multifaceted educational approaches will include virtual
nanoscience educator workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolytes and poly(ionic liquids),
possessing strong ion binding and ion transport properties, can exhibit
switchable responses which make them ideal candidates for sustainable membranes
with easy regeneration; similarly, polyelectrolytes with enhanced durability and
ion transport. This project aims to investigate the role of hydrogen-bonding and
polarization of molecules on the conformations and orientations of electrolytes,
either as solvent medium or as polymer chains. Network formation in
polyelectrolyte-grafted particles under fields will be examined using rheology
and small-angle neutron scattering experiments. Interactions between the
polyelectrolytes and the solvent media will determine the solvation state, ion
transport, conductivity, viscoelastic properties and the polarization of chains.
In addition, hydrogen interactions between non-conductive polymer, poly(methyl
methacrylate), and imidazolium-based ionic liquid will be verified by Raman and
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic techniques, and the polarization of
ionic liquids with the polymer-grafted particles will be studied through in-situ
TEM experiments. Imidazolium based poly(ionic liquid) (PIL)-grafted particles
will be synthesized and their interactions with the ionic liquid medium will be
explored to understand ionic conductivity. Two copolymer-grafted nanoparticles
with different PIL blocks will be prepared and the ion conduction mechanism in
ionic liquid will be investigated. Ultimately, the morphological study will be
correlated to the conductivity. The overall aim of the proposed research is to
explore the hydrogen interaction-induced and polarized structures of
nanoparticle-based polyelectrolytes in solutions. The research plan will
underpin the fundamental mechanism of orientations both for the polymer and for
the ionic liquid media and will help us understand competing factors and how
they influence the ion transport properties through nanoscale
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.