* 2104841
* Design, synthesis, and assembly of composite liquid crystal elastomer fibers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Shu Yang, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 462,832.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft materials that can dramatically
change size, shape from two-dimensional (2D) to three-dimensional (3D), volume,
and physical properties in response to external stimuli are of great interest
for a wide range of potential applications. Plants can achieve complex
responsive morphing via a pre-programmed anisotropic deformation of cell walls,
which are made of hierarchically arranged fibrous polymers of different
stiffness. This project aims to mimic the cell wall structures and functions by
programming the anisotropy in fibrous polymers, while exploring molecular
heterogeneity and phase separation that are ubiquitous in biology. The research
will foster synergistic interactions across disciplines of polymer science and
engineering, soft matter physics, and mechanical engineering to develop complex,
multi-component, multi-phased networks. The research outcome will lead to
potential applications in next generation smart sensors, actuators, soft robots,
smart wearables, and 3D displays. It will also act as an effective tool to
recruit and train students at all levels. Special emphasis will be given to
underrepresented groups to carry out research on campus. The latest research
results will be showcased at the Philadelphia Materials Day and Penn Science
Café Program. Shape morphing and reshaping of the polymer networks will create a
significant outreach opportunity to excite the general public, thereby provoking
and engaging interest in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM). A symposium will be organized to feature research outcome and facilitate
interactions with researchers from academic, industrial and national
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research is based on multi-pronged
activities, including design, synthesis, assembly, fabrication,
characterization, and property optimization of a unique set of environmentally
responsive polymers. These are liquid crystal elastomers and their composites in
the form of fibers with precisely controlled compositions, molecular
orientations, architectures and mechanical responses from nano- to macroscales.
Importantly, the research will offer a holistic view on how to dynamically
configure the material’s intrinsic properties at the molecular level, that is
chemical composition, phase separation, and crosslinking gradient, while keeping
sights of geometric controls at the micro- to macroscale in the form of
cylindrical confinement. The multi-component, multi-phased networks will broaden
the materials palette to create more complex structures with precisely
controlled anisotropy in material elasticity. Complex shapes in response to an
external stimulus will be created to mimic plant cell wall structures and
functions, with bonuses such as tunable photonic colors and mechanical
adaptivity. The research outcome will enrich fundamental knowledge that relates
the locally controllable degrees of freedom to the global geometries, shapes and
shapeshifting paths. The insights could contribute to the development of the
next generation composite fibers for potential applications such as smart
sensors, actuators, 3D displays, soft robots, and smart textiles.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.