* 2104136
* Collaborative Research: Experimentally Informed Modeling of Structural Heterogeneity and Deformation of Metallic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yue Fan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,682.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most metals are crystalline where
atoms arrange into periodical arrays in 3-dimensions and their structure-
property relationships have been well-established, which have enabled their
widespread applications as indispensable structural materials in numerous modern
technologies. In contrast, metallic glasses are amorphous where atoms do not
arrange into periodical arrays. Despite many exceptional properties found in
metallic glasses such as high strength and elasticity, the lack of fundamental
understanding of their deformation mechanisms has hindered their potential
applications in many technical areas. This project seeks to advance our
fundamental understanding on how composition affects the structure, in
particular, structural heterogeneity at the nanoscale, in metallic glasses and
how such structural heterogeneity affects their deformation behavior. The
hypothesis is that the presence of different types of medium range ordering,
i.e., locally ordered atomic arrangements at the nanometer scale, and their
motion during mechanical loading are responsible for different deformation
behaviors of metallic glasses. Using a combination of advanced electron
microscopy and multiscale computer simulations, this project investigates the
atomic structures of medium range ordering present in different metallic glasses
and establish a relationship between medium range ordering structures and
deformation behavior. For educational outreach, the project integrates (i) an
internship program for local community college students with diverse
backgrounds, which provides them with research experience and facilitate their
transition to 4-year universities, and (ii) online workshops for dissemination
of the experimental and computational approaches for metallic glasses and other
amorphous materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project characterize structural
heterogeneities in metallic glasses (MGs) at the nanometer scale by
quantitatively analyzing nanodiffraction patterns acquired using 4-dimensional
scanning transmission electron microscopy (4D-STEM), which provides the
information on local medium-range ordering (MRO) that constitutes the MGs’
structural heterogeneities. Using the experimental structure data, together with
interatomic potentials, the genetic-algorithm-based StructOpt optimization
provides atomic structures that minimize the potential energy under the
constraint of MRO structures being fully consistent with the experimental data.
The resulting atomistic configurations of MROs are used for subsequent potential
energy landscape analysis to gain quantitative understanding on how the MROs
affect shear transformation zones (STZs), including the key information on
distinctive shear modes, activation energy barrier, activation volume, softening
behavior, and local elastic moduli. These crucial STZ parameters that quantify
the elementary plastic events, along with the microstructural information
related to the structural heterogeneity directly from 4D-STEM, are incorporated
into a heterogeneously randomized STZ dynamic model to perform deformation
simulations at the length and time scales relevant to real-world experiments.
The results from the simulations, which explore various MRO types and their
distribution revealed by the experimental characterization, are analyzed to gain
understanding of the structural origins of the substantial variations in
ductility and β-relaxation observed in two major MG systems, i.e., the Zr-based
and La-based MGs. These findings could advance significantly the fundamental
understanding of structure-property relationship in MGs and impact the design
and development of amorphous materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.