* 2104733
* Acoustic Forces and Active Fluctuations in Levitated Granular Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 492,284.00

Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better fundamental
understanding how small particles agglomerate is critical to a wide range of
processes, from the very early stages of planet formation in solar nebula and
interstellar media, to the nucleation and growth of small ice particles in the
atmosphere, to dusty plasmas and aerosols. To address this, the project
introduces a new research platform, whereby ultrasound is used to freely
levitate small particles in air and manipulate their assembly into larger
structures. The activity provides training and mentoring for a research team
that includes undergraduate and graduate students as well as a postdoctoral
scholar. Working with artists, the project team will furthermore explore unique
opportunities for using acoustic levitation in interactive performances and
exhibits to increase the public engagement with science and scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One key
experimental challenge in granular matter research has been to gain direct
access to the particle dynamics without the mitigating influence of enclosing
walls or other surfaces. A second experimental challenge has been to introduce
attractive forces that are tunable. The project addresses both challenges by
acoustically levitating the particles. Strong sound fields can balance gravity
and, at the same time, multiple sound scattering between levitated solid
particles creates tunable attractive forces. This makes it possible to form
freely floating structures in which large numbers of constituent particles are
linked by acoustic bonds. Tightly coupling experiments with numerical
simulations, a first effort is directed at designing force fields, including
fields with non-conservative components that introduce torque and rotation. A
second effort develops strategies for assembling levitating structures comprised
of large numbers of particles. Together, these two activities aim at introducing
acoustically levitated granular matter as a powerful new research
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.