* 2104758
* CRII : HCC : Smart Acoustic Surfaces as Multimodal Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Michael Heilemann, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,824.00

Over the course of the last decade, smart devices have become essential
components of daily life. However, apart from conversational assistants, most
smart devices and environments rely primarily on presenting information
visually, a poor fit for many situations where users' visual attention is on
something besides the device. One way to support these situations is to let
people use sound or touch for interactions. However, adding separate
microphones, loudspeakers, and vibration mechanisms using conventional means can
impose extra costs and reduce the device’s durability and aesthetics. This
project seeks to develop alternative technologies for recording and reproducing
spatial audio through bending vibrations on flat surfaces ranging from
smartphones to video walls. These vibrations can also allow the smart acoustic
surface to serve as a touch interface. The advantage of this approach lies in
the fact that the surface is already part of the device, allowing the device to
maintain its durability and aesthetics while incorporating these new features.
Adding spatial audio and haptic feedback to OLED displays, smartphones, and
video walls will provide fundamental technology to improve people's ability to
navigate complex data sets such as menus and maps, and enable a greater sense of
immersion for remote applications such as video conference calls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a framework for designing surfaces
such as the display screen of a device to serve as acoustic and vibrotactile
interfaces. The research objectives will address the following three challenges
by employing the vibro-acoustics of extended surfaces: (1) spatial audio
reproduction, (2) spatial audio capture, and (3) haptic feedback and touch
sensing. The vibrations of the extended surface induced by acoustic and touch
interactions with the structure can be detected using arrays of sensors
distributed on the surface. Similarly, arrays of force actuators distributed on
the surface will induce bending vibrations that cause the structure to radiate
sound. Loudspeaker and microphone array processing methods will be adapted for
the vibration actuators and sensors with applications including noise reduction,
sound-field control, and beamforming. Machine learning techniques will be used
to identify source-location features stemming from vibration patterns induced by
acoustic and touch interactions with the structure. Acoustic recordings and
scanning laser vibrometer measurements will be used to analyze the effectiveness
of the framework in real-world settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.