* 2104142
* pNUTs: Piezoelectric Nanoscale Ultrasonic Transducers for Dust-Like Airborne Communication Links
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gianluca Piazza, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Unsolicited Proposal 2104142&lt;br/&gt;“pNUTs: Piezoelectric
Nanoscale Ultrasonic Transducers for Dust-Like Airborne Communication
Links”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasound has found a broad range of applications
spanning from underwater communication, nondestructive evaluation of structural
components, and fingerprint sensing, to haptics feedback, ranging, real-time
locating systems and analog computing. The ultrasonic transducer is the core
component behind an ultrasound system. Its wide deployment for a new realm of
applications was made possible by the miniaturization of the transducer using
micromachined thin films. Further miniaturization of the films forming the
transducer to the nanoscale could yield substantial improvements in device
sensitivity or dramatic reduction in area, hence enabling a new set of far
reaching applications such as communication amongst networks of extremely small
form factor (“dust-like”) sensors or microrobots and non-intrusive biomedical or
neural implants. However, further miniaturization comes with fundamental
challenges associated with the synthesis of the films, the control of residual
stresses in the structure, and the electromechanical design of the transducer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to tackle these fundamental scaling
challenges and deliver a new class of devices labeled as piezoelectric nanoscale
ultrasonic transducers (pNUTs). To minimize propagation losses, pNUTs operate at
frequencies between 40 kHz and 100 kHz. Operation in this frequency range of
nanoscale transducers is challenged by the high sensitivity to residual stresses
and interactions with air, which tend to stiffen the structure and make it
extremely hard to precisely set the device resonant frequency. Given these
constraints, the research efforts are focused on synthesizing nanoscale
piezoelectric films of aluminum nitride (as thin as 10 nm) with controllable
stress and arranging them in a novel pNUT geometry. pNUTs arrays are also
investigated in order to achieve orders of magnitude improvement in sensitivity
for a given form factor. The field use of pNUTs is going to be demonstrated
through board-level implementation of airborne communication links for wake-up
receivers. These demonstrations will inform the researchers on the ultimate
sensitivity, range and modulation speed that pNUTs are capable of.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.