* 2104454
* I-Corps: Device to deliver cold plasma therapeutic to wound sites to promote wound healing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Jamey Jacob, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cold plasma-based wound healing device. Most currently
available advanced therapeutic devices are costly and require lengthy treatment
times, which has inhibited adoption in both veterinary and human therapeutic
applications. This device is aimed at aiding diabetic and other recurrent or
chemically resistant infected wounds. In addition, cold plasma may be used in
other applications including aerospace and food sectors as well as in
sterilization industries. The proposed technology is based on the development of
a cold plasma versus cell interactions. The technology utilizes surface
discharge to generate plasma to convert various molecules in the air into useful
radicals. The device itself will have a handheld form factor to allow for
mobility, rapid deployment, and quick treatment using the technology. Further
development of this technology may lead to several other cold plasma
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a device to deliver cold plasma for wound healing applications.
The proposed technology delivers cold plasma directly to wound sites over a
short treatment time (measured in minutes), that will promote wound healing,
reduce overall bed rest, and lessen the use of topical ointments formulated for
surface wound healing. The technology utilizes a physical means to disinfect
wounds allowing it to treat chemically resistant infections. Additionally, the
technology utilizes plasma-generated radical species to promote late phase
inflammation and wound contraction through the activation of fibroblast cells
that induce the production of collagen. The technology is designed to deliver
cold plasma through a device to promote wound healing while maintaining a level
of sterilization to prevent reinfection. The device may be manipulated allowing
for the treatment of a large variety of wound sizes. Various studies have shown
that the technology may produce up to a 25% reduction in wound healing
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.