* 2104831
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Multifidelity Uncertainty Quantification Through Model Ensembles and Repositories
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniele Schiavazzi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2024
* USD 254,860.00

Numerical simulations are increasingly used in clinical research and practice
for diagnosis and treatment planning in cardiovascular disease, creating new
demand for reliable simulation and analysis tools. Quantification of uncertainty
in these simulations is crucial to increased clinical adoption but has
previously been largely disregarded due to its excessive computational cost and
complexity. To address these challenges, the project leverages a new class of
multi-fidelity Monte Carlo estimators for direct and inverse problems, designed
to mitigate computational complexity through the solution of a large number of
inexpensive low-fidelity surrogates. It demonstrates the proposed approach in
full-scale clinical problems including multiple uncertainty sources at a
reasonable computational budget. The project’s main objective is to create an
end-to-end advanced cyberinfrastructure ecosystem for uncertainty quantification
(direct problem) and parameter estimation (inverse problem) in cardiovascular
models incorporating realistic sources of uncertainty, able to leverage
arbitrary low-fidelity models through advanced Monte Carlo estimators, while
drastically reducing computational cost and complexity. The project’s
interdisciplinary team is synergizing computational modeling, cardiovascular
physiology, UQ and open-source software towards making UQ tractable in full-
scale 3D cardiovascular simulations, leveraging multi-fidelity estimators for
the solution of both direct and inverse problems. The project will produce
seamless cyberinfrastructure linking two well-regarded open-source packages,
Dakota and SimVascular, with sizable user communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is creating new cyberinfrastructure ecosystems for large-scale UQ tasks.
Dissemination to industry/academia is performed through SimVascular, a leading
open-source platform for cardiovascular modeling. It will leverage SimVascular
and the proposed multi-fidelity estimators to create hands-on teaching material
for graduate and undergraduate courses. Although the project focuses on
cardiovascular modeling, its results are directly applicable to other
engineering problems. The PIs will organize minisymposia and workshops at
national conferences. They will lead outreach activities to local K-12 schools
to attract girls and underrepresented minority (URM) students to STEM. The PIs
will mentor URM summer students through the SURF program and women students
through the Women in Mathematics, Scientific Computing and Engineering (WiMSCE)
group at Stanford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.