* 2104397
* Collaborative Research: Design and Demonstration of Persistent Spin Textures in Ferroelectric Oxide Thin Film
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* James Rondinelli, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Modern electronics are based on moving electrons through nanoscale transistors
made of semiconductors such as silicon. The exponential growth in computing
power has been realized by shrinking the size of transistors and increasing
their density. As the dimensions of transistors approach atomic scales, further
miniaturization is not possible. An alternative route to computing and
information processing exploits spin, an intrinsic property of elementary
particles. Spintronics combines electronics with spin, allowing for devices for
information processing and storage that have superior energy efficiency and
reduced heat-generation. The limiting feature for the field remains transporting
spins across nanoscale dimensions in magnetic materials without losing the
stored information. This project exploits a relativistic quantum mechanical
effect – spin-orbit interaction – along with crystalline symmetries to protect
the state of the spin as it travels in non-magnetic materials. The research team
will combine experimental work with simulations to realize a new class of thin
film oxide materials for spintronics. Teaching and training of students at
multiple levels is interwoven throughout the project. The project will broaden
STEM participation by underrepresented students through public outreach events,
curriculum development, and recruiting students to participate in
interdisciplinary experimental research. The educational impact extends to high-
school teachers, who will be recruited to participate in research and develop
materials physics modules for their classrooms. These efforts will impact the
next-generation workforce by endowing students with the problem solving skills
needed for future careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The desire to identify
beyond Moore’s Law devices and technologies has driven increasing attention on a
range of alternative computing devices, including using the spin rather than the
charge of an electron. The limiting feature for the field of spin-orbit-based
electronics is the difficulty in attaining both long-lived and fully
controllable spins from conventional semiconductor and magnetic materials. The
goal of this project is to design, discover, and demonstrate ferroelectric
oxides embodying a symmetry-protected persistent spin texture, which permits
information encoded in the spins to be robust to corruption as they propagate.
Unique to this project is the use of atomic topology to achieve the novel spin
textures in bulk materials with spin-orbit interactions, rather than by
delicately balancing multiple, hard to control, interactions through
conventional quantum-well structures. The project couples theory, simulation,
and comprehensive experimentation with sophisticated thin film oxide growth
methods to develop new theories and models for spin textures, identify and
synthesize novel ferroelectric oxides exhibiting symmetry-determined spin
textures, and explore electric-field tunability of the spin textures. Outcomes
of the project include new descriptive and predictive theories for spin textures
in complex materials, realization of novel complex transition metal oxide
ferroelectrics, and demonstration of spin-based
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.