* 2104732
* CRII: SHF: RUI: Representing and Merging Diverse Goal Models in Requirements Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Alicia Grubb, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,361.00

Goal-Oriented Requirements Engineering (GORE) is an established method to help
involved parties ("stakeholders") capture and determine the early-context for a
new or modified software product. Through a central artifact called a goal
model, engineers visualize the goals and dependencies of both the system under
consideration and the project stakeholders. By creating goal models, engineers
can reason about project trade-offs and how stakeholder goals and dependencies
may evolve. Prior work assumes that only a single individual creates a goal
model. This project has two research objectives. First, the project aims to
enable multiple modelers to gather features from stakeholders separately and
merge them into a single model for analysis. By merging goal models,
practitioners may collaborate and capture additional perspectives leading to a
more complete representation of the project, with inconsistencies and conflicts
being resolved in the process. Second, the project aims to improve the usability
of trade-off analysis and make analysis techniques more accessible to
stakeholders. By providing stakeholders with more realistic models,
practitioners can make better informed decisions, which in turn provides society
with higher quality software. The project will contribute to the teaching of
GORE modeling, an important part of software-engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators aim to support
stakeholders' ability to collaborate in GORE activities, specifically the
creation and analysis of large goal models. Researchers investigate integrating
the viewpoints of multiple stakeholders for models with timing information by
merging model syntax and model semantics. In a second research activity, the
investigators improve the interpretation of analysis results and define a
methodology for applying GORE reasoning, which supports stakeholders in decision
making. For example, this project combines color visualizations with filtering
analysis results to narrow the state-space of potential solutions. The project
will provide tool support for model-management features, such as traceability
links to validate the provenance of the merge operation. The research team will
validate the effectiveness of the merge operation and analysis visualization
through empirical observations of modelers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.