* 2104148
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Selective Data Protection against Data-oriented and Transient Execution Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michail Polychronakis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,058.00

The exploitation of software vulnerabilities caused by memory errors has become
more challenging due to the deployment of numerous exploit mitigation
technologies. Consequently, instead of striving to gain arbitrary code execution
capabilities, attackers have turned their attention to the leakage of sensitive
process data through memory disclosure vulnerabilities. To make matters worse,
the threat of data leakage has been exacerbated by the recent spate of transient
execution attacks, which can leak otherwise inaccessible process data through
residual microarchitectural side effects. To defend against the emerging threat
of data-oriented attacks, the project will investigate practical selective data
protection techniques by focusing on i) enabling developers to protect sensitive
data with minimal manual effort; ii) protecting sensitive data against both
memory disclosure vulnerabilities and transient execution attacks; and iii)
maintaining compatibility with large-scale real-world applications. The outcomes
of the project are expected to improve the state of the art in defenses against
data-oriented and transient execution attacks and achieve substantial practical
impact by shielding existing vulnerable applications against exploitation,
benefiting both end users and security researchers. The project will also
provide students the opportunity to conduct research in cybersecurity, and will
foster the integration of cybersecurity into high school education through
hands-on workshops for students and seminars for science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To defend against the emerging threats of memory
disclosure vulnerabilities and transient execution attacks, the project will
investigate selective data protection techniques based on in-memory data
encryption, centered around three innovative aspects. First, elevating data
protection as a core language feature will enable developers to effortlessly
enable in-memory encryption of data they deem critical. Besides C/C++, the
project will also focus on JavaScript and Rust, which, although immune against
memory disclosure vulnerabilities, are still prone to transient execution
attacks. Second, a hybrid approach that combines static pointer analysis with
scoped dynamic data flow tracking will minimize the heavyweight instrumentation
required for keeping sensitive data encrypted in memory. The key insight behind
this technique is that the inherent over-approximation of pointer analysis can
be ameliorated by relying on lightweight label lookups to determine if
potentially sensitive data is actually sensitive. Third, the sensitivity of
pointer analysis can be increased in a scalable way by i) introducing a
summarization-based context-sensitive heap modeling approach tailored to the
extensive use of memory wrappers in popular applications, and ii) selectively
increasing sensitivity only at certain parts of the program where it is likely
to be beneficial to the overall analysis precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.