* 2104298
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Real-Time AI on End Devices through Compression-Compilation Co-Design
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Xipeng Shen, COCOPIE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 254,700.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is in the array of new opportunities it creates for expanding uses of
machine intelligence. By providing an efficient way to transform deep learning
models to best fit the constraints on end devices and real-time applications,
this project will shorten the time to market for artificial intelligence
applications by orders of magnitude, and hence significantly accelerate the
development and deployment of intelligent software in health, commerce,
financial, defense, social networks, and many other
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project aims to address the important barriers for efficient development of
real-time Artificial Intelligence applications on end devices (smartphones,
drones, etc.). It does this through a breakthrough technology, compression-
compilation co-design. Compression and compilation are the two key steps in
fitting a deep learning model on a hardware for efficient execution. Model
compression reduces the size of deep learning models; compilation generates
executable codes from a given deep learning model. The principle of compression-
compilation co-design is to design the two components for AI in a hand-in-hand
manner. The technology uses a novel approach to synergize a set of novel model
compression methods with compression-aware code compilation techniques. The
result is a technology that achieves several-fold higher artificial intelligence
model compression rates over the state of the art, several times faster speed,
better energy efficiency, and satisfying accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.