* 2104837
* Analyzing and Organizing Soft Matter with Acoustic Holography
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* David Grier, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 491,776.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Sound waves can exert forces that are large
enough to levitate objects and move them in three dimensions. Acoustically
levitated objects also influence the sound field, scattering sound waves and
redirecting their forces. Scattered waves mediate interactions among the objects
that cause them to organize themselves into dynamic three-dimensional
assemblies. These wave-matter composite systems constitute a largely unexplored
state of matter with extraordinary and potentially useful properties. The
program on “Analyzing and Organizing Soft Matter with Acoustic Holography” is
dedicated to developing the fundamental principles and practical techniques
needed to control acoustic forces, elucidating the physics of wave-matter
composite systems, and advancing a new paradigm for materials characterization
based on quantitative analysis of scattered sound. This experimental program is
motivated by the Principal Investigator’s recent breakthrough in the theory of
wave-matter interactions that explains how to design and project sound waves
that move matter. Principles emerging from these studies are both general and
fundamental. They have practical applications, moreover, in areas as diverse as
non-contact manufacturing and 3D displays. Technology transfer for these
applications already is under way, The science of acoustic manipulation through
acoustic holography lends itself to effective STEM outreach in the K-12 sector.
It also provides a wealth of accessible research projects for undergraduates,
thereby helping to build the pipeline for diversity and inclusion in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The recently-
introduced acoustokinetic framework explains how the amplitude and phase
profiles of a sound wave give rise to forces and torques on insonated objects.
An analogous approach has proved extraordinarily fruitful for the field of
optical micromanipulation by providing design principles for optical holograms
that implement desired force landscapes. Translating principles of optical
manipulation into experimental realizations has benefitted from highly advanced
technology for shaping the wavefronts of light. No such technology currently
exists for sound. Realizing the benefits of acoustokinetics therefore requires a
novel approach to computational holography. This program bridges this
technological gap by introducing spectral holography as a new paradigm for
computational holography. Spectral holography is an approach to wavefront
sculpting that relies on controlling the wave’s amplitude and phase at a small
number of discrete emitters but over a wide range of frequencies. Whereas
standard monochromatic holograms create static time-averaged force fields,
spectral holograms can have dynamic content over a wide range of time and length
scales. The time-dependent behavior of individual objects and many-body systems
immersed in such multi-scale landscapes represent an emerging area of research.
Anticipated outcomes from studying these systems include advances in the
fundamental science of classical wave-matter interactions and discovery of new
principles of self-organization in soft-matter and granular materials. The
critical role of inertia in sound-mediated self-organization constitutes a
particularly promising frontier for fundamental discoveries such as the
remarkable dynamical behavior of wave-driven oscillators. This program also
provides exciting opportunities for technology transfer to industry, including
contact-free materials transport for manufacturing, rapid 3D scanning for
volumetric displays and large-scale remote materials
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.