* 2104234
* Asymmetric Side Chain Nanodomain-Driven Paracrystallinity Control in Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2024
* USD 351,194.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
understanding and improving the performance of conjugated polymers, a class of
materials whose electronic conductivity makes them useful in a wide range of
devices across energy generation and storage, biological and chemical sensors,
and computation. The electronic performance of these materials is very sensitive
to changes in how crystalline they are, and how organized the crystals are;
however, there are currently only limited and general strategies to control this
crystal organization. To develop new strategies for building this control,
researchers at the University of Washington (UW) will produce a series of
polymers with a highly controlled chemical structure that is specifically tuned
to improve the crystal quality. These polymers will also help to build
understanding of the connection between chemical structure and crystal quality,
making it easier to predict and design better polymers in the future. Because of
the importance of clean energy and interest in the community, this work will be
broadly communicated in a number of different places. One major pathway will be
through sharing the research lab’s work by demonstrating stretchable solar cells
during visitations to classrooms, as well as participating in larger science
events such as science and maker fairs, through the UW Materials Ambassadors
program. The PI will also work with the UW College of Engineering Math Academy,
working with underserved members of the community by providing opportunities for
them to participate in research lab work before even graduating from high
school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paracrystallinity in conjugated polymer backbones
represents a critical limitation for conjugated polymer electronic conductivity,
and current strategies to improve this parameter are currently extremely
limited. To address this, researchers at the University of Washington seek to
develop a new polymer backbone architecture, using an alternating pattern of
polar and nonpolar side chains to improve polymer backbone paracrystallinity.
Specifically, this work proposes to use the self-segregation of polar and
nonpolar side chains to produce a polymer with high side-chain crystallinity.
This polymer will then be processed using a variety of solvent and thermal
processing conditions, to control the extent of side chain crystallinity. The
effect on backbone paracrystallinity will be measured and correlated with the
processing conditions and side-chain crystallinity. This correlation will build
understanding of the interconnection between crystallizable side chains and the
backbone paracrystallinity, and offer insight into the strategy of using side
chain organization as a tool for improving the backbone paracrystallinity. The
work will begin with polythiophene backbones but will be expanded to include
fused rings and donor-acceptor copolymers. By delving into not just the side-
chain self-segregation, but also the connection between processing conditions,
side-chain crystallinity, and paracrystallinity, this research will provide a
strategy to improving the performance of conjugated polymers.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.