* 2104964
* NSF-BSF: Development and Study of Lattice-Derived Flat Band States
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Joseph Checkelsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2025
* USD 360,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;While the electronic properties of many
conventional metals can be understood as arising from the properties of
isolated, charge-carrying electrons, several of the most fundamentally
interesting and potentially technologically transformative materials are beyond
this paradigm. Such so-called correlated electron materials can host emergent
quantum properties such as high temperature superconductivity that are beyond
basic predictive paradigms. To find and develop new correlated materials, one
recently revisited design principle is the creation of weakly dispersing (flat)
electron energy bands. Electrons in such bands are strongly influenced by each
other and can offer a natural platform for electronic correlation. This project
aims to build on recent progress in this research area to target, synthesize,
and study specific materials designed to have strong interaction effects based
on flat electronic bands. The broader impacts of the present research program
include (1) Potential impact on society through fundamental science innovations
including new platforms for quantum technology based on flatband superconductors
and new spin liquid materials; (2) Education of the public in topics in quantum
science and quantum technology through public engagement with lectures,
visualizations, and online content; (3) Engagement of URM students targeted at
HBCUs via undergraduate research projects; (4) Increasing the competitive
advantage of the USA with partnership of this project with unique capabilities
for condensed matter physics at the Weizmann Institute of
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Material systems
which can host flat electronic bands have been proposed to host exotic
electronic behavior. Such behavior arises from the quenched kinetic energy of
flat band states that promotes interaction between electrons. Such flat bands
can also host topologically non-trivial states, allowing for potential platforms
for both correlation and topology. However, the extent to which sufficiently
flat energy dispersions can be realized in real materials has remained an open
question. This project focuses on the synthesis and study of new flat band
materials with a focus on new correlated topological phases, Kondo behavior, and
connections to spin liquid physics. A key element of this research is a close
feedback between targeted material synthesis and advanced spectroscopy to allow
for detection and crystal engineering of flat band states. Our efforts will
dovetail with research and educational efforts focused on undergraduate efforts
to develop novel measurement techniques, creation of visualizations of quantum
concepts to improve quantum intuition, and quantum science
education/outreach/URM recruitment efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.