* 2104102
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: OpenEarthscape - Transformative Cyberinfrastructure for Modeling and Simulation in the Earth-Surface Science Communities
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Gregory Tucker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,562,303.00

The landscape around us changes constantly. Sometimes change is slow: a river
bend migrates, soil erodes from a field, a waterfall carves its way upstream.
Sometimes change happens fast: a landslide, a flood, a winter storm eroding
beaches. To understand, manage, and forecast such processes, scientists rely on
computer simulation models. This project develops software tools to make
simulation modeling easier, more accessible, and more efficient. Among the
products is a website through which researchers and students alike can learn
about and experiment with a variety of environmental simulation models, without
needing to install anything on their own computers. This web portal takes
advantage of a technology that combines text, pictures, and computer code in a
single online document. The project also develops improved computer-programming
libraries designed to make it easier and more efficient for researchers to
create new simulation models. The project contributes computing-skills training
for college students enrolled in Colorado-based summer programs that serve
traditionally underrepresented student populations. The project also promotes
public education in geology, by creating an online animated simulation
illustrating how landscapes evolve in response to various geologic
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the sciences that probe Earth's changing surface
become more quantitative and prediction-oriented, they increasingly rely on
computational modeling and model-data integration. This project develops
OpenEarthscape: an integrated suite of community-developed cyber resources for
simulation and model-data integration, focusing on nine high-priority geoscience
frontiers. Products and activities include EarthscapeHub: a JupyterHub server
providing easy access to models, tools, and libraries; new capacity for creating
and sharing reproducible analyses; and major enhancements to current programming
libraries for model construction and coupling. OpenEarthscape catalyzes
efficiency by building new technology to improve performance and developing an
extended version of the Basic Model Interface API standard to address parallel
architecture and coupling. OpenEarthscape fosters research productivity with
improved library capabilities for data I/O and visualization, and with community
resources for efficient software distribution and cross-platform compatibility.
Broader impacts include partnership with undergraduate research programs that
support traditionally underrepresented student populations, with the project
team contributing introductory training in scientific computing. A novel
educational element is the OpenEarthscape Simulator: a web-hosted visual
simulation of a micro-continent evolving in response to various geologic events.
The simulator provides students and the general public with an intriguing
visualization of Earthscape dynamics and provides a template for the research
community to identify defects in our current
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.