* 2104335
* Responsive materials from self-assembling nucleic acid nanoshapes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Thomas Hermann, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 535,012.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nucleic acids are biomolecules that
lend themselves for the construction of new composite materials because of their
ability to self-assemble in a predetermined fashion and to bind various other
non-nucleic acid components. The Hermann lab will design and develop new
materials from modules composed of the two principal nucleic acid types, RNA and
DNA, which in addition contain chemically diverse ligands that serve as
permanent components, for example, to endow the materials with stimulus-
responsive functionality, or as transient trigger to control material assembly
and dissociation. The new composite nanomaterials will allow the controlled
spatial arrangement of these ligands in regular patterns at nanometer distances.
For the preparation of such nucleic acid materials, the Hermann lab will develop
procedures that apply successive addition and selective removal (“subtraction”)
of nucleic acid components by exploiting the distinct chemical reactivity of the
RNA and DNA components. The materials created under this research have potential
applications in the creation of functional surface patterns at the nanometer
scale for the fabrication of sensor surfaces for the real-time detection of
environmental stimuli and toxins, recognition of biomedical analytes in
healthcare applications, templates for semiconductor fabrication, and surface
coatings with novel sensing and catalytical properties. Benefits for society
will further be realized from the training of a new generation of researchers
knowledgeable in the design, fabrication and application of nucleic acids as
building blocks for new emerging materials in many applications that require
precise control of assembly as well as chemical and biological
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Hermann lab will design and develop new stimulus-responsive composite materials
from self-assembling RNA and DNA modules that contain chemically diverse ligands
serving as permanent components to expand functional chemical space or interact
with ligands as transiently binding triggers to control assembly and
dissociation. Building blocks for the composite materials are RNA-DNA hybrid
nanostructures which will be prepared by connecting structurally well-defined
RNA motifs as topology-defining joints with diverse DNA modules that provide
stable components for modification and inclusion of ligand binding sites.
Partitioning of architectural and functional roles between RNA and DNA
components in self-assembling nanostructures provides a new general blueprint
for expanding chemical diversity and functionality of nucleic acid hybrid
nanomaterials. The new composite nanomaterials will accommodate a variety of DNA
modules as unique ligand binding sites for controlled spatial arrangement of
chemically diverse ligands, including proteins, small molecules, and metals.
Nucleic acid modules whose stable folding is co-dependent on ligand binding
enable the design of nanostructures that assemble under ligand control. Modules
that undergo conformational or constitutional changes upon ligand binding will
provide devices to trigger dissociation of nanostructures in response to
ligands. Connection of RNA-DNA hybrid nanoshapes by a diverse set of nucleic
acid linkers will allow controlled assembly of composite materials with surface
patterns that retain regularly spaced ligand binding sites of programmable
symmetries and feature distances below 10 nm. Surface patterns created by
assembly of RNA-DNA hybrid nanostructures will be modified by selective
enzymatic digestion of RNA components and repeat addition of DNA or RNA modules
and linkers. This research will establish successive application of additive and
subtractive fabrication steps as a novel approach for the preparation of
composite nanomaterials that self-assemble from nucleic acid modules and which
achieve new properties as functional materials by inclusion of various non-
nucleic acid components such as proteins, small molecule ligands, and
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.