* 2104623
* The Instrumental Revolution in Geochemistry (GEOCHEMREV)
* SBE,SMA
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* George Borg, Borg, George
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 09/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Charlotte A.
Abney Salomon at the Science History Institute, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist investigating how revolutionary change
in geochemical instrumentation during the 20th century has enabled better
understanding of climate change in the Anthropocene epoch. Society’s capacity to
cope with this challenging new epoch of significant human-wrought influence on
the Earth’s geologic development depends critically on the future development of
Earth sciences. Geochemistry transformed scientific understanding of Earth
processes and the planet’s history during the 20th century. The carbon cycle is
central to understanding climate change, and geological processes are central to
that cycle. Historiographically speaking, putting instrumentation at the center
of this transformation can lead to new insights. Instrumental methods in
geochemistry also helped 20th-century scientists better understand global lead
pollution, plate tectonics, processes of mineral formation relevant for
prospecting and mining, and the global hydrological cycle on geological
timescales. All of this has become central to our understanding of the Earth,
and how humans can live upon it productively and sustainably. If we want to
mitigate climate change in the future, managing the carbon and hydrological
cycles is crucial. Effective management will require an understanding of the
nature, scope, limits and utility of our knowledge of these processes. This
project will show how understanding technical change in geochemistry is vital to
a fuller understanding of the dynamics of these sciences, which is in turn
crucial for tackling climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
project engages scholarship on the history of chemistry and Earth science, the
philosophy of the historical sciences, and technoscience, to answer three
research questions. First, what technical changes did geochemistry undergo to
become a major contributing discipline in climate change debates in the later
20th century? Second, how did the epistemic aims of geochemistry change, during
this same period? Third, what correlations and causal relationships exist
between the technical and epistemic changes? To address these questions, the
project employs qualitative and quantitative methods to track the history and
use of geochemical techniques in the US and Europe from, roughly, 1919 to the
1990s. Methods for data collection include literature reviews, archival
research, hands-on examination of instruments, scientometric methods to detect
trends in the aims pursued by the discipline, and logical analysis to determine
how the technology supported, or failed to support, historical claims in
geochemistry. This research sheds light on the kind of access geochemistry can
give to the history of the environment, and what key lessons have been learned
from past developments in geochemical instrumentation. The practical effects are
three-fold. (1) A greater public understanding of how claims about climate
change are established, in particular their dependence on technologically
mediated access to the deep past. (2) Greater clarity for researchers and
research funding bodies, such as the NSF, to judge the capabilities of research
on the deep past and to discern future lines of enquiry and analytical
development. (3) Given that the development of geochemical technology was to
some extent driven by economic and political forces, the project sheds light on
the relationship&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.