* 2104756
* Quantum phenomena in condensed atomic and molecular hydrogen
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* David Lee, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 555,819.00

Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Spinning electrons in hydrogen atoms
behave as tiny magnets which can interact when embedded in solid molecular
hydrogen leading to formation of magnetic phases. Hydrogen atoms can tunnel
through the lattice of molecular hydrogen according to quantum mechanics. At low
enough temperatures and high enough densities, the hydrogen atoms embedded in
the lattice of molecular hydrogen have quantum overlap which can lead to a
phenomenon called Bose-Einstein condensation, in which individual atoms lose
their identities and the whole system behaves like a single quantum wave. This
leads to superfluid properties such as flow without friction. A goal of this
research is to study hydrogen atoms in solid molecular hydrogen at the lowest
temperatures to look for Bose-Einstein condensation and subsequent superfluid
behavior of hydrogen atoms embedded in solid molecular hydrogen. If successful,
this project could initiate a new field in condensed matter physics and benefit
chemists studying chemical reactions. A second goal is the observation of
superfluidity in the collection of molecular para-hydrogen clusters as another
demonstration of Bose-Einstein condensation. Graduate students get extensive
training in techniques used to attain temperatures well below 1 K. Active
outreach programs including lectures, meetings with high school teachers and
demonstrations are performed during the Texas A&amp;M University Physics
Festival. The project also maintains the international collaboration with the
low temperature group in Finland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;This research project pursues the fundamental goal of observing new
quantum phenomena in a system of hydrogen atoms embedded in solid molecular
hydrogen films. These hydrogen atoms remain delocalized even at temperatures
below 1K and may exhibit Bose-Einstein condensation and supersolidity if cooled
to low enough temperatures. This work involves a dilution refrigerator combined
with a Pomeranchuk cooling stage to cool the samples of hydrogen atoms in solid
molecular hydrogen down to 1 mK, where new quantum phenomena is expected to
occur. The hydrogen atom ground state population and possible onset of Bose-
Einstein condensation can be probed by using 128 GHz electron spin resonance
techniques. The recent discovery of the nuclear polarized phases of hydrogen
atoms in solid molecular hydrogen films at T=0.1-0.8 K implies possible quantum
transitions. Extending the experiments to lower temperatures should help throw
light on the origin of these phases and their possible relation to hydrogen atom
Bose-Einstein condensation. Additionally, studies are in progress of hydrogen
atom spatial quantum diffusion in solid molecular hydrogen which allows
determination of hydrogen atom effective mass and estimation of the onset
temperature for Bose-Einstein condensation. The second goal of the project is
the search for hydrogen superfluidity in macroscopic samples containing a large
number of small para-hydrogen clusters. Superfluidity of single small para-
hydrogen clusters encapsulated in helium nanodroplets was observed
experimentally at 0.15 K. The search for superfluidity of para-hydrogen
molecules is performed for a collection of small para-hydrogen clusters embedded
in porous solid neon films grown on the surface of a quartz microbalance. The
onset of superfluidity in para-hydrogen clusters is registered as a microbalance
frequency change while passing through the transition
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.