* 2104607
* Developing computational tools for nonparametric summaries of income mobility
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Ian Lundberg, Lundberg, Ian Daniel
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jennie Brand
at the University of California, Los Angeles, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist researching computational methods to study
income mobility. Extensive social science research has documented how incomes
change over the life course for individuals and across generations within
families. Much of that research relies on linear models. This project extends
our understanding of income mobility by using new computational methods
developed in statistics and machine learning. These methods allow distinct
patterns among those with high and low incomes and allow fuller summaries of the
distribution. Because income is essential to the well-being of American
families, the goals of the project align with NSFâ€™s mission to advance national
health, prosperity, and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two specific
aims. The first aim of the project visualizes year-to-year changes in the
incomes of American families, as recorded in existing survey data following
those families over time. On one hand, incomes may exhibit stability: income
last year may be a good predictor of income this year. On the other hand,
incomes may be volatile: events like promotions and layoffs may create
unexpected changes. Past work has primarily summarized stability and volatility
with linear models for means and variances. This aim builds on that work by
examining patterns in quantiles and allowing nonlinear relationships. The second
aim of the project considers patterns of incomes across generations. If children
were exposed to better material conditions in childhood, how would this affect
the incomes that they realize as adults? To answer this causal question, the
research adjusts for other measures of family background which may affect
childhood income exposure and adult income attainment. Expanding on past work,
this project explicitly considers nonlinearities such that each additional
dollar of income may have a different effect among low-income as compared with
high-income families. In addition to its contribution to the substantive topic
of intergenerational mobility, this component of the project contributes to
methodology for estimating and visualizing the causal effects of continuous
treatment variables. Together, these aims bring new developments in
computational social science to bear on classic questions about the incomes of
American families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.