* 2104619
* Articulation and representation of second language speech sounds
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Madeleine Oakley, Oakley, Madeleine
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jeff Mielke
at North Carolina State University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports
an early career scientist examining how second language learners articulate
second language speech sounds. Specifically, these studies examine whether
speakers produce second language speech sounds the same as their first language
speech sounds, and whether learnersâ€™ production strategies differ depending on
the nature of the speech sounds. As such, this research uses ultrasound,
acoustic, and perception data of second language speech to look at the nature of
category transfer of both consonants and vowels, in an effort to describe the
acoustic and articulatory targets of speech sounds. More research about second
language pronunciation is vital to improve pedagogical practices related to
using technology in pronunciation instruction (specifically ultrasound and
acoustic technologies), and this research provides information about acoustic,
articulatory, and perceptual milestones for the acquisition of non-native sound
contrasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A difficulty for defining the representation of
speech sounds arises from the different phonetic nature of consonants and
vowels. Consonants are definable by their constriction location and constriction
degree, and thus gestural models are well-suited to explaining phonological
processes involving consonants. Vowels, on the other hand, are produced with a
relatively open vocal tract compared to consonants, and are therefore less
easily definable by their articulatory targets. The experiments included in this
project compare hypotheses of gestural and acoustic models of L2 category
formation. The first two experiments use acoustic, ultrasound, and perception
data to examine how L1 English speakers produce and perceive L2 Mandarin
fricatives and vowels compared to L1 fricatives and vowels. The second two
experiments examine how L1 English speakers produce and perceive L2 Korean
fricatives and vowels compared to L1 fricatives and vowels, again using
acoustic, ultrasound, and perception data. Learners in beginning, early-
intermediate, and late-intermediate learning stages are recorded. These
experiments contribute to theories of L2 category formation, which importantly
have implications about the cognitive representation of consonants and
vowels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.