* 2104353
* Protein Crystallization Programmed with DNA
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 525,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are natural, tiny
molecular machines – often 10,000 times smaller than the width of a human hair –
that play crucial roles in biology. Since their discovery almost 200 years ago,
understanding their structures and functions has enabled scientists to learn
about the processes that underpin life and solve scientific problems facing
humanity. However, their tiny size makes them incredibly difficult to
characterize and understand. One powerful way to determine the structures and
functions of proteins is protein crystallography, a technique where X-rays
interact with a highly ordered assembly of proteins, known as a single crystal.
Unfortunately, obtaining protein single crystals represents a major bottleneck
in this process because proteins can interact with each other in many ways that
prevent them from forming highly ordered assemblies. This project aims to
overcome this challenge using DNA – the genetic code of life – as a blueprint to
define the interactions between proteins and thus control how they arrange into
single crystals. Importantly, these single crystals will not only provide
insight into the tiny world of proteins but will function as new, synthetic
materials in their own right, useful as sustainable catalysts or energy
conversion materials. Using DNA to control protein interactions and arrangement
will allow crystals to be assembled by design. This work will help transform
protein crystallography from an experiment of chance to an experiment of purpose
to solve pressing societal needs in energy, sustainability, and medicine.
Researchers at various stages of their careers (from undergraduate students to
postdoctoral researchers) will benefit from the training provided by this
project, and will disseminate their knowledge and skills in publications,
presentations, and by engagement with students from typically underrepresented
and marginalized groups through synergistic outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein single crystals provide valuable, angstrom-
level resolution and structural insight into the macromolecules that engender
the infrastructure of life and represent a promising class of biomaterials with
cooperative properties and concerted functions. This project seeks to understand
the interactions that drive crystallization and discover a means to disrupt,
reprogram, and redefine those interactions, using the programmability of DNA.
This challenge will be approached from four complementary perspectives, each of
which will yield valuable fundamental insight into protein crystallization:
increasing the role of DNA in protein-DNA crystals; investigating how symmetry
and valency affect crystallization; defining specific protein interfaces within
crystals; and manipulating the conformations of flexible proteins so that they
can be controlled and, ultimately, harnessed. These findings will result in
design principles that will allow one to exploit the many distinct attributes of
DNA, including its specific hybridization, tunable length, inherent flexibility,
and tailorable interaction strength, to program the assembly of proteins.
Therefore, achieving these objectives will not only render challenging proteins
amenable to crystallographic analysis but also, importantly, open a new class of
tailorable, programmed crystalline materials that can harness the intrinsic
functionality of proteins. This project will generate new fundamental knowledge
of how to control the interplay between DNA-DNA and protein-protein
interactions, thereby empowering researchers with tools to engineer the
structural outcomes of protein crystallization towards the creation of novel
functional biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.