* 2104515
* CRII:HCC: A Crowdsourced Social Computing Platform with Gamification Mechanisms for Healthy Eating
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Maria Hwang, Fashion Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This project focuses on inequity in access to educative health information.
Better health awareness can help people reduce obesity, diabetes, and other
chronic conditions, but some of the communities most at risk of these conditions
have limited access to the nutritional expertise needed to develop that
awareness. To do this, the research team will design and test several systems
that provide both individual practice and social interaction around nutrition
topics. These interfaces will allow people to specify their own health goals,
connect people with like-minded peers, and provide motivational elements, with
the aim of increasing access to nutritional information and building communities
of peers eager to share knowledge and translate it into behavioral changes that
help them accomplish their goals. The work will also provide opportunities at
the intersection of computer science and design for students who are
historically underrepresented in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet
these goals, the proposal will explore new approaches to social computing
mechanisms that blend together the motivational benefits of judiciously chosen
gamification features with the benefits of crowdsourcing and online learning
environments. Specifically, the project team will develop new crowdsourced,
learner-centered nutrition games that help users develop nutritional evaluation
skills through assessing nutritional content of the crowd's meals and receiving
the crowd's feedback. The work aims at three specific contributions. The first
is exploring new models for aggregating and presenting crowdsourced intelligence
in the nutrition context, by embedding a Community Board inside a game
environment that hosts "in-the-wild" meal photographs that are evaluated by
peers about their fit to the poster's nutritional goals. The second is
leveraging people's use of the system to create a well-annotated dataset of meal
photographs and nutrition information that can fuel research on computer vision
techniques for assessing nutritional content of food photos. The third is
identifying ways in which this crowdsourced Community Board can be effectively
used and assessed as a learning tool for populations with low nutritional
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.