* 2104854
* Reprogramming materials properties of synapsin self-coacervates via phosphorylation code
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Peter Chung, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 04/30/2025
* USD 550,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perhaps the most intriguing aspect in
looking to structures within the cell to inspire the next generation of novel
materials is not their bulk structural properties but the cellular ability to
“reprogram” these structures. Much as reprogramming software allows it to
perform different tasks, reprogramming materials allows them to take on novel
functions after production. This is especially evident in select proteins that
phase separate into protein-rich and protein-dilute liquid phases, much as oil
added to water will separate into an oil-rich liquid phase. This phase
separation has been shown to be controlled by phosphorylation, or the addition
of a charged phosphate group to the protein. Not all phosphorylations are
created equal; phosphorylation at certain sites within the protein will
eliminate the ability to phase separate while others still can control the
transport of molecules in-and-out of the protein-rich liquid phase. However, the
inability to simultaneously assess the sequence of phosphorylation (or
“phosphorylation code”) and the corresponding materials properties of the
protein-rich liquid phase in the cell has made it difficult to design synthetic
materials that offer similar reprogramming capability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to overcome this obstacle by using
novel biochemical engineering techniques to manufacture proteins with specific
phosphorylation codes and subsequently measure the materials properties of these
phase separating-proteins. In doing so, a framework will be created to design
other materials with similar reprogramming capabilities and potentially generate
a new class of biomimetic materials for therapeutic and consumer use. Beyond
that, given the multidisciplinary scientific and engineering requirements, this
project will not only provide training opportunities for the next generation of
interdisciplinary scientists but seek to expand that pipeline by providing
research opportunities for students at local community colleges in the greater
Los Angeles area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) persist as
biopolymers in solution and can undergo phase separation into protein-rich
liquid droplets, akin to polymer coacervation. These subcellular structures
serve unique purposes, ranging from organelle sequestration to potentially
behaving as bio-reactors within the cell. However, biology has built in an
additional layer of sophistication; IDPs can be “reprogrammed” via post-
translational modifications to alter the materials properties, enabling a range
of dynamic properties that would be impractical with well-folded
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One particular modification, phosphorylation (or
the addition of a divalently-charged phosphate group), has been shown to
independently control the phase behavior and biomacromolecule transport
properties of synapsin, an IDP that forms synapsin-rich liquid droplets within
the neuron. While control of these properties is an inviting target for
biomaterials investigation, deciphering the “phosphorylation code” of
modifications that can occur at multiple, distinct sites and correlating these
codes to their resultant biological function remains a challenging obstacle. To
overcome this barrier, insights from polymer science and physical chemistry will
be used to target specific phosphorylation codes most likely to alter materials
properties. Then, cell-free protein synthesis strategies will be used to express
and purify synapsin with specific phosphorylation codes and measure their
resultant biomaterials properties. Ultimately, this data will form the basis of
a design framework that has explanatory and predictive power for reprogramming
other IDP-based biomaterials and even synthetic polymer
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.