* 2104880
* CRII: CNS: NeTS: Adaptive Cache Dimensioning in Cloud CDNs: Foundations and Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Jian Li, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

The current Internet infrastructure provides a wide range of services such as
music and movies delivery, messaging, video-conferencing and software download.
The data transmitted across the Internet corresponding to these services is
dubbed as “content”. As an increasing number of users desire such services over
the Internet, firms called content providers are engaged in developing systems
that ensure that the demanded services are available at high quality of
experience, i.e., with minimal delay. This is achieved by the process of
“service placement”, which places replicas of popular services near end users at
small servers called caches, coupled with additional copies at larger servers
deeper in the Internet. If the content requested by a user is available at a
cache, it is promptly delivered. Otherwise, the request must be forwarded to
servers that are further, hence increasing delay. However, provisioning these
small and large servers is expensive. Under the cloud computing paradigm, cloud
providers make server resources available for rent and allow dynamic sizing of
caches, referred to as cache dimensioning. This implies that costs for the
content provider may be significantly reduced. This project develops
methodologies on cache dimensioning for handling different types of services. A
significant challenge lies in the fact that popularity of services changes with
time, and hence learning, dimensioning and service placement must happen
continually. The solution approach is via machine learning, and the project
contributes to the fundamentals of learning from a sequence of samples over
time, entitled online learning. The project also includes the development of
educational materials on networking, distributed systems and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers the cache
dimensioning problem in cloud content distribution networks (CDNs), where the
objective is to decide how much storage to place at each location in the
network. This project addresses key issues essential to developing theoretical
foundations, practical online algorithms and low-complexity implementation for
providing adaptive cache dimensioning differentiated services in cloud CDNs.
This requires the conjunction of several mathematical tools to analyze online
algorithms, leading to systems development to make the algorithms a reality.
This project develops a social welfare maximization-based framework for
providing adaptive cache dimensioning differentiated service in cloud CDNs. The
project is organized into three interdependent thrusts. The first thrust focuses
on a Time-to-Live (TTL) approximation analogy-based analysis to decouple the
behaviors of different contents by means of dynamically adapting the timer
values to maximize the social welfare. The second thrust focuses on online
optimization-based analysis by leveraging online learning to design new online
reactive algorithms that are aware of non-stationary popularity and traffic
variations. The third thrust focuses on implementation and evaluation on public
cloud infrastructure. An immediate impact of this project is to help design
next-generation cloud CDNs leading to greater enterprise productivity and user
satisfaction. The impact is enhanced by specific minority inclusion activities,
an education plan focusing on caching and machine learning, as well as outreach
in the form of summer camps for high school students. At the same time the
project develops fundamental theories that pertain to the area of machine
learning, specifically to online learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.