* 2104892
* Ionoelastomer heterojunctions at the micro- and nano-scale
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ryan Hayward, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 460,657.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft polymer networks that can
conduct currents through motion of ionic species hold potential for the
development of new classes of materials and devices. Recent work has focused on
the interface formed when one material bearing fixed positive (and therefore
mobile negative) ions is placed in contact with another bearing fixed negative
(and mobile positive) ions. Such interfaces act much like the electronic gates
found in modern electronic devices, which allow current to pass in one
direction, but not the other. However, interfaces based on soft ion-conducting
polymers offer other interesting properties, such as the ability to reversibly
stick and release with the application of a small voltage, and the ability to
generate currents when mechanically deformed. This project seeks to deepen our
understanding of this emerging class of materials, and to thereby open the door
to new types of devices built from them. To do so, it will develop a library of
ion-conducting polymers and characterize how the behavior of the resulting
interfaces depends on the polymer characteristics. It will provide insight into
the tendency of these oppositely charged polymers to mix, or not mix, and use
this knowledge to engineer systems that spontaneously assemble into junctions
with improved performance. The project will provide opportunities for training
and mentoring of students and researchers from the high school to post-doctoral
levels, and will partner with nearby high schools and several organizations at
the University of Colorado Boulder to engage, recruit, and retain a diverse
group of participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crosslinked networks of polyelectrolytes with low
glass transition temperatures formed from ionic liquid monomers, or
‘ionoelastomers’, have recently emerged as a promising class of soft ion
conductors. While recent work has shown that heterojunctions between polyanionic
and polycationic materials serve as inherently stretchable ionic diodes,
enabling the formation of transistors, low-voltage electroadhesives, and
electro-mechanical transducers, much remains to be understood about their
operation. This project will establish a library of copolymers with varying
content of different ionic charge carriers and different backbone chemistries,
and characterize how the behavior of the resulting ionoelastomer heterojunctions
depends on these characteristics. It will characterize the tendency of
poly(ionic liquid) blends and block copolymers to mix, or undergo micro- or
macro-phase separation, as a function of these parameters as well. Finally, it
will establish routes based on self-assembly and photochemical patterning of
ionic species to yield high surface area nano- and micro-scale heterojunctions,
offering potentially dramatic improvements in the performance of the resulting
devices. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.