* 2104375
* RUI: CAS: Collaborative Research: Synthesis, Conductivity and Morphology of Cellulose-Based Ionic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kevin Miller, Murray State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 190,161.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this RUI
(Research in Undergraduate Institutes) CAS (Critical Aspects of Sustainability)
Collaborative program is to create and evaluate new conductive materials by
functionalizing cellulose with ionic groups. Cellulose represents an
inexpensive, sustainable feedstock with a number of desirable properties,
including good mechanical strength and high permeability. However, cellulose has
been underutilized in the development of advanced materials for applications
such as energy storage and carbon dioxide capture, both of which are extremely
important in today’s world. In this work, ion-containing, cellulose-based
materials will be synthesized and characterized in order to understand
fundamental relationships between material structure and properties. Cellulose
will be used extensively as a foundational material for the formation of
conductive polymers and the results will help advance knowledge in energy
storage and transport. The work proposed here will be completed collaboratively
by a team of primarily undergraduate students from Murray State University (MSU)
and Rutgers University-Camden (RUC) in the hopes of not only providing a rich
and rewarding educational experience for the students involved, but also to
continue a sustainable collaboration between the two groups. Through this RUI
proposal, the Integration of Rural and Urban educational Experience (IRUE) will
be created, offering students from each university the opportunity to spend part
of a summer at the other respective institution to learn polymer synthesis,
morphology, and materials characterization, thus advancing the breadth of their
scientific education. As MSU is located in rural Kentucky and RUC is located in
urban New Jersey, these students will also experience vastly different
sociological environments, further enhancing their appreciation for
collaborative scientific research. Student participants will receive a
rewarding, cutting-edge research experience that will prepare them for STEM-
related majors, careers and/or pre-professional school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of
this proposal is that, through functionalization of cellulose with an ionic
liquid (IL) or poly(ionic liquid) (PIL) group, a new class of conductive
materials will be developed and that their end-use properties (mechanical,
conductive, morphological) can be manipulated through careful choice of IL/PIL
structure. Although the segmental dynamics of cellulose itself are relatively
slow, leading to high stiffness and poor conductivity, functionalization with an
IL or PIL group will lead to enhanced flexibility and ionic conduction due to
changes in morphology. The PIs propose three objectives as part of this
proposal: (1) synthesis and characterization of IL-functionalized cellulosic
materials, (2) synthesis and characterization of PIL-grafted cellulosic
materials, and (3) evaluation of select materials in CO2 capture/absorption.
Ionic conductivity, backbone-to-backbone spacing, polysaccharide crystallinity,
ion aggregation, and microphase separation will be evaluated using a combination
of techniques, including electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, X-ray
scattering, chemical mapping, electron microscopy, and calorimetry experiments.
MSU will serve as the lead institution of the proposal and will oversee all of
the synthetic thrusts as well as the overall management of financial/technical
reporting. RUC will be responsible for characterization (conductivity,
morphology) of the materials, including the affect of humidity on these
properties, and then integrate with MSU in the synthetic efforts during years
two and three as promising leads are developed. Carbon dioxide
separation/capture measurements will be made at both institutions and completed
as time permits in year three. As mentioned above, a significant number of
undergraduate STEM students will be supported by this award, acquiring skills
that encompass monomer/polymer synthesis and characterization (FTIR, TGA, DSC,
X-ray scattering, DRS, SEM, etc.). Students in the proposed IRUE program will
gain a unique sociological perspective as well as a broadening of their
scientific skills. Synthetic approaches, materials analyses and applications
were carefully selected so as to provide student participants with a rewarding
research experience while generating high quality data which will be
disseminated in nationally and internationally recognized, peer-reviewed
journals and presented at professional meetings. The PIs firmly believe that
their results will greatly enhance the area of sustainable, conductive materials
with long-range implications in energy transport/storage and CO2
capture.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.