* 2104111
* Collaborative Research: From rock to regolith to rivers: weathering, grain size, and controls on soil production and fluvial incision
* GEO,EAR
* 10/21/2020,07/31/2024
* Jane Willenbring, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 233,932.00

Soil is a vital resource but processes controlling soil production are not well
understood. Data collected in previously NSF-funded studies, along with new
data, will be used to better understand how soil is produced in different
environments. The depth of soil is likely closely linked to the soil production
rate and how rivers erode. How rivers and soils interact has practical
consequences for river infrastructure and human impacts on landscapes such as
deforestation or forest fires. How sustainable is soil given a changing Earth?
Undergraduate and graduate students and a post-doctoral scholar will contribute
to this research project. The team will also use 3D printers to make synthetic
landscapes to be used as part of outreach to K-12 students who are visually
impaired or have Autism Spectrum Disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Rio
Blanco watershed in the Luquillo Critical Zone Observatory, we will map patterns
in surface soil thickness, grain size, and soil chemistry across the landscape
and tie these to new rates of soil production and soil grain residence time.
Theoretical hillslope-channel coupling will be modeled using the Landlab
modeling toolkit and a recently published analytical model that predicts the
grain size distribution of sediment fed to channels as a function of climate and
erosion rate, which controls the residence time of soil particles. We will also
build a new fluvial incision modeling component to incorporate the influence of
sediment load, including grain size, on bedrock incision rates. Further, data
from the Rio Blanco will be used to calibrate a Landlab
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.