* 2104879
* CRII: SCH: Compact and Affordable, Non-intrusive mmWave and IoT enabled skin monitors - A Synergy for Chronic Skin Wound Evaluation and Prognosis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Satheesh Bojja Venkatakrishnan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 174,995.00

Chronic skin wounds resulting from burns, diabetes, ulcers, and other medical
conditions can overwhelm the skin's regenerative capabilities, leading to
persistent infections and even amputations in severe cases. Over 10 million
patients with chronic wounds are treated yearly in the United States, with an
estimated cost of more than US $ 40 billion in annual spending for treatment.
Accurate diagnosis of chronic skin wounds, particularly in the early stage, can
provide efficient and targeted treatment, ultimately reducing patient suffering.
Current burn wound diagnosis and prognosis are limited to visual inspection by
the physician and patients are physically required to be in the medical center
to undergo expensive wound imaging approaches or the excruciating process of
repeated bandage removals for inspection. Even with the latest advances in
health, smart bandages can only aid in drug releases and do not provide real-
time diagnosis nor monitoring. This proposed research aims to overcome the
obstacles associated with existing burn wound profiling by developing
transformational imaging and wound monitoring approaches that can be readily
integrated with existing smart bandages to provide real-time information of the
wound state without affecting their daily routine. This project will also foster
workforce development in the rapidly growing area of bio-medical wireless
engineering. New degrees and new curricula in biosensing and IoT technologies
will be leveraged to promote STEM outreach programs and coordinate outreach
activities. The latter will be aimed at recruiting larger cohorts of
undergraduates and K-12 students from the local Miami-Dade and Broward counties
to be trained in wireless engineering. Examples of our signature outreach
programs to be leveraged include Engineers on Wheels, Engineering Expo, ENLACE
(Engaging Latino Communities for Education), and the Miami PREP (Positive Youth
Preparedness) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate diagnosis and prognosis of
a skin wound treatment commonly require the measurement of the wound area,
maximal wound depth, the chemical composition of wound exudate, and type of
tissue affected. In addition, sensors for non-intrusive diagnosis need to
overcome the following challenges, namely 1) attenuation provided by bandages,
2) adherence to regulatory requirements while employing radio frequency (RF)
sensors, 3) avoiding battery-powered electronics, and 4) accurate diagnosis
across demographics. The proposed development of a non-intrusive, affordable,
wireless real-time wound assessment device that can be easily integrated to a
smart bandage is transformative as it unites the interdisciplinary research
areas of biomedical engineering, network engineering, and electromagnetism
towards a single goal. Specifically, the PI will be working closely with bio-
medical researchers towards the, 1) Development of mmWave sensing system to
estimate skin wound depth with ~0.1 mm accuracy, through electrical impedance
spectroscopy, by computing the variation of the skin impedance as the wound
depth varies, and 2) Realization of IoT-based wireless connectivity employing
low-power low-cost protocol to transfer vital wound healing details obtained
using integrated electrical, electrochemical and RF mmWave sensors, in a reduced
SWAP-C package. The proposed research capabilities have the potential to
revolutionize medical imaging tools for remote assessment of skin burn injuries,
ulcers, and other chronic skin wounds, benefiting the global society by
realizing a safe, accurate, and self-reliant burn-wound monitoring
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.