* 2104819
* CRII: HCC: RUI: Toward Understanding of Virtual Reality Sickness in Children
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sharif Mohammad Shahnewaz Ferdous, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 174,835.00

Virtual Reality (VR) technologies have become more affordable and accessible to
a diverse population in recent years. One of the biggest challenges for VR users
is virtual reality sickness, also known as cybersickness, in which users
experience symptoms including eyestrain, headache, sweating, fullness of head,
disorientation, vertigo, and nausea. Although factors that cause cybersickness,
and ways to reduce it, have been studied for many years in adults, children are
increasingly frequent VR users whose rapid psychological development may affect
both the mechanisms by which they experience cybersickness and the type and
severity of the symptoms. This project will investigate these possible
differences between children and adults through creating effective measures of
cybersickness for children and comparing the severity and drivers of
cybersickness between adults and children. Achieving these objectives will allow
the team to develop guidelines for developing safe VR content for children that
will expand the population of children who are able to benefit from VR
experiences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is among the first to
investigate cybersickness in children thoroughly. The causes of cybersickness
are still debatable, and how they affect children is severely understudied.
Further, common instruments for assessing cybersickness, such as the text-based
simulator sickness questionnaire (SSQ), may not be suitable for use with
children, as some of its questions (e.g., fullness of head, stomach awareness,
etc.) can be difficult for children to comprehend. The first objective of this
project is to implement a child-friendly SSQ that leverages children's visual
skills by augmenting the SSQ with animations of the symptoms. The effectiveness
of the visual questionnaire versus the text-based SSQ will be studied as a part
of the first objective and released for use by other VR researchers and
designers. The second objective is to compare both subjective (i.e., the SSQ)
and physiological (including rate variability, electroencephalograms, and
galvanic skin response) measures of cybersickness between children and adults.
The last objective is to investigate the factors in a virtual environment that
trigger cybersickness in children. An event-related potential analysis of the
brain activity in different VR environmental design conditions will identify
their effects on cybersickness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.