* 2104410
* Polymer Adhesion at Extreme Rates and Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alfred Crosby, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer adhesives are one of
the most pervasive applications of polymers, and their critical role in today’s
technologies has only grown. The reliance of numerous technologies, from
electronics to medical care to building and construction, on polymer adhesion
has vastly increased the range of environments and loading conditions that these
interfaces encounter. This range of environments and conditions will grow as
polymer interfaces are expected to play more important roles in protective gear
and in robotic devices that are specifically designed to minimize human exposure
to potentially harmful extremes. Additionally, the quantity of waste that is
created due to polymer adhesion and adhesives is growing at significant rates.
This waste is not only polymers directly used in bonding but also the bonded
materials, which are typically difficult to separate in order to be recycled or
upcycled efficiently. This research project will lead to new understanding of
adhesion at polymer interfaces at extreme rates of loading and temperature
change. This foundation will help to meet a deficiency in the fundamental
knowledge of polymer interfacial properties at extreme conditions, and we
anticipate that the results will guide the development of new protocols for
separating interfaces that help build a more sustainable society. Graduate and
undergraduate students who participate in this project will learn a broad range
of skills, including polymer synthesis and formulation, characterization methods
for adhesion, mechanical and thermal properties, and the development and
implementation of custom instrumentation designed to address challenges at the
forefront of technology. They will also develop writing, management, mentoring,
and presentation skills. Additionally, the team of researchers will launch a new
K-12 outreach program geared toward under-represented minority students
throughout the Western Massachusetts region to help inspire future careers in
STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While polymer interfacial strength has been studied
classically, open questions, and seemingly contradictory results, remain
unresolved in how material structure controls the deformation of interfaces
loaded, mechanically and thermally, at high rates. The PI's group will combine a
new experimental method, called power amplified dynamic mechanical analysis
(PADMA), with model materials to provide insight and pathways for controlling
polymer interfacial strength. Three model polymer systems based on poly(n-butyl
acrylate), which is broadly used in many current commercial adhesives, will form
the foundation of the study. Two systems will be designed with similar low
strain and low strain rate properties but different large strain and large
strain rate responses. This difference will be associated with the network’s
crosslink junctions. These materials will provide insight into how the elasto-
adhesion length scale evolves at high velocities and how this change is related
to changes in the polymer network structure. The third materials system,
poly(n-butyl acrylate)-co-poly(dimethylacrylamide) hydrogels with controlled
volume fractions of water, will provide insight into how localized phase
transitions initiated by high rate thermal changes alter interfacial separation.
Specifically, the size and interconnectivity of water swollen domains will be
related to changes in interfacial strength when loaded at high thermal rates.
Overall, the results will contribute to the limited, yet growing, knowledge base
of polymer properties at high rates, especially at interfaces. This knowledge
will lead to new methods for separating polymer interfaces with decreased energy
and without the need for harmful solvents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.