* 2104602
* NSF-BSF: Tapered Bottlebrush Block Copolymers: Synthesis, Solution Self-Assembly, and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Rana Ashkar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 441,459.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Polymers
Program of the Division of Materials Research, Professor John B. Matson of
Virginia Tech and Prof. Ronit Bitton of Ben-Gurion University in Israel lead a
team that is creating new polymers that take on a conical shape. How cone-shaped
polymers behave and interact in solution is currently unknown because methods to
synthesize these polymers were only recently developed. This work is important
because polymers that interact in water to form aggregates on the size range of
1-100 nanometers are used in a variety of applications, but fundamental studies
on how cone shape influences aggregate shape and size are lacking. The research
team will rely on an approach that connects polymer synthesis, characterization
of nanometer-scale aggregates, and computer simulations of aggregates to
generate theories describing how these unique polymers behave in water.
Collectively, these efforts will advance the field of polymer self-assembly,
offering potential benefits in the design of polymers for applications in
biomedicine, catalysis, food science, and other areas. Due to the collaborative
and cross-cultural aspects of this NSF-BSF proposal, this platform will be used
to enhance scientific communication with assistance from the Virginia Tech
Center for Communicating Science. Off-campus educational goals of this proposal
focus on enhancing the Youth Experiencing Science (YES) program for 4th–8th
graders in southwestern Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-BSF project focuses on tapered
amphiphilic bottlebrush block copolymers (BCPs), which are graft polymers with
high grafting density designed to take on an approximately conical shape. The
work incorporates an integrated approach to the synthesis, characterization, and
simulations of tapered bottlebrush BCPs. Synthetic efforts will rely on ring-
opening metathesis (ROMP) grafting-through methods to make a wide range of
tapered bottlebrush BCPs with variable degrees of polymerization for the
backbone and side chains. The solution self-assembly of tapered bottlebrush BCPs
will be systematically investigated using a range of characterization techniques
including electron microscopy and small-angle X-ray and neutron scattering
(SAXS, SANS). Modeling studies will include coarse-grained models, in a feedback
loop, to explain the observed morphologies and suggest new tapered bottlebrush
BCPs that could self-assemble into unique or unexpected solution morphologies.
The central hypothesis for this project is that the cone angle of the tapered
bottlebrush BCPs will influence self-assembled morphology and size distribution.
Expected outcomes from this synthesis–characterization–modeling approach include
discovering how cone angle influences polymer self-assembly, ultimately
revealing new understanding of how polymer structure influences material
properties. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.