* 2104535
* SHF: SMALL: Semantically and Practically Generalizing Graded Modal Types
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Harley Eades, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2024
* USD 426,413.00

Over the course of the last thirty years, computer scientists studying
programming languages have worked on two major problems: how to incorporate
software verification into the typical software developer's work flow, and how
to extend software verification to support reasoning about data usage, for
example, preventing the misuse of memory and socket handles. The main novelties
of this project are to rectify this problem of misuse of data: the research
generalizes and combines program logics for reasoning about data-usage, and the
power of verification tools used in modern programming languages, within a
single practical general-purpose programming language. The project's merits are:
(1) The development of a new general theory that others can use to study and
adopt this new combination; (2) A new programming language, Tenli, that
encompasses this new powerful combination; and (3) The design of new pedagogical
materials for teaching resourceful software verification at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. A major broader impact of this work is the
incorporation of a wide range of students in this project, e.g., undergraduate
students from Augusta University, a research university in Georgia, Wesleyan
College, a historical liberal arts women's college in Georgia, and Clark
Atlanta, a private Methodist historically black university in Georgia, and the
first cohort of graduate students at Augusta
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines two powerful verification
methodologies: (1) type-based verification, and (2) data-usage tracking through
graded modal types. Graded modal types are generalized to support reasoning
about a wide range of data-usage tracking including reasoning about imperative
data structures. Both a new theory of graded modal types based on the notion of
adjoint logics and a new practical general-purpose dependently-typed programming
language, Tenli, are developed based on this new theory. Furthermore, several
case studies within Tenli are being conducted to gauge its
practicality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.