* 2104764
* Lattice Distortions in Concentrated Metallic Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Todd Hufnagel, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 381,887.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most metallic alloys are based on a
single principal element with other elements added in small amounts. Common
structural steel, for example, is mostly iron with less than two percent of
other elements present. Recently, complex concentrated alloys in which multiple
elements are present in large amounts, with no single majority element, have
been the subject of much research interest because they show promising
properties. The precise reasons why the properties of these complex alloys are
different from those of simpler alloys are the subject of intense debate. One
idea is that the atomic-scale structure of complex alloys is heavily distorted
by the presence of so many different kinds of atoms, each of different size.
This project seeks to test this idea by careful experimental measurement and
detailed computer simulations of structural distortions in complex alloys. An
improved understanding of the atomic-scale structure of these novel alloys could
lead to the development of new materials with superior mechanical and functional
properties. A related educational aspect of the project is to validate a new
tool for assessing how well students learn concepts related to the structure of
materials, which will contribute to the development of better teaching methods
in materials science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple-principal element alloys (MPEAs) have been
the subject of intense research over the past fifteen years due in part to their
promise in structural and functional applications. Early on it was suggested
that the crystal lattices of these alloys should be highly distorted due to the
need to accommodate atoms of various sizes. Although the lattice distortion
hypothesis is widely invoked to explain some of the novel properties of high
entropy alloys, evidence in support of it is sparse and contradictory. This
program uses diffuse x-ray and neutron scattering studies of MPEA single
crystals together with total scattering experiments on polycrystals to provide
unparalleled insight into the nature of lattice distortions, and structural
disorder more generally, in complex concentrated alloys. The experiments are
supplemented and cross-validated with density functional theory calculations of
structure. By comparing disorder in complex (four- and five-component) alloys
with compositionally similar but simpler (two- and three-component) alloys the
hypothesis that adding components results in a different degree or type of
disorder can be tested. In a complementary set of educational activities, a
concept inventory for use in undergraduate courses in Structure of Materials is
being completed and validated to show that it measures expert thinking by
students. When complete, the validated concept inventory will be disseminated to
instructors for use in their courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.