* 2104919
* Gauge Theory and Invariants of Symplectic Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Timothy Large, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 158,856.00

The first objective of this project is to study a class of equations known as
generalized Seiberg-Witten equations. These little understood equations belong
to the area of mathematics known as gauge theory, which originates from physics
and describes the dynamics of gauge fields, such as the electromagnetic field
and other fields carrying fundamental forces of nature. The importance of gauge
fields in pure mathematics stems from their relationship to the geometry of
shapes known as manifolds. This leads to the second objective of this project,
which is to apply the theory of generalized Seiberg-Witten equations to find new
ways of distinguishing different manifolds from one another. The Principal
Investigator (PI) is specifically interested in applications lying at the
intersection of different areas of research, such as algebraic geometry (which
studies manifolds described by equations), symplectic geometry (which studies
manifolds related to classical mechanics), topology (which studies properties of
manifolds which remain unchanged under deformations), and string theory (a
branch of modern theoretical physics). In addition, the project's goal is to
expose a broad audience, including graduate and undergraduate students, as well
as researchers in other areas, to some of the ideas and techniques of gauge
theory and geometry. As part of the project, the PI will organize seminars and
minicourses for students and write expository notes on gauge theory aimed at
non-specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
analytic foundations in the study of generalized Seiberg-Witten equations on
three- and four-dimensional manifolds. Examples of such equations include the
Vafa–Witten and Kapustin–Witten equations, which are expected to lead to new
topological invariants of low-dimensional manifolds and knots, and the ADHM
Seiberg–Witten equations which play an important role in defining conjectural
invariants of higher-dimensional Riemannian manifolds with special holonomy. In
recent years, there has been a lot of progress on the compactness problem for
these equations, following groundbreaking work of Taubes. The first goal of the
project is to solve the converse problem of describing the moduli spaces of
solutions near the boundary. This will involve understanding singular solutions
to the Fueter equation, a nonlinear generalization of the Dirac equation, which
appears as the limit of rescallings of generalized Seiberg–Witten equations. In
particular, little is at present known about deformation theory and gluing
constructions for such singular sections, and making progress in this direction
will involve developing new analytical tools for studying singular solutions of
elliptic differential equations. The PI will apply this general theory to define
a symplectic analog of the Pandharipande–Thomas invariants of Calabi–Yau
threefolds. The invariant counts embedded pseudo-holomorphic curves with weights
defined using moduli spaces of the ADHM Seiberg–Witten equations. A symplectic
interpretation of the Pandharipande–Thomas invariant is likely to shed a new
light on the Maulik–Nekrasov–Okounkov–Pandharipande conjecture, which remains
one of the major open problems of enumerative geometry of Calabi–Yau
threefolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.