* 2104273
* OAC Core: Data-driven Methods and Techniques For Protecting Research and Critical Cyberinfrastructure By Characterizing and Defending Against Ransomware
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Elias Bou-Harb, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Ransomware is an extortion-type of malicious software (malware) that encrypts,
locks and exfiltrates data from local and networked assets for financial gains,
hindering the availability of such resources while causing immense reputational
damages. Recent ransomware attacks on high-valued cyberinfrastructure (CI) in
the health, educational, IT, and critical sectors demanded ransoms up to $50M
while causing collateral losses estimated to reach $20 billion in the next few
years. While there are number of ongoing research efforts that address the
ransomware phenomena, they are hindered by several challenges. These include the
lack of ransomware-specific analysis methods that permit the comprehension of
(state-sponsored) attacks that specifically target US CI, the ineffectiveness of
current network-based methods that are capable of thwarting ransomware
propagation attempts, and the shortage of host-based techniques that would
proactively mitigate the threat. To this end, this project serves NSF's mission
to promote the progress of science by developing data-driven methods, techniques
and algorithms to offer a first-of-a-kind multidimensional approach to provide
CI resiliency against evolving ransomware attacks. The project empowers numerous
CI communities, minorities and K-12 students with open source tools, virtual
training material and empirical data to facilitate forward-looking research and
education. The project further supports the operational cyber situational
awareness community by indexing the generated threat intelligence in an open
source platform, making it readily available to support near real-time,
ransomware-centric mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws upon
close to 2M (US-targeted) ransomware samples per month provided by an industry
partner. The project develops binary authorship methods that are resilient
against common obfuscation and refactoring techniques to (1) provide empirical
evidence related to the orchestration behavior of the attack entity, and (2)
facilitate the large-scale measurements and characterization of such
orchestrated events. Along this vein, the project initially leverages pre-
processing data methods based on opcode frequencies to subsequently devise
feature engineering processes as applied on binary code to extract salient
coding habits; related to memory usages, utilization of specific data
structures, function terminations, etc. Moreover, the project ingests run-time
behavioral reports of ransomware and develops learning methodologies by
innovating techniques rooted in natural language processing and attention
mechanisms. This aims at engineering models that could provide resiliency from
the network level, while applying concept drift notions to capture and
comprehend the mutating behaviors of such ransomware. The project also designs
and implements data carving techniques by applying the devised learning models
on streaming network traffic. Additionally, the project explores host-based
prevention methodologies by exploiting a set of ransomware-specific behaviors.
Herein, the project conducts large-scale ransomware instrumentation, models
ransomware sensing activities based on DLL calls, while devising data mining
methods based on a priori methods. The project further develops data sharing
capabilities to facilitate access to raw data, and the generated threat
intelligence. The project also devises virtual labsâ€™ material to enable large-
scale, cloud-based research and training activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.