* 2104716
* Identifying the role of dissolved organic matter composition in complete and partial photooxidation in diverse lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Christina Remucal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 326,446.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inland waters, such as lakes and
rivers, cover a small percentage of the Earth's surface yet play a central role
in the carbon cycle. Dissolved organic matter (DOM), which is made up of
chemicals from plants and microorganisms, is a critical component of the carbon
cycle within lakes. For example, natural processing of DOM by microorganisms or
by reaction with sunlight can produce carbon dioxide, a key greenhouse gas. As a
result, lakes are hotspots of carbon cycling and emission in the landscape.
However, the reaction of DOM with sunlight is frequently ignored in carbon
cycling models and little is known about how the type of DOM, which varies in
different lakes, influences its reactivity. This project will study DOM from
eleven lakes in the North Temperate Lakes-Long Term Ecological Research (NTL-
LTER) program, along with two well-studied DOM isolates. The DOM will be
evaluated for its photochemical reactivity using multiple approaches.
Importantly, the DOM will be thoroughly analyzed using state-of-the-art
techniques, including high-resolution mass spectrometry, before and after
reaction with simulated sunlight to identify how sunlight reacts with this
complex material. This project will yield important insights into the properties
that determine the reactivity of DOM in inland waters by isolating the impact of
photochemical reactions, which could ultimately be used to model carbon dioxide
production from lakes. A better understanding of the carbon cycle, particularly
in sensitive hydrologic environments, is critical for predicting and ultimately
adapting to a changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The composition of
dissolved organic matter (DOM) is critical to its reactivity. One example of DOM
reactivity is its susceptibility to complete and partial photooxidation in
sunlit waters, such as lakes. This process is increasingly recognized as an
important component of the global carbon cycle. However, a mechanistic
understanding of how DOM composition influences its photochemical reactivity is
lacking. This research will fully characterize waters collected from the eleven
core lakes of the North Temperate Lakes-Long Term Ecological Research (NTL-LTER)
program, along with two well-studied DOM isolates. These lakes include
dystrophic, oligotrophic, mesotrophic, and eutrophic systems that range widely
in DOM composition. Photochemical reactivity will be assessed by quantifying
photomineralization rates, measuring quantum yields and steady-state
concentrations of photochemically produced reactive intermediates (triplet DOM,
singlet oxygen, hydroxyl radical, and carbonate radical anion), and using
quencher experiments to distinguish between direct and indirect photolysis of
DOM. The DOM samples will be characterized before and after photolysis using UV-
visible spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, antioxidant measurements, and
Fourier transform-ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry. Multivariate
statistics, including multiple linear regressions, hierarchical cluster
analysis, and principal component analysis, will be used to identify how DOM is
altered during photooxidation, derive new measurements of partial
photooxidation, and identify the roles of direct and indirect photolysis in
complete and partial photooxidation. The work will yield important insights into
the fundamental properties that govern the reactivity of DOM in inland waters by
isolating the impact of photochemical reactions. This knowledge can be used to
develop relationships between DOM composition and reactivity that could
ultimately be used to model the potential for carbon dioxide production from
lakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.