* 2104526
* Collaborative Research: Acoustic Holography Enabled Additive Manufacturing of High-resolution Multifunctional Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Tian Zhenhua, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 10/31/2022
* USD 260,000.00

Recent swift advances in additive manufacturing have demonstrated its great
potential in tailoring the local and global properties of produced structures by
including micro- or nano-particles into polymer matrix composites. However,
current approaches have been limited by the challenge in precision spatial
controls of embedded particles, which usually have diverse material properties,
sizes, and shapes, making particle manipulation in a viscous polymer fluid
difficult. This collaborative research award will conduct fundamental research
to transform an additive manufacturing technology that leverages digital light
processing for photopolymerization printing and acoustic holography to
accurately “tweeze” micro/nano-particles in a polymer resin. The research will
greatly impact basic science fields in acoustic tweezers, materials processing,
metamaterials, and biomaterials, etc. Moreover, the studied acoustic holography
additive manufacturing technology will advance many engineering applications
through enabling novel metamaterials containing, e.g., lattice-like patterns for
ultrasonic signal processing devices, cellulose-based reinforced architectures
for customized repair of aircraft composite structures, or patterned micro-
vessels for personalized biomimetic bone tissue regeneration. Through education
and outreach activities, this project will also broaden the participation of
underrepresented minorities, improve STEM education, and increase public
engagements with science and technologies. The multidisciplinary nature of this
project will provide unique learning and training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
research is to understand an acoustic holography enabled additive manufacturing
mechanism to fabricate multifunctional composites that contain high-resolution,
versatile patterns of diverse micro/nano-particles such as cellulose
nanofibrils, carbon-based particles, and cells, etc. First, an acoustic
holography-based particle patterning mechanism will be established to construct
and reconfigure versatile particle patterns in viscous resins by studying a
frequency multiplexing-based method for dynamically controlling multifrequency
acoustic fields. Acoustic wave interactions with particles in viscous resins
will be uncovered through particle image velocimetry and acoustic field
scanning, and a theoretical model for rapid prediction of the particle
patterning process will be developed and validated. Next, the knowhow of the
acoustic holography-based particle patterning will be fused with the digital
light processing-based photopolymerization to create a versatile, high-
resolution apparatus for scalable additive manufacturing. Then, the apparatus
will be utilized to develop and study novel multifunctional composites such as
topological metamaterial composites containing periodic lattice-like patterns of
micro-particles. Both theoretical and experimental methodologies will be
utilized to further discover the effects of different periodic particle patterns
on different properties of additively manufactured composites, including
anisotropic elasticity, acoustic band gaps, Dirac cones, and topological states,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.