* 2104888
* Racial Socialization in Multiracial Families: A Mixed-Methods Investigation
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Riana Anderson, Stokes, McKenzie
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Fantasy T.
Lozada at Virginia Commonwealth University, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist examining the antecedents and consequences of
parental racial socialization among one of the fastest-growing populations in
the United States – Biracial Black-White adolescents (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018).
Racial socialization, or the ways that parents talk to their children about the
meaning and significance of race, is an adaptive cultural coping practice that
can promote the developmental well-being of Black adolescents (García Coll et
al., 1996; Murry et al., 2018). More specifically, racial socialization can lead
monoracial Black adolescents to adopt positive attitudes about being Black and
other Black people, which can protect them from deleterious effects of racism
(Neblett et al., 2013; Peck et al., 2014). Racial socialization may be equally
as important for Biracial Black-White adolescents as they experience many of the
same race-related stressors as their monoracial Black peers and unique forms of
Multiracial discrimination like social exclusion and exoticization (Skinner et
al., 2020; Yoo et al., 2016). However, only four percent of the studies on
racial socialization within the past decade included Biracial participants
(Umaña‐Taylor &amp; Hill, 2020), so we know very little about how parents of
Biracial Black-White youth socialize their adolescent children around race
(Stokes et al., 2020). As the U.S. becomes increasingly diverse, we must learn
how sociocultural practices, like parental racial socialization, function within
Multiracial families and impact youth who grow up in them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed-methods project employs a new self-report
measure and observational design to produce a rich conceptualization of racial
socialization in Multiracial Black-White families through two phases. The first
phase uses Latent Class Analysis and Structural Equation Modeling to analyze
self-report data to better understand what Biracial Black-White adolescents
learn about race from their parents and how it impacts their racial identity and
well-being. The second phase will build upon these findings by using
observational research to examine how the emotional context of the parent-
adolescent relationship shapes the transmission and effectiveness of racial
socialization (Yasui, 2015). More specifically, 75 Multiracial Black-White
families will visit a research lab and share stories about race-related
incidents in their own lives (e.g., racial stories task) or listen to vignettes
about common racial dilemmas that Biracial adolescents face. The participants
will be instructed to discuss the scenarios with one another and share how they
did or would respond to racial matters like it while being video recorded. The
recordings will then be analyzed using the Racial Socialization Observational
Coding system (Smith-Bynum et al., 2016) and emotion recognition software (e.g.,
Noldus) to detect emotional valence and understand the relational nature (e.g.,
tone, comforting behavior, advocacy, etc.) of socialization exchanges.
Additional analyses will explore (1) if parent-child closeness and child
characteristics (e.g., gender, phenotype) influence socialization, (2) if Black
and white parents differ in their emotional responses to racial dilemmas, and
(3) if parents respond to monoracial experiences of discrimination differently
than Multiracial experiences. Ultimately, both phases of this project will
advance the theoretical understanding of racial socialization in Multiracial
Black-White families. It will also begin to illuminate how interfamilial
communication about race shapes how Biracial youth develop in and interact with
other people in our society. This knowledge can be used to identify patterns of
"stability, change, conflict, and cooperation" that contribute to the
psychosocial well-being of youth with multiple racial identities and in turn,
expand our fundamental understanding of racial socialization in Multiracial
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.