* 2104211
* Investigating the Role of Emotions in Intergroup Conflict
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Jennifer Richeson, Hudson, Sa-kiera T
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jennifer A.
Richeson at Yale University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the role of an understudied emotion –
schadenfreude or feeling pleasure at another group’s misfortune – in intergroup
conflict. In particular, we are studying the importance of schadenfreude in
motivating people to not only endorse policies that harm outgroups, but to
actually engage in behaviors that will directly harm those groups. Research on
intergroup conflict has primarily focused on the importance of empathy in
creating prosocial conditions between groups. However, empathy is a weak
antecedent of intergroup violence and aggression, suggesting that a lack of
empathy isn’t sufficient to motivate the kinds of deeply harmful intergroup
behaviors seen around the world. Instead, we propose that feeling schadenfreude
is a more prominent motivator of intergroup harm and violence. We are expanding
conversations around intergroup conflict by highlighting the importance of
including schadenfreude in conjunction with empathy in intergroup conflict
interventions. Our work ideally will provide the foundation for more effective
intergroup conflict interventions in the future, especially those conflicts
marked by hatred and subjugation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We plan to study the
contextual and individual difference factors that give rise to schadenfreude in
three relevant intergroup domains in America. The first aim in the proposed
research explores the role of schadenfreude in promoting intergroup harm. We
will assess the amount of empathy and schadenfreude people have towards
outgroups as well as their support for harmful policies, asking whether
schadenfreude has greater predictive power for support for harmful policies than
the absence of empathy alone. The second aim tests whether perceived group
threat sets the stage for individuals to experience schadenfreude toward
outgroup members, which then leads to greater support for harmful policies. We
will manipulate participants levels of threat towards relevant outgroups and
assess levels of emotions and policy support, with a focus on reducing levels of
threat and therefore reducing schadenfreude and harmful policy support. The
third aim assesses whether experiencing intergroup schadenfreude not only leads
individuals to support outgroup harm but to engage in it. Researchers have
theorized that schadenfreude could be a potent motivator for engaging in
intergroup harm because it reduces the psychological barriers to violence.
However, actual research on this relationship is scant. We plan to utilize
economic games to model engagement in intergroup harm, asking whether feeling
schadenfreude leads individuals to become more vindictive and harmful towards
outgroups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.