* 2104443
* Phase Behavior of Random Heteropolymers In Solution
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Ting Xu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2024
* USD 525,587.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well accepted that a
protein’s sequence encoded by DNA is the key foundation toward its structure and
functions. Extensive efforts have been devoted to synthesis of sequence-specific
synthetic polymers (oligomers and multi-block copolymers) and to probe how the
changes in monomer sequence affect the polymer behavior. However, it remains as
a question: “what extent of sequence specificity is needed in synthetic polymers
to exhibit protein-like behavior?” Recent experimental studies demonstrated that
random heteropolymers (RHPs) with statistical sequence control could be designed
to recapitulate proteins’ functions. This is orthogonal to well accepted protein
sequence-structure-function approaches in biology. The proposed studies aim to
answer an important question on what these RHPs are at different levels ranging
from segment, single-chain, to clusters in solution. Systematic studies from the
angle of polymer phase behavior will combine the fountain of knowledge in
traditional polymer science and biology. Successful RHP developments may enable
polymers to molecularly interface with biological processes and ultimately lead
to hybrid functional materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes broad
interdisciplinary educational and mentoring aspects, outreach, development of
undergraduate laboratory modules, as well as creation of publicly available
software tools for RHP sequence simulation and analysis to overcome the initial
barriers in RHP design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RHPs act as chaperon proteins to stabilize enzymes
in non-native environments and channel proteins to selectively, rapidly
transport protons. Recently results on such RHPs suggested that monomeric
sequence specificity is not the prerequisite to replicate some properties of
natural proteins. It is feasible to rationally design RHPs with protein-like
behavior. This project will experimentally study the RHPs’ synthesis and
solution behavior at the single-chain level and as ensembles and provide
experimental foundation toward initial understanding of this class of complex,
challenging, and useful polymeric materials. Specifically, the planned studies
focus on: (1) Synthesis and characterization of RHP libraries with controlled
composition and statistical monomer distribution; (2)Phase behavior of RHPs in
dilute solutions; (3) Assemblies of RHPs in solutions with increased
concentration. In parallel, the PI's group will synthesize and characterize
model block copolymers to delineate effects of statistical monomer distribution
in RHPs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an orthogonal approach to sequence-specific
polymers, RHPs represent a rarely explored area in terms of polymer design and
encompass controlled randomness as a critical design parameter. If successful,
the planned studies will pave the path toward truly protein-like polymers
synthetically. With the interdisciplinary nature of RHP approach,these studies
provide a platform to promote polymer science among different scientific
communities and training opportunities for the next generation of materials
scientists. The project includes broad interdisciplinary educational and
mentoring aspects, outreach, development of undergraduate laboratory modules, as
well as creation of publicly available software tools for RHP sequence
simulation and analysis to overcome the initial barriers in RHP
design.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.