* 2104666
* An EEG investigation of temporal orienting of attention for goal-directed eye and hand movements
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Melisa Menceloglu, Menceloglu, Melisa
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Joo-Hyun Song
at Brown University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the mechanisms of temporal orienting of attention in
goal-directed eye and hand movements. Using temporal regularities in the
environment, we can orient attention to specific points in time to select and
prioritize an upcoming relevant event. This ability, called temporal orienting,
can then facilitate upcoming perception and action in many everyday situations
such as estimating the duration of a yellow traffic light when driving,
approximating when to swing at a tennis ball, or deciding when to jump into a
conversation. Research on temporal orienting has mostly focused on perception,
uncovering the neural mechanisms by which temporal orienting modulates
perception and its behavioral and neural consequences. While temporal orienting
may be especially important for action; much is still unknown about its effects
on action. How may temporal orienting contribute to the temporally precise
planning and execution of actions such as goal-directed saccades and reaches? Do
the effects of temporal orienting on eye and hand movements rely on distinct or
overlapping neural mechanisms? This project aims to answer these questions and
thereby uncover the principles about the interplay between time perception,
attention, and action. The outcomes of the project have potential technological
and clinical implications; they can inform brain-computer interface technology
developed for motor control, effective information processing methods and
interface design used in domains such as aviation and automotive industry, as
well as rehabilitation programs used for neurological disorders involving motor
control and timing deficits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
neural mechanisms by which temporal orienting of attention influences goal-
directed saccades and reaches using eye- and hand-tracking combined with
electroencephalography (EEG). Specifically, this project aims to reveal the
motor effector-general and/or effector-specific influences of temporal orienting
on ocular and manual motor control by testing the hypothesis that temporal
orienting contributes to the temporally precise control of eye and hand
movements by exerting its effects at a global level of motor control followed by
effector-specific level of motor control. The effects of temporal orienting
generated by different temporal structures such goal-driven temporal expectation
(using probabilistic variations in target timing) and stimulus-driven temporal
priming (using sequential repetitions versus switches in target timing) are
considered to gain a more complete picture. By using multiple EEG data analysis
methods to extract as much information as possible from the multidimensional EEG
signals, and reinforcing exploratory analyses by replication, this project has
the potential to provide a comprehensive understanding of the neural mechanisms
of goal-directed eye and hand movements as well as how temporal orienting
generated by various temporal structures provides anticipatory signals that
modulate motor control. Overall, the outcomes of the project will contribute to
a more unified framework for attention and action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.