* 2104025
* Elements:  Towards a Robust Cyberinfrastructure for NLP-based Search and Discoverability over Scientific Literature
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 04/30/2024
* USD 399,566.00

This project creates an open platform for accessing and mining information from
scientific texts that provides access to an array of software, computing
resources, and publication data. Current search technologies typically find many
relevant documents, but do not extract and organize the information content of
these documents or suggest new scientific hypotheses based on this organized
content. Natural Language Processing (NLP) strategies are a recognized means to
approach this problem, and this project develops the cyberinfrastructure to
support sophisticated search and retrieval from scientific publications, use and
augmentation of facilities for advanced and well-established natural language
processing and machine learning tools, and extraction and aggregation of data
from scientific publications. The project leverages two NSF-funded projects: the
Language Applications (LAPPS) Grid, which has already proven to be an effective
platform for development of NLP applications; and University of Wisconsin’s xDD
(formerly, GeoDeepDive), a scalable, dependable infrastructure capable of
rapidly growing a digital library of scientific publications, currently
including over 13 million documents from multiple distributed commercial and
open-access providers. The effort significantly enhances the value of these
existing NSF-funded infrastructures by providing access to services for mining
scientific publications and lowering the barriers to entry resulting from
licensing, redistribution, and intellectual property issues. Scientists may
perform large-scale text retrieval and mining using the University of
Wisconsin’s high performance computing (HPC) infrastructure through a web-based
interface. Iterative domain adaptation capabilities allow scientists to easily
adapt existing services to specialized areas without configuring or installing
additional components. The potential impact of the cyberinfrastructure is
applicable to any community that relies on computational tools for mining large
textual datasets, including researchers in sociology, psychology, economics,
education, linguistics, digital media, and the
humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends the LAPPS Grid to provide
access to UW-xDD’s collection of scientific publications and UW’s High
Performance Computing facilities, as well as means to rapidly adapt existing,
well-established natural language processing and machine learning software tools
to new domains and evaluate results. The LAPPs Grid provides a large collection
of NLP tools from a wide variety of sources exposed as web services, together
with multiple commonly used resources and a front-end document retrieval engine
currently configured to access PubMed/PubMedCentral as well as nightly updates
of the CORD-19 dataset. The LAPPS Grid is open source, and can be run from the
web, on a user’s laptop or desktop, in the cloud, or as a self-contained docker
image when it is necessary to protect sensitive or licensed data, when there is
no network connection available, or for deployment on remote HPC facilities. All
tools and resources can be used interoperably, eliminating the effort required
to convert input and output formats to use a set of tools or resources together.
xDD is one of the world’s largest single repositories of scientific publications
that spans all domains of knowledge, incorporates new documents automatically
and updates API endpoints every hour. xDD has accumulated millions of documents
from multiple commercial and open-access publishers (over 13M publications). The
xDD infrastructure is an integral part of the developing UW-COSMOS pipeline,
which consists of a suite of services supporting document processing, including
ingestion and parsing of PDFs; extraction of individual document objects such as
text sections, figures, tables, and captions; and recall, which creates
searchable Anserini and ElasticSearch indexes on the contexts and objects to
enable retrieval of information. Specific project activities include
implementing efficient retrieval and analysis of xDD’s vast holdings of
scientific publications; extending the NLP capabilities of the LAPPS Grid for
scientific publication mining and domain adaptation; developing full
interoperability between the Grid and xDD/COSMOS; scaling LAPPS Grid services to
handle the very large textual datasets available from UW-xDD; and surveying
visualization techniques and integrating them into the
Grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the NSF Division of Information and
Intelligent Systems within the Directorate for Computer and Information Science
and Engineering, and the NSF Public Access program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.