* 2104268
* Uncovering the Missing Physics in the Metrology of Spin-Orbit Torques
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Daniel Ralph, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 346,254.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic devices offer a combination of virtues
for computer memory that no other technology can match – they can retain
information with no applied power, they can withstand an unlimited number of
writing and reading operations without wearing out, and they can be made fast
and high-density. However, widespread applications in electronics will require
finding a way to write information to magnetic memories with lower power.
Recently, a promising new mechanism has been discovered for controlling magnetic
memories very efficiently, known as “spin-orbit torque,” but there is a problem
that different experimental methods used to measure the strength of this
mechanism often give inconsistent values. This project is investigating what is
the missing science that has not been properly taken into account, causing these
conflicting results. The practical aim of the research is to enable trustworthy
measurements of spin-orbit torques. This will provide the scientific foundation
to optimize the next generation of magnetic memory technologies, with the goal
that they will enable improved performance and lower energy consumption for
applications ranging from machine learning to low-power internet-of-things
networks. This project trains graduate and undergraduate students in advanced
device fabrication, measurement techniques, and computer modeling along with
science communication and other professional skills. Graduates typically find
employment in research laboratories of electronics hardware companies.
Participants in the project are also active in public outreach programs, in
particular a partnership between the Cornell Nanofabrication Facility and 4-H
clubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in
understanding the interactions between charge currents, spin currents, and
magnets have led to the development of magnetic-memory technologies in which the
orientation of magnets is efficiently controlled by torques exerted from spin
currents. However, this field faces a fundamental-science puzzle because
different experimental techniques used to measure spin-orbit torques (the most-
efficient known mechanism for current-driven magnetic manipulation) often give
contradictory results. This indicates that the intellectual framework used to
analyze these measurements is missing essential physics. This project is
performing experiments to test whether the excitation of short-wavelength
magnons, heating, nonlinear transport effects, spin currents emitted by
ferromagnets, or other yet-to-be recognized effects might explain this missing
physics. The ultimate project goal is to establish trustworthy measurement
techniques for use in the development of a new generation of magnetic memory
devices with improved performance and lower energy consumption, for applications
ranging from machine learning to low-power internet-of-things networks. This
project trains graduate and undergraduate students in advanced device
fabrication, measurement techniques, and computer modeling along with science
communication and other professional skills. Participants in the project are
also active in public outreach programs, in particular a partnership between the
Cornell Nanofabrication Facility and 4-H clubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.