* 2104842
* Developing isoscapes and testing lead isotopes of human tooth enamel
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Virginie Renson, Buckley, Gina M
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 04/30/2023
* USD 139,833.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Virginie
Renson at the University of Missouri Research Reactor Center (MURR), this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating
the applicability of lead isotope analysis in human tooth enamel as a means for
studying migration in non-temperate climates where preservation of human tissues
tends to be poor. This study will also develop lead isotopic baselines across
important regions of population growth and human movement. Research will combine
methods from archaeometry and environmental sciences to produce universal,
detailed tools future researchers can use to identify paleomobility using lead
isotopes and tooth enamel. This project will actively involve the collaboration
and training of students and the creation and distribution of educational
activities for children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the
potential use of lead (Pb) isotope signatures in human dentition as a means of
studying migration in an important area of population growth and expansion. Lead
isotopes (206Pb/204Pb, 207Pb/204Pb, 208Pb/204Pb) have largely been used in
archaeological science to trace artifact provenance and are now also being
applied with success to the study of human paleomobility in traditionally
temperate climates. However, this methodology has yet to be developed in regions
where the preservation of prehistoric skeletal material is poor. This
postdoctoral research project will address two issues. First, 150 geological and
environmental samples will be collected to develop a 20nPb/204Pb isoscape to
determine if the geological terrains of this region exhibit distinct Pb
isotopoic ratios that can be used in archaeological migration and provenance
studies. Second, procedures will be developed from archaeometry and
environmental sciences to understand if diagenetic alteration from taphonomic
processes, including contamination from modern lead sources, can be
systematically detected apart from in vivo lead concentrations in human tooth
enamel. Tooth enamel specimens (n = 75) will come from known hubs of migrant
activity. Results are expected to advance archaeological migration studies by
directly testing the applicability of Pb isotopes in low concentration, low
preservation materials and by allowing researchers to study shorter-distance
human migration patterns through Pb isoscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.