* 2104015
* The development of lexical competition in heritage speakers
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Ethan Kutlu, Kutlu, Ethan
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Bob McMurray
at the University of Iowa, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist examining language development in heritage speaker children. In
the current geographical, political, and global climate, immigrant populations
are expected to continue increasing around the world. A critical barrier faced
by the children of these immigrants is language, as they may not have the same
opportunities as monolingual children do to develop the majority language of
their new home (Valdés, 2005). Thus, a challenge is posed for understanding the
language development of heritage speaker children, as their first language (the
heritage language) becomes their less dominant language as they age (often when
schooling begins), and their second language (the majority language) eventually
becomes dominant, despite a delayed start (Polinsky, 2011). This often relegates
them to special English Language Learner classrooms or leaves them with
insufficient support. Currently, how heritage speakers develop their dominancy
in the majority language and what type of neural changes happen when this
language dominancy shift occurs is not well-studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research study aims to understand spoken word recognition, a bottleneck
process of early language development (Perfetti, 2007; Verhoeven, Reitsma, &amp;
Siegel, 2011), in monolingual and heritage speakers at Grade 1, Grade 4, and in
adulthood by using eye-tracking, EEGs, and machine learning. Here, lexical
processing—a critical hub in the language system—is being targeted as a model
system in which to ask how heritage speakers become more automatic language
processors in the majority language and maintain this in their heritage
language. Assessing heritage speaker children’s linguistic backgrounds presents
a unique challenge in that their exposure to English is not similar to their
monolingual peers, and their age and manner of acquisition as well as their
proficiency in the majority and the heritage language do not follow previously
assessed bilingual norms. Therefore, typical language background questionnaires
may not adequately capture heritage speaker children’s experience. Instead, a
more holistic approach, including an innovative recording tool (i.e., the LENA
system) and network science to quantify the exposure in both languages are
employed. Finally, the proposed study aims to not only understand the impact of
delayed exposure to the majority language in childhood but also its prolonged
impact on heritage speaker adults’ language representation, and to separate the
contributions of semantic and auditory differences using electrophysiological
and machine learning techniques. Findings here expand on both language
acquisition and the cognitive neuroscience of language processing in various
bilingual populations (i.e., heritage speakers). Crucially, heritage speakers
provide insight to help answer theoretically challenging questions in lexical
processing which cannot be otherwise addressed. Overall, this study aims to
broaden the participation of heritage speakers in language development research
as well as find and create more sustainable language and educational programs
for heritage speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.