* 2104902
* Collaborative Research: Correlated States in Twisted Hetero-bilayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Sufei Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 281,321.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;In conventional materials, electrons travel in
the periodic arrays of atoms without "talking" (interacting) to each other. When
two monolayers of atomically thin materials, also knowns as two-dimensional (2D)
materials, are stacked together with a well-controlled twist angle between these
two layers, they form a new periodic structure with interesting properties. In
this collaborative project, the PIs investigate these 2D materials to gain
knowledge that could enable transformative technology innovations such as high-
temperature superconductivity, quantum electronics and optoelectronics. This
project integrates an education component to train students and build a strong
workforce for quantum science and technologies. Under-represented groups are
particularly encouraged and included in the education
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Correlated states
such as Mott insulators and Wigner crystals remain intriguing subjects of
physics. More recently, twisted hetero-bilayer transition metal dichalcogenides
(TMDs) have emerged as a new platform with even more enhanced correlation
strength, and their strong spin-orbit coupling and presence of bandgaps provide
new avenues to explore spin-related physics and optoelectronics in correlated
states. In this collaborative proposal, the PIs explore the moiré superlattices
formed by twisted hetero-bilayer TMDs. The research plan includes two main
thrusts. Thrust I is to characterize the interaction strength of the correlated
states and study its relationship with moiré structure parameters and external
controls to manipulate the correlated states. Thrust II is to explore new
correlated states arising from interactions with other electronic phases, such
as the interplay of correlated states with Landau levels, the effect of strong
correlation on valley physics and excitonic physics of the moiré superlattice,
and other types of new states that could possibly arise in this strongly
interacting system. The collaborative project trains graduate and undergraduate
students are trained for future placement in quantum science and technologies.
The project also creates research modules for outreach to K-12 students and
actively involves under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.