* 2104655
* Collaborative Research: Far-from-equilibrium surfaces of high entropy alloys: interplay between frictional sliding and corrosion damage
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Wenjun Cai, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2025
* USD 420,511.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-principal-element alloys, also
known as high entropy alloys (HEAs), are an emerging class of metallic materials
which often consist of five or more alloying elements with similar
concentration. HEAs have generated considerable interest as potential structural
materials for use under harsh conditions due to their superior mechanical
properties and chemical stability compared to traditional alloys. Despite all of
the promise that HEAs hold, little is known about their surface structure and
properties upon simultaneous mechanical impacts and chemical reactions under
harsh environments. This collaborative research between Virginia Tech and the
University of Alabama aims to develop a scientific understanding of the
structure and formation mechanism of the surface of HEAs after simultaneous wear
and rusting (i.e. tribocorrosion) in chloride-containing aqueous solution (e.g.
seawater). By combining advanced surface characterization tools and multi-scale
computer simulations, the link between surface defects, deformation, and
tribocorrosion susceptibility of HEAs will be established. This project will
lead to the design of metals with high tribocorrosion resistance for critical
applications which require high wear and rust resistance under harsh conditions.
The highly cross-disciplinary research activities will provide graduate students
with diverse training in materials science, tribology, corrosion, and
computational materials science, as well as the collaborative teamwork
experience. It will also positively impact several education and outreach
initiatives, especially the involvement of underrepresented groups via research
opportunities at Virginia Tech and the University of
Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current
understanding of the tribocorrosion mechanisms of HEAs is mainly challenged by a
lack of understanding of the selective dissolution/oxidation of principal
elements, as well as the new deformation physics at/below the surface. The
synergy between mechanical and chemical attack drastically alters the materialsâ€™
surface condition and corrosion susceptibility, especially for Cr-containing
HEAs that rely on a thin yet protective surface oxide layer (i.e. passive layer)
for corrosion protection in air and water. This project will combine advanced
surface characterization and multi-scale simulations to reveal how frictional
sliding-induced depassivation leads to the formation of far-from-equilibrium
microstructure and composition at the surface, and the influence of the surface
electrochemistry and mechancis that act synergistically on the overall
repassivation kinetics and tribocorrosion rate. Specifically, the PIs will (1)
determine how alloy concentration and grain size affect wear, corrosion, and
their synergy, (2) elucidate the chemistry, composition, and defect
characteristics of the tribocorroded surface structure and its formation
mechanism, (3) understand wear-induced defect generation and microstructure
evolution using atomistic simulations, and (4) develop an experimentally
validated, predictive model for tribocorrosion using multiphysics simulations
that incorporate rate-limiting corrosion and repassivation steps. The integrated
experimental and computational approach has great potential to reduce the
materials creation and deployment cycle to fabricate tribocorrosion-resistant
alloys over a larger design space than traditionally known. Research
opportunities and mentorship programs will be created at Virginia Tech and the
University of Alabama for undergraduate students, especially for women (with
both PIs serving as role models) and under-represented minorities. In addition,
the proposed outreach activities will positively impact local K-12 students and
the broad internet audience to promote their interest and enhance their
knowledge in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.