* 2104212
* Mass/Momentum beyond Classical Gravity and Submanifolds of Higher Codimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Mu-Tao Wang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 337,146.00

This project investigates fundamental problems at the intersection of general
relativity, geometry, and differential equations. Einstein’s theory of general
relativity describes how spacetime is curved by gravitation. The language of his
theory is geometry and the phenomenon is governed by his eponymous equation.
Recent advances such as the detection of gravitational waves by LIGO and the
observation of black hole images by the Event Horizon Telescope confirmed
predictions made by Einstein’s theory, and enhanced our understanding of the
global and large scale structure of astrophysical events and objects. The PI's
research will apply the latest mathematical breakthroughs in spacetime geometry
and Einstein’s equation to obtain the most precise descriptions and measurements
of fundamental concepts such as energy and angular momentum on any finitely
extended region of the universe. This is essential in understanding the local
and fine structure of our universe, with applications in, for example, GPS
technology and space exploration, as well as the interaction of gravitating
systems such as black hole coalescence. A novel application of the concepts is
to space-times beyond four dimensions, which arise in the most viable approach
in unifying general relativity and quantum physics. The PI will also study
geometric objects of manifold dimensions that live in ambient spaces of even
greater dimensions. Examples of such include gigantic data sets that rely on
multiple variables subject to multiple constraints. The PI will apply the method
of differential equations to investigate the optimal shapes/phases of these
objects. The research in the project will be used to promote interest in
mathematics among undergraduate students and to provide motivations for research
projects. The PI has been engaging himself in educating a diversified body of
undergraduate/graduate students and young researchers, and the project will be
instrumental for his continued efforts along this direction. In addition,
several research problems studied in this proposal are of interest beyond
mathematics and there is considerable potential for interdisciplinary
cooperations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to resolve several
outstanding problems related to higher dimensional gravity and submanifolds of
higher codimensions by the method of geometric analysis. In particular, the PI
will define quasilocal mass and linear/angular momentum near null infinity of
higher dimensional spacetimes. Immediate goals include proving
positivity/monotonicity theorems for quasilocal mass and rigidity/regularity
theorems for general submanifolds of higher codimensions, in addition to
establishing conservation laws and supertranslation invariance for
linear/angular momentum at null infinity. The proposed research will advance our
understanding of nonlinear partial differential systems, such as the Einstein
equation and mean curvature equations in higher codimensions, and cast new light
on important physical quantities such as gravitational energy and angular
momentum in higher dimensional spacetimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.