* 2104912
* Interactions between spin wave and magnetic domain structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Luqiao Liu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 408,000.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Spin wave is a useful way to transfer energy
and information inside solid state materials. It is considered as one of the
promising building blocks for next generation microelectronic technologies.
Compared with existing computing devices, the ones based on spin wave can have
lower power consumption, higher speed and are compatible with parallel
operations. In order to realize computing devices based on spin wave, some
bottlenecks need to be overcome. Particularly, one has to control the flow of
spin wave inside solid materials. This project utilizes a novel mechanism to
control the spin wave flow, which is intrinsically compact and consumes little
energy. The fundamental knowledge achieved in this project has direct
microelectronic applications and can lead to new device structures for
information storage and computing. The research and education efforts ensure
students at different levels benefit from the research and get trained to master
cross-disciplinary techniques used in this project. The project not only
educates and trains the next generation scientists and engineers but also
assists to place them in microelectronic industry after graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The study on the
interactions between spin current and the dynamics of nanoscale magnetic
structures has been a very active research area within spintronics. The non-
uniform magnetic textures-induced magnetoresistance and the spin current-caused
magnetic switching have both led to important industrial applications. However,
existing research mostly employ conduction electrons to carry spin current. The
other useful way of transferring spin angular momentum within solid state
materials, i.e., to use spin wave, has remained largely unstudied
experimentally, despite the theoretical prediction on the rich physics that can
be caused by the interactions between spin wave and magnetic structures. This
project focuses on quantitatively studying the influence of magnetic textures on
the transport of magnon spin current, as well as the magnonic spin torque
induced magnetic switching. Particularly, the project aims to achieve
quantitative understanding between spin wave transport and the internal
structures of domain wall as well as topological magnetic textures. The project
enhances peopleâ€™s understanding on the spin current transport enabled by magnons
and results in new ways of controlling magnetic ordering in solids. This project
has applications in microelectronic industry on making better interconnections
and leads to new device schemes for information storage and computing.
Integrated research and education efforts are established through the project so
that students at K12, undergraduate and graduate levels benefit from the
research, who are trained to master cross-disciplinary techniques used in this
project, including material synthesis and characterization, nanoscale device
fabrication and microwave circuit design and
measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.