* 2104228
* Material Response to Dense Electronic Excitations: Nonlinear Defect Dynamics and Phase Transformations
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* William Weber, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The response of materials to energy
dissipation from energetic charged particles is important for defect
engineering, ion-beam modification, ion-beam processing, ion-beam analysis,
geologic age dating, space exploration, high-energy accelerators and nuclear
applications. As a charged particle penetrates a solid, its energy is
transferred to atomic nuclei and to electrons leading to complex energy
dissipation processes in the solid that are coupled in time and space. The
energy transferred to electrons results in highly-local, dense electronic
excitations that often exceed those produced by intense pulsed lasers. These
coupled processes bring materials to extreme and often transient regimes where
unique defects, novel nanostructures, and material phases are formed, and where
competitive self-healing can be induced. The goal of this project is to achieve
critical understanding on these coupled phenomena on the response of materials
and to identify new pathways to control the formation of defects, nanostructures
and phases for advanced electro-optical systems, for tailoring materials
functionality and performance, and for the design of better materials for
advanced energy technologies. This project provides a unique set of integrated
education, research, training and outreach activities to educate both
undergraduate and graduate students in fundamental research on a new class of
engineering materials, recruits students from under-represented groups in STEM
areas, and provides training for the next-generation workforce in advanced
electro-optical and energy technologies across academia, national laboratories
and industry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;This
project applies experimental approaches to understand, model and ultimately
control the far-from-equilibrium dynamic response of ceramic materials to
extreme energy dissipation from energetic charged-particles at the level of
electrons and atoms in order to guide materials discovery and tailor materials
functionality and performance. The model ABO3 perovskites to be studied exhibit
different bonding character, strong luminescence signatures for electronic and
lattice defects, and distinctly different response to electronic and nuclear
energy loss. The response of these model perovskite structures to single and
multiple ion events is experimentally investigated over a range of conditions to
vary the partitioning of energy transfer to electrons and atoms in both
undamaged single crystals and in single crystals containing different pre-
existing levels of damage. The investigations are designed to both separately
and simultaneously probe high electronic excitation densities and the coupling
of electronic and atomic processes under irradiation from cryogenic to elevated
temperatures using in situ ion-beam analysis and optical spectroscopy
techniques, as well as advanced microscopy and x-ray diffraction methods. This
research provides transformative new understanding of the complex electronic and
atomic correlations with extreme energy dissipation that enables the formation
of unique defect states, the design and discovery of materials with novel
functionalities for advanced technologies, and the development of self-healing
and radiation tolerant materials for next generation high-energy accelerators,
space environments and nuclear applications. This project provides a unique set
of education, research and training activities on state-of-the-art ion-beam
capabilities, materials characterization techniques and defect physics, as well
as written and oral communication skills, that prepare students for the
technological workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.