* 2104971
* Fatigue Initiation Resistance in Shape Memory Alloys-Theory and Experiments
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Huseyin Sehitoglu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 467,571.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of how to prevent the
formation of cracks at the atomic scale of materials, known as fatigue, that are
used in aerospace, automotive, and defense applications is paramount to avoid
catastrophic structural failure that could result in loss of human life. Fatigue
of a material begins at the atomic scale under repeated physical pressure
(loading) and result in nucleation (birth) of small cracks. The cracks can grow
under variable loads and produce component and structural failures. New
experimental tools, such as high resolution microscopy, allows visualization of
the atomic motions that are responsible for fatigue phenomenon, and these
measurements provide unprecedented insight into processes that result in the
beginning of microscopic crack formation. These experiments can also provide a
critical check on the models aimed at predicting when fatigue starts. With
better understanding, one can develop new materials that withstand fatigue. The
focus of the work is on a special class of metals, called shape memory
materials, that change their shape upon load and recover their original shape
upon removal of the load. This phenomenon is similar to how rubber stretches and
returns to its original shape upon release of the applied force. These shape
memory materials can potentially exhibit higher fatigue resistance compared to
conventional steels and aluminum alloys. The proposed work will advance
understanding of the mechanism of nucleation and improve fatigue lifetimes,
quantifying stochasticity (variability in the results) linked to the underlying
microstructure, ultimately improving the safety and reliability of components
and structures. To enhance education in this field, senior design projects that
involves building a fatigue test machine will be introduced. A new textbook on
fatigue that covers current methods of measuring fatigue and the different
models of fatigue will also be produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual aims of this work centers on a
better understanding of fatigue initiation behavior from fundamental atomistic
to representative micro-mechanical scales to enable determination of fatigue
resistance and enhanced predictability of lifetime. To verify the models at
various length scales and mitigate risks of any unwarranted artefacts in the
predictive procedures, the proposed experiments include single-crystal
mechanical tests and High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy along
multiple judiciously chosen zone axes. Information obtained will be of a 3D
nature and will be analyzed using Template Matching (TeMA) and Geometric Phase
Analysis (GPA) methods, further developing advanced algorithms for the same. The
modeling efforts will incorporate Frank-Bilby concepts for defect evolution
along with Molecular Statics to study the energy barriers and Anisotropic
Elasticity Theory for slip under to- and fro-(cyclic) loading, as it is
established that material performance enhancement for fatigue resistance can be
achieved by controlling such characteristics at lower length scales. Thus,
utilizing such a unique combination of techniques provides greater insight into
the processes responsible for the structural evolution under fatigue and allows
for the direct observation of the underlying damage processes. Therefore, the
proposal will create significant broader impacts in terms of improving fatigue
design for high performance shape memory alloys by creating a new set of tools.
Early studies have not elucidated the experiments and theory addressing
processes at length scales that are relevant to fatigue nucleation. This
research will have the capability to examine potentially new materials that
currently remain untested but promise considerable advantages. The outreach
efforts include preparation of a textbook on fatigue combining theory and
experiments, and a design project for fatigue initiation experiments under
rotary-bending of wires subject to different mean
strains&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.