* 2104787
* Using joint experience-sampling and fMRI methods to understand how the brain supports differentiated emotional experiences
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Dylan Gee, Nook, Erik Christopher
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 63,250.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Dylan Gee at
Yale University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist in examining the neural processes that support differentiated
emotional experiences. Although affective and clinical scientists have shown
that the ability to specifically identify one’s emotions (a skill called emotion
differentiation) is widely associated with mental health, there are two key
unanswered questions that that stymie basic understanding of this phenomenon.
First, what neural mechanisms support differentiated emotional experiences, and
second, what psychobiological mechanisms explain why emotion differentiation is
associated with better well-being? The current project aims to address both of
these questions using cutting-edge neuroimaging and ecological momentary
assessment (EMA) methods. Overall, this study aims to clarify the neural
processes that support differentiated emotional experiences and connect this
neural measure to effective emotion regulation. As such, it aims to advance both
basic understanding of human emotion and the multilevel mechanisms that support
psychological well-being. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project uses a joint
functional magnetic resonance imaging – ecological momentary assessment (fMRI-
EMA) design to investigate the neural bases of emotion differentiation. Adult
participants complete an fMRI task in which they view and regulate their
responses to neutral, sadness-inducing, and fear-inducing images before 14 days
of EMA measures. Four times each day, participants report on their momentary
experiences of negative emotions, the strategies they use to regulate their
emotions, and how successfully those regulation attempts reduce negative affect.
Emotion differentiation scores are computed from their EMA reports of emotional
experiences, and a novel measure of neural emotion differentiation is computed
from fMRI data using representational similarity analyses. Aim 1 tests whether
the EMA measure of emotion differentiation tracks neural dissimilarity when
participants view sad vs. fear stimuli. Aim 2 tests whether greater neural
dissimilarity in emotion representation explains the relationship between the
EMA measure of emotion differentiation and emotion regulation efficacy.
Together, these aims address open questions about (i) how the brain supports
differentiated emotional experiences and (ii) the neurobiological pathways that
connect high emotion differentiation with better emotion regulation (a key
component of mental health). Together, this study aims to develop research
methods and basic insights about emotion differentiation that can be translated
in future research to improve psychological well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.