* 2104193
* Superconducting and Metal-Insulator Transitions in Quasi-Two-Dimensional Strongly Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Dragana Popovic, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 319,354.00

NONTECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;Electronic properties of many new materials with
potentially great technological importance are dominated by interactions among
charge carriers. Those correlations give rise to a variety of phenomena,
including the emergence of novel states of matter and transitions between
different phases, such as metal to insulator or superconductor to normal.
However, microscopic mechanisms underlying these transitions and the nature of
various phases in such strongly correlated systems are not well understood. This
research addresses fundamental questions about superconducting and metal-
insulator transitions in two classes of layered, strongly correlated materials,
copper-oxide high-temperature superconductors and a new series of organic
systems, by performing measurements of charge transport over a wide range of
temperatures and magnetic fields. The results of this project are crucial for
understanding of strongly correlated materials, which will benefit society by
ultimately influencing the development of science and technology. A key
component of the project is education and training of graduate students for
future careers in academia, national laboratories, and industry. It also
incorporates various activities to broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in the areas of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics,
outreach to general public, and impact on research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
several fundamental questions in the physics of strongly correlated materials,
such as unconventional superconductivity and the Mott metal-insulator transition
in quasi-two-dimensional systems. Since anomalous transport properties are one
of the key characteristics of strongly correlated materials, experiments involve
electrical transport, including time-resolved protocols. Studies focus on two
classes of quasi-two-dimensional systems, cuprates and newly synthesized
substitutional series of quasi-two-dimensional organics. In both cases,
unconventional superconductivity emerges as a result of tuning through the Mott
transition by varying doping or chemical pressure, respectively. In cuprates,
the goal is to probe the destruction of superconductivity by high magnetic
fields and to clarify the respective roles of spin and charge orders, disorder,
and quantum phase fluctuations, as a function of doping. In organics, the focus
is on understanding unconventional superconductivity by exploring both thermal
and magnetic-field-tuned superconducting transitions. In addition, the Mott
metal-insulator transition and the role of spin liquid excitations are probed
using time-resolved techniques. The knowledge gained from this project is
essential for further development of condensed matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.