* 2104999
* CRII: SaTC: Cyber Resilient Localization and Navigation for Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* MIZANUR RAHMAN, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 175,000.00

Autonomous vehicles (AVs) in all modes of transportation (be it surface,
aviation, or maritime) require accurate and reliable localization and navigation
services in order to perform their autonomous functions. In many cases, a Global
Positioning System (GPS) or Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) provides
the required localization and navigation capabilities for surface
transportation. A GPS (or GNSS) mostly depends on satellites and radio
communication, which are subject to various obstructions, such as high-rise
buildings, walls and ceilings in garages and tunnels, and even thick cloud
cover. Besides these factors, GPS devices are also subject to intentional
threats, such as radio interference, spoofing on communications, data
manipulation on transmitted messages, the jamming of GPS receiver channels, and
disruptions to the GPS infrastructures. Existing cyber-resilient solutions
against GPS interference, such as high-definition maps and Wi-Fi or cellular-
based technologies, are either data-intensive and costly or susceptible to
signal interference and limited by coverage area. Alternatively, low-cost in-
vehicle sensors (including gyroscopes, accelerometers, steering angle sensors,
inertial measurement units, odometers, and cameras), which are not susceptible
to signal interference, can provide effective strategies for detecting threats
as well as locating and navigating AVs. To establish cyber-resilient
localization and navigation for autonomous driving in a roadway environment, the
goal of this research is to develop sensor fusion approaches that combine
outputs from low-cost in-vehicle sensors with those of onboard geographical
information systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research addresses
intentional and unintentional interference issues of GPS services in order to
improve the operational safety of AVs. The project will first investigate and
develop an approach to detect GPS interference (such as jamming, spoofing, and
natural interference) by predicting and identifying vehicle states (including
distance traveled, turning, and lane-change maneuvers) based on data from low-
cost in-vehicle sensors and the onboard graphical information system. This
initial research thrust adopts a three-step approach: (i) create different types
of jamming and spoofing attacks using interference devices in both a laboratory
and controlled real-world environment; (ii) generate attack and attack-free
datasets in real-world scenarios for predicting and detecting vehicle state
information; and (iii) develop a deep sensor fusion model and dynamic time
warping algorithm to detect GPS interference using the generated attack and
attack-free datasets. The second stage of the project will develop an integrated
cyber-resilient navigation system using data from in-vehicle sensors and the
onboard graphical information system to guide an AV towards its intended
destination in a GPS-denied or GPS-compromised environment. This will involve a
three-step process: (i) generate route creation and location information using
the graphical information system; (ii) fuse steering angle and gyroscope data to
identify lane changes and turning movements using deep fusion and dynamic time
warping techniques developed in the first research thrust; and (iii) integrate
graphical information and sensor-fusion data for localization and navigation
when the GPS signal is compromised. The final stage of research will develop a
proof-of-concept of the cyber-resilient localization and navigation system using
a conventional vehicle with low-cost AV sensors. Broader impacts entail a
transformation of autonomous vehicle operations under intentional and
unintentional interference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.