* 2104982
* CAS: Molecular Engineering of Efficient Compatibilizers in Polymer Recycling
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Mark Dadmun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 531,823.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plastics are critical materials for
broad swaths of society, including healthcare, food storage, packaging, and
transportation, among others. However, managing end-of-life plastics must be
improved, as the life-cycle of most materials currently end in landfills or an
incinerator. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop technologies to
manage the environmental and economic consequences of end-of-life plastics.
Unfortunately, the options available to compete with disposal are limited.
Mechanical recycling is the most common current technology, but requires
separation of a mixed waste stream to provide pure polymer as most polymer pairs
produce ill-defined mixtures with inferior properties. The development of novel
and effective polymeric surfactants can improve the properties of mixed plastic
waste streams that are ubiquitous in polymer recycling. This research program
will therefore provide a foundation to develop novel polymeric modifiers that
are required to enhance current polymeric recycling. Notably, these results
enable the development of materials that will have near-term benefits allowing
the efficient reclamation of plastics currently in the environment. As such, the
identification of these molecular design principles provides a bridge between
emerging chemical recycling, new materials design efforts, and current
technologies to mechanically recycle plastics. Workforce development and
training of the next generation of scientists and engineers who are prepared to
tackle the grand challenges in mitigating the economic, environmental and
societal effects of the end of life of plastics will be realized through this
research program and also by engaging public high school students in hands-on
research experiences. Additionally, an online clearinghouse for curriculum
modules focused on sustainable materials will be established and made available
to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research program is to
provide a foundation from which optimal polymeric compatibilizers for mixed
plastic waste streams may be designed. As crystalline polymers dominate polymer
recycling, research efforts will provide fundamental information that delivers
molecular design characteristics for effective compatibilizers of phase
separated crystalline polymer blends. Initial experiments will seek to identify
crucial molecular characteristics that enable the co-crystallization of
compatibilizers and homopolymers in phase separated crystalline polymer blends,
thereby strengthening weak interfaces. These studies will be coupled with
efforts to intercept telechelic intermediaries in the chemical recycling of
polymers that may be used as value-added materials, such as their use as
feedstocks to synthesize multiblock copolymers that compatibilize polymer waste
stream-derived phase separated blends. The targeted molecular characteristics of
these optimal compatibilizers will be informed by the molecular design efforts
described above. The efficacy of these building blocks to form optimal
compatibilizers in both passive and reactive processing schemes will be studied,
with the goal of providing routes to jointly utilize chemical and mechanical
recycling in developing improved materials from end-of-life plastics. This
portion of the research program will therefore have an amplified environmental
impact as it links and improves both chemical and mechanical recycling of
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.