* 2104394
* Combustion of Supercritical Spray under High-Pressure and High-Temperature Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Tiegang Fang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2024
* USD 341,305.00

The need to decrease our carbon footprint becomes more prevalent due to the
increased awareness of its effect on climate change. Although electrification of
the transportation sector is moving forward rapidly to increase efficiency
through hybridization, combustion of hydrocarbons will continue to be the
dominant choice for propulsion for many decades to come, especially the heavy
duty, marine, and aviation applications. This project will investigate a new
combustion concept using supercritical fluids. It will advance and provide new
knowledge pertaining to the applications of supercritical spray in combustion
engines. The successful adoption of the proposed techniques can dramatically
reduce the fuel consumption and pollutant emissions, benefiting the environment
and energy security. Additionally, this project will provide an excellent
opportunity for integrating research and education. Graduate and undergraduate
students, particularly from underrepresented and diversified groups, will be
involved in the research. The research outcome from this project will help
enrich three courses within the current curriculum. The results can also be used
to serve the engineering community and to motivate the younger generation (K-12
students) to pursue STEM majors in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
hypothesis of this proposal is that supercritical spray combustion has
significantly different mixing, ignition, combustion, and pollutant formation
processes from conventional spray combustion and understanding the fundamentals
can help achieve clean and efficient fuel combustion suitable for many emerging
applications. The objective of this research is to experimentally demonstrate
supercritical fuel combustion and quantify its impact on air-fuel mixing,
ignition, combustion, and the production of pollutant emissions. Supercritical
spray combustion is a novel area that has not been well studied despite
potential applications in next-generation compression-ignition engines and other
combustion devices. Besides fundamental understanding of supercritical spray
penetration, mixing, combustion, and pollutant formation, this study will have
significant impact on the performance of future diesel engines. Practically, the
proposed research will have the potential to transform combustion engines with
high fuel efficiency and ultra-low emissions. Fundamentally, the proposal
research will fill the knowledge gap for spray combustion under extreme
supercritical conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.