* 2104578
* Collaborative Research: Non-equilibrium fluctuations and diffusion in 2D
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Joseph Maclennan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 76,567.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion, one of the most common transport
processes, is ubiquitous in biological systems and is often modeled as mixing of
particles of different species due to the random motion of these particles at
molecular length scales. However, diffusion in liquids has been found to couple
with the flow of the fluid itself. This can lead to random concentration
fluctuations that were recently found to exist at the molecular length scale and
up to orders of magnitude larger. While these fluctuations have been measured
for three-dimensional (3D) fluids, in the constrained dimensions of a two-
dimensional (2D) fluid like a bio-membrane, they may be much larger still. Using
ultra-thin freely-suspended liquid crystal films and molecular monolayers
deposited on the surface of water, the research team aims to quantify these
fluctuations within 2D fluids during diffusion and explore their effects on
molecular transport. At the same time, the theory group is developing a
mathematical model for these fluctuations and running computer simulations that
can mimic experiments. This work contributes to an improved understanding of
colossal fluctuations during diffusion and informs their importance in bio-
membranes. The collaboration with the Soft Materials Research Center at the
University of Colorado Boulder provides additional opportunities for the team of
undergraduate research students to work at the frontiers of materials science
and launch their post graduate careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion of particles in bio-membranes plays an essential
role in biochemical processes in living organisms. The concept of diffusion has
recently received renewed attention with the discovery of giant concentration
fluctuations (of spatial extent approaching 10,000 times molecular length
scales) that develop during diffusive mixing of three-dimensional (3D) fluids in
the presence of a concentration gradient. The concentration fluctuations are
expected to be even larger in two-dimensional (2D) fluids due to the larger
spatial extent of hydrodynamic interactions between diffusing particles. Bio-
membranes can be modeled as quasi-2D fluids, having a combination of 2D and 3D
hydrodynamic features due to the presence of a bulk fluid embedding the
membrane. This project studies experimentally and theoretically the spatial and
temporal extent of out-of-equilibrium concentration fluctuations, the crossover
from 2D to 3D behavior, and the effects of fluctuations on the aggregation rate
of diffusing particles in freely suspended smectic films, a model quasi-2D
fluid. The research team is using Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching
(FRAP) of dye dissolved in the film, and a miscibility phase transition in films
of a binary liquid crystal mixture as well as in a dye-doped lipid Langmuir
monolayer, to measure the concentration correlation function through the
crossover from 2D to 3D behavior. The theory component of the project involves
performing analytic calculations and running computer simulations, based on the
immersed boundary method and stochastic hydrodynamics and using initial
concentration distributions characteristic of the experiments, in order to
generate a comparison to the observed concentration correlation functions. The
education component of the project integrates training for undergraduate
students, with a particular focus on recruiting under-represented groups, to
help students in future positions at industrial and academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.