* 2104052
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Seismic COmputational Platform for Empowering Discovery (SCOPED)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Carl Tape, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2025
* USD 647,985.00

Seismology is the most powerful tool for investigating the interior structure of
Earth — from its surface down to the inner core — and its wide range of
processes, including earthquakes, volcanic activity, glacial processes, oceanic
and environmental processes, and human-caused processes such as nuclear
explosions or hydraulic fracturing in oil and gas exploration. Seismology cannot
achieve its greatest potential without harnessing state-of-the-art computing
capabilities for the dual purpose of scientific modeling and analysis of rapidly
increasing data sets. The SCOPED (Seismic COmputational Platform for Empowering
Discovery) project establishes a computing platform that delivers data,
computation, and service to the seismological community in a way that promotes
education, innovation, and discovery, and enables efficient solutions to
outstanding scientific problems in geophysics. By focusing on openly available
data, openly available software, and virtual training, SCOPED opens
seismological research to a broad range of users. Four research components
emphasize openly available software for the purpose of characterizing Earth's
subsurface structure and the wide range of natural and man-made events that are
recorded by seismometers every day. Training of seismologists is a central focus
of the project. SCOPED training workshops (seismoHackweeks) are open to the
community. Emphasis on virtual research and training diversifies strategies to
engage minority groups entering computational geosciences. The project trains a
new generation of seismologists to harness the latest capabilities for
processing and modeling large data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SCOPED
project establishes cyberinfrastructure that provides fast access to large
seismic archives from a suite of containerized open-source computational tools
for big data analysis, machine learning, and high-performance simulations. The
implementation focuses on four interconnected, compute- and data-intensive
research components: seismic imaging of Earth’s interior, waveform modeling of
earthquakes and Earth structure, monitoring of Earth structure using ambient
noise, and precision monitoring of earthquakes and faults. Each research
component is enabled by open-source codes that meet, or aspire to meet, best
practices for software development. The project contains several transformative
components. First, it offers compute performance for both model- and data-driven
seismological problems. Hundreds of terabytes of waveform data are directly
accessible both to modelers—for data assimilation problems—and to data
scientists for processing, analysis, and exploration. Second, it establishes a
direct collaborative link among four teams of seismologists at four institutions
and a team of computational scientists at Texas Advanced Computing Center. This
unity reflects the necessity of both groups to achieve research-ready codes that
can exploit high-performance computing (HPC) and Cloud systems. Third, it
establishes a gateway with ready-to-run (or adapt) container images and data as
a service for the seismological community. Fourth, it develops computational
tools that promote the democratization of HPC/Cloud with cutting-edge data
processing and modeling software through their scalability from laptops to HPC
or Cloud systems and through their portability with containerization. Finally,
although the development of cyberinfrastructure is the main priority, ancillary
scientific results from advanced techniques are expected to offer insights into
fundamental seismological problems. The project has the potential for
discoveries across fields (seismology, Earth science, computer science, data
science, material science), as well as societal relevance in the realms of
seismic hazard assessment, environmental science, cryosphere, earthquake early
warning, energy systems, and geophysical detection of nuclear
proliferation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.