* 2104024
* Collaborative Research: Elements: ROCCI: Integrated Cyberinfrastructure for In Situ Lossy Compression Optimization Based on Post Hoc Analysis Requirements
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Dingwen Tao, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 10/31/2022
* USD 280,000.00

Today’s simulations and advanced instruments are producing vast volumes of data,
presenting a major storage and I/O burden for scientists. Error-bounded lossy
compressors, which can significantly reduce the data volume while controlling
data distortion with a constant error bound, have been developed for years.
However, a significant gap still remains in practice. On the one hand, the
impact of the compression errors on scientific research is not well understood,
so how to set an appropriate error bound for lossy compression is very
challenging. On the other hand, how to select the best fit compression
technology and run it automatically in scientific application codes is non-
trivial because of strengths and weaknesses of different compression techniques
and diverse characteristics of applications and datasets. This project aims to
develop a Requirement-Oriented Compression Cyber-Infrastructure (ROCCI) for
data-intensive domains such as astrophysics and materials science, which can
select and run the best fit lossy compressor automatically at runtime, in terms
of user's requirement on their post hoc analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to offer a complete series of automatic
functions and services allowing users to transparently run the best fit
compressor at runtime during the scientific simulations or data acquisition.
This project advances knowledge and understanding with three key thrusts: (1) it
builds an efficient layer to interoperate with different lossy compressors and
diverse post hoc analysis requirements on data fidelity by leveraging an
existing compression adaptor library (LibPressio) and compression assessment
library (Z-checker); (2) it develops an efficient engine to determine the best
fit compressor with optimized settings based on user’s post-hoc analysis
requirements; and (3) it develops a user-friendly infrastructure that integrates
compression optimization and execution via the HDF5 dynamic filter mechanism.
This project particularly targets cosmology and materials science applications
and their specific requirements of using lossy compressors in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.