* 2104270
* CRII: III:  Rare Event Prediction in Time Series
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Juhua Hu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,850.00

Predicting rare events within a time series is a critical task in many real-
world applications. Taking the healthcare industry as an example, it would be
very useful to predict an influx in the number of patients that would overwhelm
a hospital beyond its capacity. Without such capability, it could have negative
consequences in the hospital’s ability to adequate health care. Rare event
prediction in time series is a challenging problem due to the non-linear nature
of rare events, the inability to capture their key information in the systematic
components of the temporal data, and the data imbalance between rare and normal
events. This project will result in a framework to address these challenges.
With such a prediction framework, steps can be taken to ensure the affected
population's readiness for such rare events. For instance, the application of
the resulting technology will significantly improve readiness in the healthcare
care industry. Furthermore, the resulting technology can be applied to other
areas of societal interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the nature
of rare events in time series and addresses the above-mentioned challenges with
three technical aims. First, it is well known that sequence models such as
recurrent neural networks can be used to capture both the temporal and non-
linear nature of the data. Nevertheless, they have not been well studied for the
problem of rare event prediction in time series. One goal of this project is to
thoroughly study if sequence models can capture both the temporal and non-linear
nature of the rare events to facilitate the prediction. Second, the key
information of rare events can be hidden by the seasonal fluctuations in the
time series. Another goal of this project is to study if time series
decomposition that separates the seasonality can help the prediction of rare
events. Finally, in terms of the data imbalance problem, traditional prediction
models often treat normal and rare events equivalently, which can be harmful for
the rare event prediction. This project will develop a new method based on the
properties of rare events to emphasize their importance. Moreover, filters can
be specifically designed to extract rare events better to reduce the effect from
large amount of normal data. Both strategies have not been well studied for the
rare event prediction in time series, which will be the third goal of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.