* 2104407
* I-Corps: Privacy-preserving occupancy monitoring system for fall detection
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Arunas Tuzikas, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a system that detects falls, predicts a fall before it occurs,
and monitors a person’s age-related mental and physical status such as cognitive
decline. In assisted living facilities, the majority of residents have age-
related disabilities with a concomitant increased risk of falls. Fall prevention
and detection are significant and urgent problems. The proposed technology will
monitor a person’s movements in their living space. In the event of a fall, the
system will automatically recognize the change in movement and position and
inform the caretakers to ensure a timely response. The next-generation system
will use the analysis from continuous monitoring of the patient’s daily
activities to catch behavioral and gait changes that have a correlation with an
increased likelihood of a fall, giving caregivers a chance to take necessary
corrective action to help prevent a problem. Detecting falls quickly will
provide better health outcomes to patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a system that uses sensors and artificial
intelligence (AI) to monitor movement patterns and identify age-related decline
without the use of privacy-invading cameras. The proposed technology uses
sensors and movement patterns to send alerts for increased patient safety and
protection in all settings. The advantage is the ability to track people and
identify postures with a very low-resolution (8x8 pixels) off-the-shelf, Time-
of-Flight sensor, enabling a low cost, low energy solution. Deployed on
ceilings, the sensor measures distances of reflecting body parts that are
analyzed by unique machine learning models. The sensor can identify the
subjects’ poses, movement vectors, and potential for a fall. A full system will
contain multiple sensors, installed in strategic locations. The primary mode of
the system is to give an alert to caregivers when a fall occurs. The next
version will include a real-time AI engine that will analyze subjects’ movement
patterns and will predict gait changes, serving as a predictive tool to prevent
falls before they happen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.