* 2104195
* Collaborative Research: Distributed Electro-Mechanical Transmitters for Adaptive and Power-Efficient Wireless Communications in RF-Denied Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Swarup Bhunia, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2023
* USD 91,311.00

Propagation of radio frequency (RF) electromagnetic waves becomes infeasible in
certain situations, thus resulting in "RF-denied" environments. Examples include
underground and deep-water facilities (mines, shelters, storage areas, tunnels,
submarines, undersea cables, etc.). Recent events have highlighted the
importance of wireless communications with such environments. A prominent
example is the July 2018 rescue of a soccer team from the Tham Luang Nang Non
cave in Thailand after they had been trapped underground for over two weeks.
Such RF-denied environments are fundamentally produced by the short "skin depth"
of electromagnetic waves within conductive media such as earth or seawater,
which results in high attenuation. Fortunately, the skin depth increases as the
frequency decreases, so extremely low frequency (ELF) radio waves in the kHz
range can penetrate long distances in nominally RF-denied environments. For
example, the skin depth in sea water is 7.1 m at 1 kHz, which would allow
undersea communications to depths of about 30 m with reasonable transmit power
levels if one could effectively couple ELF radio waves into the medium. However,
conventional antennas are extremely large and impossible to deploy in this
frequency range, while electrically-short antennas have very poor power
efficiency. This project seeks to solve this fundamental problem by adopting a
radically new approach to ELF antennas that is based on the mechanical motion of
permanent magnets. The proposed research will have a broad impact on the
availability of bidirectional wireless communications in RF-denied environments.
Specifically, it will enable low-data-rate wireless links to be established
using portable, robust, low-power, and low-cost devices. Such links are expected
to have a multitude of applications in fields such as sensing and networking in
underwater or underground environments, near-surface geophysics, atmospheric
science, search and rescue operations, mining, and oil and gas
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of portable low-power ELF
transceivers would immediately enable communications within RF-denied
environments by enabling bidirectional low-data-rate wireless links with the
surface. While miniaturized and highly-sensitive ELF receivers are available,
ELF transmitters (typically dipole or loop antennas) are the key obstacles for
realizing such links since they are physically large and power-hungry. Thus,
this project focuses on miniaturized and power-efficient ELF transmitters that
enable bidirectional communications over short- and medium-range (up to about 1
km) wireless links in conductive media. In particular, the proposed research
will explore a fundamentally new all-mechanical approach to ELF transmitter
design that has the potential to enable efficient use of this region of the EM
spectrum. The major intellectual contributions of this project focus on
different aspects of this overall approach. They include: i) Proposing the
concept of distributed all-mechanical transmitters based on synchronization over
either wired or wireless networks and showing how it overcomes the key
limitations of existing ELF transmitter architectures; ii) Creating a
theoretical basis for the design of power-efficient wireless communications
using systems that have significant mechanical inertia, thus linking the
mathematics of information transfer over fading channels to the physics of the
mechanical devices; and iii) Laying the first theoretical groundwork for the
precise control of networked high-speed machines, which has the potential to
dramatically advance the current state of the art by seamlessly modeling complex
3-D (dimensional) machine parameter variations and their tight coupling with
high-speed machine vibrations and energy/power fluctuations within the
transmitter network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.