* 2104383
* Machine Learning–Enhanced Multiscale Modeling of Spatially Tailored Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shaoping Xiao, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 486,358.00

Spatially tailored materials are metal-ceramic composites consisting of two or
more different materials. The volume fraction of each material continuously
changes in space. Compared to traditional composites, these composites offer
advantages over traditional ones for they provide more opportunities to
designers to fashion their performance for the operating conditions and
environment. Since these composites have features spanning multiple length
scales, it is usually necessary to develop predictive models capable of
describing physical phenomena at different levels of resolution, e.g., at the
nanoscale as well as the microscale. This award supports the development of an
innovative multiscale method, enhanced by machine learning techniques and
supported by experimental data, to investigate the mechanics of spatially
tailored materials under mechanical and thermal loading. The proposed method
will accelerate the design of the next generation of metal-ceramic composites
for use in the automotive, aerospace, and biomedical industries. In addition,
the award will leverage university programs to support: (1) undergraduate
teaching and learning in data science and engineering; (2) recruitment of
female, underrepresented minority, and LGBTQ students; and 3) outreach to K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Current state-of-the-art practices for numerical
modeling of spatially tailored materials use the principles of micromechanics to
bridge the gap from the lower scales under consideration to the macroscale.
However, most methods cannot account for the molecular interfacial interactions
and the microstructure uncertainties, both of which must be considered to
accurately predict material responses at the higher length scales. And even when
these considerations are addressed, it results in the difficulty of explicitly
deriving effective material properties and constitutive or failure
relationships. This project utilizes data science techniques and machine
learning to overcome these challenges in the multiscale material modeling of a
spatially tailored titanium alloy-titanium diboride metal-ceramic material
system. The project will lead to the following general outcomes: (1) development
of a data-enabled approach in hierarchical multiscale modeling to link and
interface information (including uncertainties) across multiple length and time
scales; (2) development of an efficient way to generate homogenized microscale
models of heterogeneous composites that account for microstructure
uncertainties; (3) development of an adaptive machine learning framework that
updates with data accumulation; and (4) design of multiscale experiments under a
variety of thermomechanical loading conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.