* 2104797
* CRII: III: Graph Neural Networks: A Feature and Structure Learning Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Hongyang Gao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 175,000.00

Many data in the real world can be naturally represented by graphs, such as
social networks, citation networks, chemical compounds, and biological networks.
The graph structure is an effective way to express relationships among a
collection of items. Using graphs to represent these data, we can obtain an
advanced understanding of the complex data structures embedded in the raw data.
Graph mining using machine learning methods yields many exciting discoveries in
various fields. Existing graph deep learning methods, such as graph
convolutional networks (GNN), conduct local information aggregation with local
structural operations. They usually stack multiple graph convolutional layers to
enable a larger receptive field, which is straightforward but can result in
several issues, including over-fitting and over-smoothing. These issues are
critical to graph neural networks but are not well investigated. The objective
of this project is to develop advanced graph learning methods without going deep
and complex. This project also facilitates integrating graph learning algorithms
into existing curricula of Machine Learning courses at both undergraduate and
graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
focuses on how to enlarge receptive fields without going deep effectively. This
project develops a set of advanced convolution, pooling, and un-pooling
operations on graphs. The advanced graph convolution layer utilizes teleport
functions to select highly relevant nodes at the global scope. In this layer, a
teleport function computes relevance between the center node and other nodes
beyond the local neighborhood. The nodes with particular relevance are
teleported for the center node, enabling the center node to gather information
from a broader neighborhood. The new graph pooling layer uses an attention
operation to produce a better-connected coarsened graph with more graph topology
information. In particular, it leverages an attention operator to generate
ranking scores for node selection, capturing the graph connectivity information.
The proposed graph un-pooling layer utilizes an attention operator to initialize
restored nodes. Altogether, this project provides a systematic GNN study on
graph feature and structure learning and is expected to advance GNNs development
significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.