* 2104532
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: Developing Instructional Laboratories for Blockchain Security Applications
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jing Lei, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 06/30/2024
* USD 391,993.00

The increasing adoption of blockchain technology in a variety of sectors,
including cryptocurrency and healthcare systems, is resulting in a global
shortage of skilled professionals knowledgeable in blockchain security. To
address this urgent need to grow the workforce, the project team will develop
and evaluate instructional laboratory modules centered on the topic of
blockchain security applications. The project's outcome will be nine reusable
lab modules and teaching components that can readily be integrated into a range
of cybersecurity courses. The modules will also be packaged to allow for easy
and broad dissemination. The project team will provide tutorials for college and
university educators and engage in outreach at local museums, Hackathon events,
and professional organizations to reach K-12, IT professional, and public
audiences. In an effort to improve the representation of individuals that are
members of underrepresented groups in the next-generation blockchain security
workforce, the project team will organize an education workshop at Florida
Agricultural and Mechanical University, a Historically Black College and
University (HBCU). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop hands-on labs
at the intersection of blockchains and cybersecurity. Specific topics that will
be addressed include: blockchain and information security protocols; blockchain
and financial technologies security; blockchain application programming
interface (API) security; and blockchain and network security. The associated
educational research intends to address the extent to which two essential
learning objectives are facilitated by the labs: 1) students' ability to create
domain applications secured by the blockchains (blockchain for security); and 2)
students' ability to analyze and understand the security of blockchain systems
(blockchain by security). To address the first objective, Tasks 1 and 2 plan to
develop lab modules on blockchain applications in securing information security
infrastructures and financial technologies. To address the second objective,
Tasks 3 and 4 intend to develop labs for blockchain security at the levels of
API and underlying networks. In each lab, the project team will conduct
instructional design, development, and education evaluation activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy
Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and
privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program
aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan
and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing
social and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.