* 2104337
* CRII: CNS: With Uncertainty Comes Opportunity: Providing Best-Effort Edge Services with Uncertain and Limited Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Zheng Song, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2024
* USD 190,443.00

The goal of this project is to create a runtime system for providing best-effort
edge services. Different from clouds with manageable and redundant resources,
many edge environments are opportunistic and feature uncertain and limited
resources. As a result, edge services cannot guarantee Quality of Service (QoS)
for their clients, which is a critical obstacle of creating current and emerging
edge computing applications. Existing solutions fall short, as they optimize the
overall QoS by allocating bottleneck resources competed for by services. In
contrast, this project is based on the insight that the uncertainty of edge
environments also brings opportunity so the equivalent functions that do not
consume the same resources can satisfy the same service request. Hence, this
project will explore how to systematically improve QoS by dynamically
orchestrating equivalent functions that consume underutilized
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technologies developed during the course of
this project will accelerate large-scale applications of edge computing in
emerging domains like autonomous vehicles, smart homes, and Industry 4.0. A
particular objective is to make it possible to use any kinds of hardware devices
in edge computing environments. The software infrastructure developed for this
project will be used for instructional purposes to create new and enrich
existing courses on distributed systems and edge computing. Executed in the
Detroit Metropolitan area, this project provides an excellent opportunity for
outreach to local diverse communities, thus accelerating end-user adoption of
edge computing technologies and attracting underrepresented groups into
computing study and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.