* 2104600
* Approaches to Coastal Adaptation in the United States
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Anne Siders, Doeffinger, Tess
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 133,500.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. A.R. Siders
at the University of Delaware, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist to investigate coastal adaptation pathways in the United
States. Sustainable development along the United States’ coast is challenging
for several reasons, including continual weathering and climatic shocks. These
risks are expected to be exacerbated due to climate change. There are currently
a wide range of coastal adaptation responses being employed across the United
States. The purpose of this research is to develop a fundamental understanding
of the variation in adaptation responses that directly impact households, how
these responses were chosen, and also to determine whether the most vulnerable
members of communities are benefiting from these responses. The knowledge gained
from this research offers the ability to identify gaps in adaptation, track
progress, and aid in future decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
aims to generate novel techniques combining diagnostics, historical pathways,
and spatial statistics to evaluate adaptation pathways that have led to the
current levels and distribution of adaptation in the United States. This
research specifically investigates national, state, and local policies (e.g.
zoning restrictions) and infrastructure (e.g. seawalls) that can directly
influence households’ adaptation decisions, with three coastal communities in
the United States serving as case studies. This research is split into four
phases, starting with a short prepping period (Phase 1). Phase 2 utilizes a
diagnostic approach to generate a status assessment of coastal adaptation in the
three communities through the collection of information on adaptation measures
employed, socio-demographics, drivers, and characteristics of the built
environment. Phase 3 employs a historical pathways analysis to produce a
historical narrative and timeline for each community to highlight path
dependencies and critical junctures. Finally, Phase 4 assesses coastal
adaptation and equity by mapping adaptation measures versus demographic data. By
combining these methods, this research has the potential to enhance contextual
knowledge that can lead to an improvement in modeling abilities, and therein,
enhance decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.