* 2104723
* Engineering the design of self-assembling, shear-thinning pentapeptide hydrogels to promote neural cell growth and differentiation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Kyle Lampe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 372,379.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The brain is central to the
human experience, but society poorly understands many of the factors that impact
brain cell survival and growth. Hydrogel biomaterials can help address this
problem because they behave like human tissues, allowing researchers to model
healthy and diseased or injured tissue in a simplified lab setting and better
understand human health. While hydrogels can emulate a wide variety of tissues,
hydrogels that emulate brain tissue are useful to grow cells derived from the
brain. This proposal aims to make new hydrogels similar to human tissue because
they are composed of the same raw materials, built from natural amino acids
strung together in blocks that are simple and cheap to make. Hydrogels prepared
from these amino acid building blocks look and act like brain tissue with
behavior controlled by the choice of block and block pattern. The right amino
acid sequence may result in blocks that find each other and automatically
assemble into a 3-dimensional structure, like a designer microscopic city which
builds itself. These interchangeable blocks can come together in different
shapes, determining whether the hydrogel behaves more like a liquid or a solid,
as well as its suitability for growing cells. Hydrogel properties will be
studied in the lab as well as in computer simulations to create and test the
best possible block combinations. Given the versatility of blocks and ways in
which they assemble, this strategy is expected to result in a new family of
hydrogel materials that can automatically rebuild themselves after damage. The
hydrogels that best mimic brain tissue will be used to guide the behavior of
brain-derived cells and control cell growth. This research will impact education
by training students in biology, materials science, computer science,
engineering, and neuroscience through laboratory and curricular activities. An
outreach program centered on paid high school and college internships for
underprivileged youth will nurture interests in engineering, provide research
skills, and build experience in diverse student groups through research and
science communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integral to realizing functional peptide
biomaterials is an understanding of the molecular and macroscopic features that
govern assembly, morphology, and biological interactions. This research centers
on the rational design and investigation of a new family of peptides that
assemble under cytocompatible conditions into a robust extracellular matrix
(ECM) hydrogel with structure and bioactivity that drive cell fate. This project
seeks to develop a new family of short, rapidly gelling, self-healing peptides
that emulate a wide variety of tissues. Using short, 5-amino-acid sequences as
gelators simplifies synthesis and maximizes adaptability. These new peptides
will address existing peptide hydrogel deficiencies, namely 1) gelation
mechanisms that lead to poor survival of sensitive cells, like neurons and
neural stem cells, and 2) low mechanical stiffnesses. The proposed approach will
involve cytocompatible encapsulation of neural cells as a test bed. To improve
the design and discovery process, a computational framework will be integrated
with the experimental approach. This design strategy could transform
biomaterials development and address the challenges of characterizing the
dynamic processes that occur in biological matrices. Computational simulations
will provide understanding of peptide assembly and more efficiently identify and
predict peptide candidates that will cytocompatably assemble into 3D physical
hydrogels. The primary goal is to create, model, and characterize peptides that
gel under physiological conditions and drive neural stem cell differentiation.
Outcomes of this research project will include amino acid sequences conducive to
physiological gelation, an atomistic molecular dynamic model of peptide
assembly, and a compliant, dynamic matrix appropriate for neural cell culture.
Physiologically relevant hydrogels that gel on-demand will dramatically improve
the ease and efficacy of cell culture and study. This project will create a
comprehensive high school research internship program for socioeconomically
challenged students, and broaden their career and college opportunities. As part
of this project the PI will cross train PhD students, work-study college
students, and high school interns in biomaterials synthesis, molecular
simulations, stem cell biology, and neural tissue
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.