* 2104759
* Role of Organic Matrix Molecules in the Formation of Very High Magnesium Calcite
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Horacio Espinosa, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mineralized tissues are
sophisticated organic-inorganic composites that are assembled bottom-up and
exhibit hierarchical architecture. Highly evolved design enables features such
as high bone toughness at low weight, self-sharpening teeth, and continuous
adaptive remodeling/self-repair. The arrangement of the cellular components of
the sea urchin tooth allows continuous growth and regeneration, in response to
tooth wear and abrasion during feeding. From a materials perspective, the sea
urchin tooth is highly unusual in that it is the only known instance of very
high magnesium calcite (VHMC) in the columns that connect the primary and
secondary plates to each other. With up to 33% Mg, VHMC is far from equilibrium,
much harder than calcite, and cannot be made in the lab. The overarching goal of
this proposal is to elucidate the mechanism of formation of VHMC in the sea
urchin tooth. The PI previously isolated a set of four proline-alanine rich
acidic phosphoproteins (PARPs) that are unique to the tooth biomineral. The
central hypothesis of this proposal is that PARPs are involved in VHMC
formation. The main objective of the proposed work is to test this hypothesis by
a) mapping the distribution of PARPs in the tooth in relation to the columns
using immunohistochemistry; b) quantifying the impact of recombinant PARPs on
nucleation, growth, and final composition of crystalline calcium carbonate in
the presence of magnesium in vitro; and finally, by c) determining the impact of
knock down of the most promising candidate in vivo. Poised at the intersection
of molecular biology, materials science, and bioengineering, this research has
the potential to inform a wealth of new technologies, from bio-inspired and bio-
enabled materials to materials for carbon dioxide sequestration. The team will
leverage the interdisciplinary potential of this research to train high school,
undergraduate, masters and a graduate student from a broad range of backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activities address gaps in the understanding of how living organisms control
crystal growth processes, with the long-term objective to develop bio-inspired
and bio-enabled materials. The arrangement of the cellular components of the sea
urchin tooth allows continuous growth and regeneration, in response to tooth
wear and abrasion during feeding. An intriguing aspect of the tooth architecture
is the use of both high magnesium calcite in the plates (HMC, Ca1-xMgxCO3, where
x ~ 0.13) and very high magnesium calcite (VHMC, x~0.33) in the inter-plate
columns. While other mineralized tissues in the sea urchin are comprised of HMC,
VHMC is unique to the tooth. VHMC composition is far from equilibrium and there
is no known synthesis. The PI previously identified a set of proline-alanine
rich acidic phosphoproteins (PARPs) that are unique to the tooth biomineral. The
central hypothesis of this proposal is that PARPs are involved in VHMC
formation. To test this hypothesis, all 4 PARPs will be recombinantly expressed
in a system that will ensure appropriate post-translational modification
(phosphorylation). Antibodies will be raised against all recombinant PARPs to
determine, using immunohistochemistry, which of them, if any, co-localize with
the inter-plate columns, but not the plates. The two most promising candidates
will be chosen for in-vitro experiments to determine their impact on nucleation,
growth and composition of calcium carbonate in the presence of Mg. Both fully
and un-phosphorylated forms will be tested to establish the functional role of
phosphorylation. Finally, based on the in-vitro crystallization results, the
most promising candidate will be knocked down in the adult sea urchin (using in-
vivo morpholinos) and its effect on the composition of the inter-plate columns
determined. The results should provide a mechanistic basis for bioinspired
synthesis of VHMC, and how the sea urchin synthesizes calcite with a composition
very far from equilibrium, thereby improving the properties of the material, and
the performance of the tooth dramatically. Elucidating the mechanism of VHMC
formation will feed back into the fields of cell and development biology.
Complementary to the proposed research objectives, the team will engage
undergraduates, a masters and a graduate student in research, and host a high
school intern through Northwestern University's Science in Society
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.