* 2104365
* The plastidial MEP-pathway signature in mitochondrial structure and function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Katayoon Dehesh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 850,000.00

Mitochondria are known as the ‘power-house’ in both animal and plant cells. In
plant cells, mitochondria are the site of respiration where fuel derived from
photosynthesis in the chloroplasts is converted to energy currency. Mitochondria
can move within the cell, and upon encountering each other undergo fusion,
resulting in the merger of two mitochondria into a single larger mitochondrion.
Conversely, a single mitochondrion can divide into two distinct mitochondria via
fission. The balanced frequencies of fusion and fission determine the overall
morphology of the mitochondrial population, and are crucial for maintaining
mitochondrial functions such as respiratory capacity and response to stress
signals. This project will use genetic manipulations of a biochemical route (the
“MEP pathway”) used to respond to stress, in order to uncover how alteration of
a chloroplast’s metabolism affects the genes and proteins that determine the
shape and activity of mitochondria. The outcome of this research will determine
the potential signaling functions of chloroplasts through the MEP-pathway and
determine if chloroplasts affect mitochondria directly, or if the signal must
first travel through the cell nucleus in order to remodel mitochondrial shape
and function. These results could be used to help plants become more resistant
to parasites, and tolerant of growth in dry or other stressful areas. This
project will also provide laboratory training for undergraduate and graduate
students as well as postdoctoral fellows; and will expose high school students
to the study of plant biochemistry and its importance to the growth of plants
and role in food production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although both the mevalonic
acid pathway and MEP pathway synthesize plant isoprenoids, the MEP pathway is
indispensable to plant growth, which suggests that it has other functions.
Mutants in the MEP pathway give rise to cells with altered mitochondrial fission
and fusion rates leading to altered morphologies. This project will investigate
communication between chloroplast and mitochondria via the MEP-pathway through
two Aims: A) Alter specific steps of the MEP pathway and examine mitochondrial
morphology via biochemistry, genetics, and fluorescent and electron microscope
tomography; B) Use physiological, genetic, and transcriptomics techniques to
investigate which steps of mitochondrial morphogenesis are perturbed. This work
will provide fundamental insights into the molecular and biochemical links
required for functional coordination of two interdependent types of organelles
in plants, providing greater understanding of interorganellar communication in
all eukaryotic cells as well as understanding of biochemistry of plant
resistance to harsh conditions. In addition, the PI will bring local students
from five nearby underfunded high schools into the laboratory for yearlong
training. The PI as well as students and postdoctoral fellows in the laboratory
will also participate in organizing and judging local science
fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.