* 2104757
* Zero energy modes in vortex cores: Spectroscopy and Majorana carousel braiding
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Alexey Bezryadin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 354,181.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Quantum computers are expected to enable
transformative advances in information technology, quantum chemistry, secure
communications, material modeling, and in many other applications. Aluminum-
based superconducting qubits demonstrate promising characteristics as building
blocks for quantum computers. Yet, even with the recent impressive advances in
this field, building a fully functional and practically useful quantum computer
is still beyond reach, since existing qubits loose quantum information very
quickly. The problem can be solved if the theoretically predicted, so-called
non-Abelian excitations can be realized in solid-state nanoscale devices. Such
hypothetical non-Abelian excitations have a useful and very counterintuitive
property. Even though they are identical, if two of them exchange places, they
collectively evolve into new quantum states. This property can be used to
perform noise-proof quantum computation, which is protected from environmental
interference. The PI and the research team are developing nanoscale electronic
devices in which non-Abelian phenomena can be demonstrated. The approach is
motivated by recent theoretical results suggesting how these excitations can be
effectively isolated from perturbations caused the environment. The research
team uses traditional superconducting qubits, microwave technology, and quantum
tunneling contacts to perform energy measurements and to uncover the
hypothetical non-Abelian Majorana modes. A special Corbino disk geometry
exploits quantum mechanical behavior of vortices containing these exotic
excitations. This research offers modern physics training for graduate and
undergraduate students and provides extensive mentoring to the next generation
of scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;Many theoretical models have been suggested in which Majorana zero
modes are used for topologically protected quantum computation. Nevertheless,
their key property, namely the non-Abelian physics, has not yet been
demonstrated experimentally. The traditional approach to study Majorana modes is
to employ semiconductor nanowires coupled to superconductors. The present
project explores a different route. The PI and his team study Majorana modes in
the cores of superconducting vortices in topological superconductors. The goal
is to isolate Majorana modes from ordinary electronic states and to demonstrate
the hypothetical non-Abelian effects, which, if found, will help to solve key
problems of quantum information technology. The PI and the research team perform
microwave and tunneling experiments to measure the discrete spectrum of the
topological vortex cores. An important obstacle in such experiments is the large
number of low-energy non-topological excitations present within vortices. Such
electrons can mix with the Majorana modes, making non-Abelian physics
undetectable. The research group uses recent theoretical models to design and
study novel devices in which the vortex is trapped within a superconducting
sample having a circular hole with a topological superconductor or a topological
insulator at the bottom. In such devices, the Majorana energy gap is predicted
to be sufficiently large to isolate the Majorana modes from non-topological
excitations. The research team is also developing the next generation of such
devices, in which vortices can move following circular trajectories in Corbino-
geometry devices. Such circular motion is used to exchange positions of Majorana
modes and to induce nontrivial changes in the quantum state of the system. The
Majorana modes are probed and controlled using ordinary
qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.