* 2104167
* RUI: DMR: Bespoke low-dimensional magnets:  from chiral chains to skyrmion candidates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jamie Manson, Eastern Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 395,482.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program and the Condensed Matter Physics Program in the
Division of Materials Research, atoms arranged in unusual architectures such as
one-dimensional (1D) spiral or zig-zag chains or two-dimensional (2D) planes are
synthesized using chemical methods. Prof. Manson studies the resulting crystals
by a variety of measurement techniques to assess their magnetic properties and
collaborates with theorists to aid their understanding of these properties or
develop new theories as appropriate. Because he uses different metal atoms with
varying numbers of electrons during the synthesis new magnetic phases emerge,
including skyrmions. A skyrmion can be likened to a vortex of electrons with
precise alignments that depend on several factors, factors that Prof. Manson and
his team study to learn more about. This is the first time this phenomenon is
produced in molecular materials. Such materials have the potential to
revolutionize existing technologies, including spintronics and data storage.
Through this project the principal investigator provides a diverse and inclusive
group of undergraduate researchers with ample opportunities to participate in
experiments; meet and interact with collaborators; assist in data analysis and
prepare manuscripts for publication; help shape future research directions; and
present their results at conferences and workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program and the Condensed Matter
Physics Program in the Division of Materials Research, Prof. Manson examines the
excitations in 1D chains and 2D layers that feature staggered/alternating and
chiral topologies as well as those that generally lack inversion centers. Key to
this is the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction which principal investigator
Manson posits it a tunable parameter. This tunability is expected to lead to
great opportunity to discover novel phases including skyrmion candidates, a
phenomenon not yet realized in molecular systems. These materials are
synthesized as crystals in protic or aprotic solvents using combinations of
paramagnetic transition metal ions and carefully chosen anions and organic
ligands. These crystals are subjected to detailed experimental study
complemented by theory to aid our understanding of the underlying physics. It is
anticipated that these concepts are transferable and relevant to the single-
molecule magnets and strongly-correlated electron communities. Additionally, the
project brings together a wide-ranging materials design and discovery effort as
well as numerous characterization methods to foster national and international
collaboration, coalescing the resources of the best facilities, equipment, and
expertise available in the field, as well as provide unique opportunities for
undergraduate research, training and education. At the core is an all-inclusive
research team focused on sample preparation, optical characterization and X-ray
structure determinations. EWU students have ample opportunities to participate
in experiments; meet and interact with collaborators; assist in data analysis
and prepare manuscripts for publication; help shape future research directions;
and present their results at conferences and workshops. For this project Prof.
Manson has established a diverse undergraduate research group that consists
mostly of women, a group largely underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.