* 2104242
* Direct Thermodynamic Quantification of Single-strand DNA Binding Proteins Cooperativities and Conformations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Trakselis, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 426,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Michael A. Trakselis from Baylor University to study how
proteins bind to single-stranded DNAs. The cell’s genetic information is stored
in DNA, but in order to read this information, this double helical molecule must
be unwound and stabilized with the help of single-strand DNA binding proteins
(SSBs). This project uses a method known as native mass spectrometry (nMS) to
very accurately determine the size of single-stranded DNAs bound by SSBs, which
then shows whether SSBs bind in a cooperative manner when assembling into such
DNA complexes. When combined with results from other biophysical methods, these
studies will help elucidate the mechanisms by which SSBs from different
organisms bind to single-stranded DNAs and potentially change their shapes.
Fundamental knowledge gained from this project is expected provide a better
understanding for how the information in DNA is duplicated and repaired when
errors occur. In addition, the successful use of nMS to study SSB binding to
DNAs will help develop the method for its application to study the assembly of
other proteins into biologically important functional complexes, including how
the binding of one component stimulates the binding of the next in a cooperative
manner. This project includes scientific outreach programs designed to encourage
local elementary school students to explore the wonders of nucleic acid science
through "DNA Days", to engage the community though Science Days at local
Farmer’s markets, and to encourage local high school students to pursue science
in college through “Present Your PhD” presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, single-stranded binding proteins (SSBs) from diverse sources will
be used to probe and quantify the thermodynamics and conformations of
cooperative binding through advanced MS and fluorescence approaches. SSBs exist
in both monomeric form and oligomeric complexes; have varied binding modes
including from non-cooperative to strongly cooperative, and upon binding, have
the ability to alter DNA conformation. The thermodynamic and structural
properties of some SSBs have been thoroughly characterized, while the binding
properties of other SSBs are more contradictory and less well-characterized.
This project will utilize diverse classes of SSBs to validate the application of
nMS methods on well-defined systems, reveal binding modes and properties for
other novel SSBs, and provide a framework for others to directly quantify free
energies of binding and to structurally characterize SSBs in macromolecular
assemblies. The resulting data, methods, and findings will be broadly
distributed within the scientific community through multiple outlets and are
expected to provide thermodynamic insight into cooperativity of SSB
binding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.