* 2104427
* Synthesis and Spectroscopy of Thin Film Nickelate Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Kyle Shen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 290,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The electronic properties of materials are
critical to modern civilization and society, enabling technologies such as
telecommunications, computing, and information storage and processing. Among
these properties, superconductivity is particularly promising for applications
in quantum information processing and communication, medical imaging, energy
storage and transport, and electronics. The possibility to discover and engineer
new superconductors with superior properties, such as higher operating
temperatures or larger current densities, is one of the frontiers of modern
physics. The objective of this project is to provide a more coherent and global
understanding of the long-standing puzzle of high-temperature superconductivity
through the investigation of a newly discovered but still enigmatic family of
superconductors based on nickel oxides and comparing these materials to the
closely related and more well-established family of copper oxide high-
temperature superconductors. By achieving a better understanding of these nickel
oxide superconductors and comparing their properties with their copper oxide
cousins, this project could unlock the key ingredients for discovering higher
temperature superconductors. Finally, this project provides crucial training to
young scientists in materials synthesis and characterization, outreach
activities, and the samples fabricated in these studies supports several
scientific collaborations across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Layered nickelates with a Ni 1+ valence have long been
proposed as close electronic analogues to the cuprates and another potential
family of high temperature superconductors. The recent discovery of
superconductivity at 15 K in doped rare earth nickelates in the infinite layer
structure has ignited intense interest in these materials, but there are many
open questions about these compounds, including the nature of the
superconductivity, their underlying electronic structure, and which aspects are
similar or different from the cuprates. The objectives of this project are to
synthesize and investigate thin films of infinite layer nickelates using a
combination of oxide molecular beam epitaxy and angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy to address fundamental questions about the nickelates, including
the momentum-dependence of the superconducting gap, the presence and nature of a
pseudogap, the electronic structure of the parent compounds, and the normal
state electronic structure. The research proposed here consists of two primary
stages, specifically the synthesis of infinite-layer nickelate thin films,
beginning with oxide MBE synthesis of precursor perovskite nickelates, followed
by reduction to achieve the infinite layer structure. Next, angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy addresses crucial questions about these nickelate
superconductors, including the nature of the superconducting order parameter,
the electronic structure of the parent compound, the evolution of the electronic
structure with hole doping into the superconducting state, and the possible
existence of a pseudogap. The samples synthesized through this project support a
wide number of external collaborations, including optical spectroscopy and
magnetic imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.