* 2104520
* CRII: SaTC: Physical Side-Channel Attacks in Biometric System
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Nima Karimian, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 11/30/2022
* USD 174,428.00

Biometric traits are permanent and difficult to revoke if compromised, unlike
keys or passwords. By requiring the storage of biometric trait measurements
(templates) for subjects, biometric systems are vulnerable to violation of user
privacy. Unprotected storage of biometric reference data poses severe privacy
threats such as identity theft. Despite recent research in the security of
biometric systems, research on physical side-channel attacks in biometric
systems are still nascent, especially when compared to cryptographic and
information technologies. Although side-channel attacks are well-developed
techniques in the information technology security and cryptography fields, they
have been understudied in the context of biometric systems. The project’s novel
aspects are developing methodologies such as metrics, deep learning algorithms,
protocols, and tools for physical side-channel attacks and countermeasures in
biometric systems. This project intends to be a first step towards bridging the
knowledge gap between seemingly isolated research field on hardware security and
biometric security. The project's broader significance and importance are
improvement of security and privacy of biometric systems against physical side
channel attacks followed by protection schemes and involvement in the ongoing
biometric evaluation and standardization efforts led by the National Institute
of Standards and Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project offers insights
for future biometric designers on how to efficiently take advantage of physical
side-channel attack frameworks to recognize vulnerabilities in biometric
systems. The project outcomes advance both attack (physical side-channel) and
defense mechanism (domain-specific architecture) in biometric systems. The
biometric protection scheme is evaluated according to International Organization
for Standardization and the International Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC)
Standard 24745. Due to the wide adoption of biometric systems in society, this
project can have a positive impact on a broad range of activities involving
identity cards, border identity checkpoints, and patient authentication in
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.