* 2104856
* GOALI: CAS: Targeted Design of Blocky Poly(Ether Ether Ketone) Copolymers for Enhanced Interfacial Interactions in Blends and Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert Moore, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 430,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current demand for enhanced
material properties has often followed a bottom-up approach to synthesize new
polymers using complex chemical procedures that generally just expands that vast
array of long-lasting plastics in the environment. A more sustainable approach
is to use existing materials in new ways. For example, the high cost of
poly(ether ether ketone) (PEEK) and its inherent stability strongly favor end-
of-use recycling and/or upcycling as opposed to landfilling. In this project,
the widely valued approach of compatibilizing polymers in blends to address the
critical economic and environmental sustainability needs of our society will be
accomplished by performing simple chemical modifications on existing feedstocks
of PEEK. Specifically, a new physical approach will be used to create blocky
copolymers that are known to be beneficial in polymer blends by selectively
modifying specific sequences of units along the chains of commercially available
polymers. The blocky PEEK polymers will be targeted toward new blends of PEEK
with other valuable polymers as a means to eliminate waste and upcycle PEEK to
new materials with synergistic enhancements in properties. These same polymers
will also be used to facilitate strong bonds between PEEK and solid fillers in
the formation of new composites with enhanced mechanical properties. With
respect to the grand challenges facing our society, this project will provide
cost-effective, environmentally friendly, readily available materials
alternatives needed to meet critical demands for advanced materials in a wide
range of commercially relevant technologies. The nature of research activities
in this project, involving close collaboration between academic and industrial
laboratories, will provide broadly interdisciplinary training to a diverse
community of researchers and students, including underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The widespread commercial application of block
copolymers as blend compatibilizers and fiber sizings is limited by the
expensive and rigorous polymerization methods needed to control the sequence of
comonomers in the form of discrete blocks. As a transformative approach, the PIs
propose a facile, physical polymer chemistry alternative to yield controlled
blocky microstructures in poly(ether ether ketone) (PEEK) via post-
polymerization functionalizations in a heterogeneous, semi-crystalline, gel
state. The fundamental focus of this project will be on pushing the limits of
blockiness that is achievable with this new process, expanding the synthetic
toolbox of functionalization chemistries for targeted interfacial
interactions/reactions, and understanding the molecular-level impact of blocky
functionalization on phase behavior and interfacial interactions in high-
performance polymer blends and composites. This academic-industrial
collaboration is poised to address the grand challenge of forming interfacially
active copolymers for PEEK-based blends and composites, with compatibilization
efficiencies rivaling that observed with conventional segmented block
copolymers. The overall fundamental goal of this project is to understand the
role of the compatibilizer microstructure (blocky vs. random) on interfacial
properties in multiphase systems. The interdisciplinary nature of research
activities in this project, ranging from pure chemistry, materials
recyclability, to macromolecular engineering, will provide a plethora of
educational opportunities to a diverse community of citizens and researchers
eager to contribute to our nationâ€™s leadership in ensuring a healthier, more
sustainable global society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.