* 2104770
* Collaborative research: Floquet-Bloch topological states in quantum Hall systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Paola Barbara, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 269,769.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to investigate new
states of matter induced by light. The project studies the occurrence of these
states and their manipulation under continuous light illumination, using
atomically thin materials that can be grown with scalable processes, thereby
broadening their potential applications for novel devices. The research team
expects a strong educational impact of the project: In addition to working on
cutting-edge research in condensed matter physics in the PIs’ labs, graduate
students are exposed to a world-class facility like the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory. The lead university in the project is a Hispanic Serving
&lt;br/&gt;Institution, with students from local Native American tribes,
providing unique opportunities for outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;A large number of crystal
structures have been predicted to host novel states of matter that are robust
due to their topological nature, linking them to a number, the Chern number,
which is a bulk invariant, unaffected by defects or sample shape. As a result,
the bulk of these materials is insulating and the surface is conducting, with an
integer number of counter-propagating, spin-polarized, resistance-free, edge
current modes holding promise for applications in topological low-loss
electronics and spintronics. This project goes beyond the crystal-structure-
defined topological materials and addresses the possibility of a topological
state of matter being induced in a material that does not have such edge states
and is topologically trivial. Recent theories predict that light can act as a
topological switch to induce topologically protected Floquet-Bloch edge states
in some atomically thin topologically trivial materials. This project studies
the generation of Floquet-Bloch edge states by driving two-dimensional materials
away from equilibrium with steady-state illumination, thereby inducing
topological states “on demand”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.