* 2104882
* CNS Core: Small: Towards Internet-scale Permissioned Blockchain Infrastructure for the Mobile Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Boon Thau Loo, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The project centers around Saguaro, a hierarchical permissioned blockchain
system designed specifically for wide area networks with mobile nodes. Saguaro
explores infrastructural design and systems models that are essential for
realizing an Internet-scale hierarchical blockchain design compatible with
modern 5G networks and beyond. Saguaro aims to provide a suite of consensus
protocols to process transactions within and across domains with nodes that
might follow different failure models. Saguaro will be topology-aware and will
leverage the hierarchical structure of Internet-scale mobile networks to
establish consensus on cross-domain transactions efficiently. To establish
delay-tolerant mobile consensus, the project will explore novel consensus
protocols that rely on communication between edge servers of local and remote
domains to share a compressed version of the node's history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5G's low latency, ultra-high reliability, and device to
device communication, together with blockchains' transparency, immutability,
provenance, and authenticity, reflect the immense potential of running a new
generation of real-time data transactional applications on the mobile Internet.
Saguaro will unlock the potential of a hierarchical permissioned blockchain
designed specifically for edge and fog computing environments, targeting use
cases ranging from mobile delay-tolerant micropayments in development countries,
accountable edge applications and accountable cloud infrastructures. An
affordable online for-credit master's course in Blockchain combining transaction
processing and cryptography will be delivered at-scale, aimed at increasing
accessibility of extremely high quality computer science education to
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.