* 2104950
* Hydrosocial territories of climate governance: an interdisciplinary examination of the Indigenous-hydropower nexus
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Emily Hite, Hite, Emily B
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 133,500.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was provided as part of
NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
(SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Denielle Perry at Northern Arizona
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the contested nature of Indigenous peoples and
hydropower development as they converge through the context of climate
discourse. This study is imperative given the dominant role hydropower now plays
as a global climate mitigation strategy and the cascading social-ecological
impacts that hydropower projects have on Indigenous peoples, their lands, and
cultures. This project aims to contribute a more nuanced understanding of this
Indigenous-hydropower nexus and more broadly, offer a more complete perspective
of decision-making processes within multi-scaler climate
governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this postdoctoral research
project engages scholarship on imaginaries, space/place, and hydrosocial
territories to answer the following question: What are the dynamic interactions
and feedbacks between Indigenous imaginaries, climate change discourse, and
hydropower development? To address this question, the project employs mixed-
methods, ethnographic research at climate and hydropower conferences, as well as
in the Western United States where proposed hydropower projects threaten
Indigenous communities. Methods for data collection include interviews, focus
groups, participant observation, and policy research. The results of this study
will be used to directly inform practical suggestions for policy changes to
develop more equitable climate mitigation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.