* 2104662
* Normalized Betti Numbers, Non-Positive Curvature, and the Singer Conjecture
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Luca Fabrizio Di Cerbo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 205,925.00

Differential geometry is a broad and active subject that plays a crucial role in
modern mathematics, theoretical physics, and computer science. It studies spaces
called differentiable manifolds that when zoomed in look like pieces of the
familiar Euclidean space, and that strikingly are the correct model for many of
our physical theories such as General Relativity and String Theory. In modern
differential geometry, the so-called Singer conjecture predicts a fascinating
connection between the geometry and topology of such spaces in the presence of
non-positive curvature. A principal objective of the funded research will be to
build a multidisciplinary study of such a problem, and to explore its
connections with other important problems in the field such as Yau's question on
normalized Betti numbers and the Hopf problem. The goal of this proposal will be
not only to build a comprehensive program towards the solution of these
problems, but also to propose extensions of such questions, to clarify their
interdependence, and to bridge a gap with closely related problems in
differential geometry, complex algebraic geometry, and geometric topology.
Moreover, progress in these areas could have significant repercussions outside
of geometry. Indeed, these questions are intimately connected to problems in
partial differential equations, geometric group theory, as well to areas of
mathematical theoretical physics. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
trained through their participation in the proposed activities, and the PI will
continue to organize seminars and conferences and to participate in outreach
efforts targeting students who have experienced reduced access to
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project
addresses the study of normalized Betti numbers and L2-Betti numbers on non-
positively curved spaces with geometric analysis techniques and Hodge theory. In
2017, the PI together with Mark Stern developed the theory of Price inequalities
for harmonic forms on Riemannian manifolds. The PI will explore and elucidate
the connections between the theory of Price inequalities for harmonic forms and
the Singer conjecture for compact manifolds. The PI will also study non-compact
finite volume negatively curved spaces with Price inequalities, and he will
apply these techniques to higher dimensional aspherical Dehn filled manifolds,
higher graph manifolds, and non-positively curved toroidal compactifications.
Also, he will study the cohomology of sequences of negatively curved Riemannian
manifolds which converge, in the sense of Benjamini and Schramm, to their
Riemannian universal cover. Finally, in the Kaehler setting the PI will focus
his research on smooth irregular varieties. This will yield extensions of the
original conjecture of Singer outside the class of aspherical manifolds, and it
will also open new avenues of research related to Yau's question on normalized
Betti numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.