* 2104348
* Collaborative Research: Algebraic K-Theory, Arithmetic, and Equivariant Stable Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Mandell, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2024
* USD 203,000.00

Algebraic topology began as the study of those algebraic invariants of geometric
objects that are preserved under certain smooth deformations. Gradually, it was
realized that the algebraic invariants, called cohomology theories, could
themselves be represented by geometric objects known as spectra. A central
triumph of modern homotopy theory has been the construction of categories of
ring spectra that are suitable for performing constructions analogous to those
of classical algebra. This has proved fruitful by providing invariants, which
shed new light on old questions. In addition, it has raised new questions that
have unexpected connections to other areas of mathematics and physics. This
project works in the setting of an invariant called algebraic K-theory and
related theories. The project studies applications of these theories to a broad
range of questions in number theory, algebraic geometry, and geometric topology,
as well as algebraic topology itself. The award provides support for students
who will be engaged in parts of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
funds a broad research program aimed at applying recent work of the PIs on
algebraic K-theory, trace methods, and equivariant stable homotopy theory to
study a wide variety of problems in homotopy theory. Prior work of the PIs
studied the algebraic K-theory of the sphere spectrum and the fiber of the
cyclotomic trace for algebraic number rings. The current project expands the
investigation to the fiber of the cyclotomic trace on more general rings over
algebraic p-integers in terms of Tate-Poitou duality and a related K-theory
question more generally for other kinds of Artin duality. The project explores a
connection between the geometric Soule embedding and the Kummer-Vandiver
conjecture discovered in the PIs' prior work. The PIs' prior work also gives a
splitting that is consistent with and gives evidence for the existence of
p-adically interpolated Adams operations on the algebraic K-theory at least in
the context of regular rings. The project investigates specific conjectures and
approaches to this problem. The project advances a new approach to the the
Hatcher-Waldhausen map that would have implications in geometric, differential,
and symplectic topology. The project proposes a construction of multiplicative
norm maps in equivariant stable homotopy theory for positive dimensional compact
Lie groups. This requires a new foundation for non-equivariant factorization
homology and holds the promise of constructing a genuine equivariant
factorization homology theory for positive dimensional compact Lie groups. The
project includes a collaboration of the PIs with Basterra, Hill, and Lawson to
study equivariant TAQ as part of a broader program to develop the foundations
for equivariant derived algebraic geometry. If successful, this program will
provide an organizing principle for phenomenological data coming from work on
topological modular forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.