* 2104346
* Mapping Class Group and Fiber Bundles
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bena Tshishiku, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 322,138.00

This project is concerned with the study of spaces (manifolds), especially in
dimensions 2, 3, and 4. In the study of these objects, a fundamental role is
played by the mapping class group, which captures the symmetries of a space and
encodes gluing data for building new spaces, such as fiber bundles. The study of
mapping class groups is a meeting ground for many areas including geometric
group theory, dynamics, homotopy theory, algebraic geometry, and mathematical
physics. This project focuses on using mapping class groups to understand
geometric properties of fiber bundles. The project provides research training
opportunities for graduate students and includes organizing the Brown-Yale
Geometry and Topology Conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three
main objectives. (1) Find new examples of non-flat bundles, especially surface
bundles whose base is low-dimensional. Research in this direction will increase
our understanding of the dynamics of surface homeomorphisms, the algebra of
mapping class groups, and their relation. (2) Establish new connections between
the dynamical properties of a pseudo-Anosov surface homeomorphism and the
(non)arithmeticity of the associated hyperbolic mapping torus, thereby building
on work of Thurston and Bowditch-Maclachlan-Reid. (3) Provide new examples of
convex-cocompact subgroups of the mapping class group. This work is aimed at a
conjecture of Farb-Mosher regarding purely pseudo-Anosov subgroups of mapping
class groups, and it also has connections to 3-manifold topology. The project
will also support the advising of students and the organization of a
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.