* 2104694
* Exploring room temperature dynamic covalent bonds in adaptive materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Stuart Rowan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2025
* USD 622,276.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Polymers/plastics play a
critical role in almost every aspect of our daily life. Generally, most plastics
in everyday use are passive, that is, designed for a single purpose (e.g., food
containers, plastic bags, or adhesives) and once used these plastics are thrown
away and impact the environment. This project is focused on developing a class
of adaptive polymers that have the ability to heal or change shape on demand. In
addition, these materials have the ability to be reprocessed after use, and by
controlling the temperature and time employed during reprocessing it is possible
to tailor their physical properties (e.g., stiffness, elasticity, temperature
response). The ability to precisely retool the material properties opens the
door to targeting materials that can be easily and systematically changed by
processing, which in turn expands the potential applications areas that they can
be used for. The research is a mix of different disciplines within the polymer
area, from chemistry to polymer processing and mechanical characterization.
Importantly, this broad research approach provides students (at all levels) with
wide-ranging educational experiences covering this swath of topics. Graduate
students will participate in a two-year outreach training program to develop and
refine their abilities to engage and effectively communicate with the general
public. Using this training they will participate in a series of outreach
events, including Junior Science Caf√©s, the No Small Matter Molecular
Engineering Fair, as well as a number of programs aimed at outreach to students
from local Chicago public schools. These outreach activities, in conjunction
with additional integrated high-school and undergraduate research opportunities,
are designed to increase the fraction of underrepresented minorities in science
and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent work by the Rowan group has shown that room
temperature dynamic thia-Michael (tM) chemistry (based on
benzalcyanoacetate/amide Michael acceptors) can be used to access mechanically
robust polymer networks through a process coined dynamic reaction-induced phase
separation (DRIPS). These phase separated dynamic materials exhibit properties
such as healing, shape memory, and reversible adhesion. Furthermore, the
exchange kinetics and thermodynamics of tM reactions can be systematically
altered by the electronic nature of the tM acceptor, allowing an investigation
of how the dynamic exchange properties impact both the phase-separated
morphology and the overall materials properties of the network. The planned
research investigates the manipulation of dynamic tM materials through annealing
conditions, light exposure, and cross-reactivity with additional dynamic bonding
systems. In addition, the phase separated morphology (and therefore mechanical
properties) of these materials can be directly manipulated through thermal
processing conditions (cooling rates, annealing steps, etc.). As such, the first
goal of this work is aimed at developing fundamental structure / processing /
morphology / property relationships in this class of adaptive materials. The
second goal of this work is to develop photo-responsive dynamic tM bonds by
taking advantage of the inherent E/Z isomerism of the benzalcyanoacetate/amide
Michael acceptor structure, to give access to a new class of photo-activated
dynamic materials. Finally, a new program will be initiated aimed at using a
Systems Polymer Science approach (inspired by systems chemistry) to functional
polymer design with the goal of accessing pluripotent polymers, namely polymer
systems whose properties can be significantly altered upon exposure to chemical
or environmental cues allowing them to be used in a wide variety of
applications. To do this, the PI will investigate the potential of incorporating
multiple communicating dynamic reaction cycles into polymer
networks.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.