* 2104839
* Lattice instability and room temperature hyper-diffusion in metastable phase-transforming alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Ji Ma, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2025
* USD 431,993.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys (SMAs) are metals
that can return to a pre-programmed shape upon heating. This ability, which is
driven by a reversible change in the crystal structure, makes them capable
candidates for morphing aircrafts, deployable medical implants, and solid-state
actuators. Beyond the unique mechanical response, atoms in some SMAs
inexplicably move up 10 billion times faster near room temperature than
predicted by current diffusion models. As a result, the alloy spontaneously
grows stronger but also less ductile over a period of weeks to years when left
undisturbed at room temperature. This project proposes a new theory for this
unexplained behavior based on locally weakened bonding between atoms caused by
instabilities of the crystal structure, which lowers the energy required for
atomic motion along certain directions within the crystal. The award supports a
theory-driven experimental approach that augments the fundamental understanding
of diffusion in crystalline solids. Broader impacts of the project include
research experience for undergraduate students, K-12 students, and especially
those from underrepresented minorities and backgrounds, community outreach
through contribution to science and technology exhibitions and makerspaces, and
a “living sculpture” artistic project using SMA technology in collaboration with
the school of design and architecture. Fundamental understanding gained from the
project could lead to a new class of programmable materials whose properties
change controllably with time over the course of months to
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to identify the origins of ultra-fast low-temperature diffusion observed
in some shape memory alloys (SMAs), which cannot be explained with current
diffusion models. The knowledge gained will establish the basic understanding
for a new mode of enhanced diffusion in crystalline solids based on phase
instability and lattice softening. This work proposes a hypothesis based on
reduction of activation energy of vacancy-based diffusion due to orientation-
dependent lattice softening of the unstable austenite. The hypothesis will be
tested experimentally in a single crystal model through inelastic x-ray
scattering and electron microscopy. It will also explain how rapid room-
temperature nucleation and coarsening of precipitates can be possible in some
alloys despite being far from their melting points. At the basic science level,
the project yields information on the phonon dispersion relations in beta-
titanium shape memory alloys, and identifies soft phonon modes and their
relationships with both phase transformation and abnormal diffusion at room
temperature. At an applied science and engineering level, the proposed work will
clarify the origins of the room temperature aging effect in SMAs and identify
strategies by which such instability can be eliminated. From an education and
outreach perspective, the project will engage students at the intersection of
science and the arts through a living sculpture project that utilizes the shape-
changing characteristics of SMAs, and introduce advanced materials to designers
and architects as a new set of tools in their toolbox.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.