* 2104554
* Perfecting Complex Assemblies of Covalent and Supramolecular Polymers via Biological Principles
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Virgil Percec, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2025
* USD 760,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological macromolecules
such as proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates and their conjugates to lipids
are the most common building blocks produced by nature. Their properties are
determined by a perfect arrangement of their atoms in their structure and in
their complex assemblies. Even though they are pervasively used in our daily
lives and in many health, defense and other technological applications,
synthetic polymers are not able to match the properties of metals and biological
macromolecules. This research program aims to use biological principles in the
construction of polymers and their complex assemblies to increase the level of
structural precision of synthetic polymers to that of metals and natural
macromolecules and expand their applications in daily life to the precision and
sophistication encountered in biological systems. The project involves design,
synthesis, and characterization of macromolecules to a variety of complex
assemblies, followed by study of their structure and properties. This project
will provide interdisciplinary education for high school, undergraduate,
graduate students and postdocs, including minorities, at the interface of
disciplines including organic, polymer, supramolecular synthesis, catalysis,
physics, biology, synthetic biology, nanoscience, nanomedicine, and
supercomputing. Group members will work in the laboratories of the PI and
colleagues at Penn, collaborated with scientists in the US and abroad, and
interact with industry. The principles and lessons learned from this project
will be applicable to scientific, industrial and societal complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex assemblies generated from metal atoms and from
large biological macromolecules are strikingly dissimilar as concepts but
identical in their extraordinary level of structural perfection and functions.
Synthetic covalent and supramolecular polymers have statistical chain length
distribution, chirality, composition and sequence. Therefore, they cannot
provide the level of structural perfection and properties of inorganic and
biological assemblies. This project will use monodisperse, homochiral and
sequence-defined components to elucidate principles required to produce
noncovalent-supramolecular and covalent polymers that will self-organize into
complex assemblies exhibiting the precision of inorganic and biological
assemblies. The following topics will be investigated: (1) The principles of
self-organization of Frank-Kasper phases will be elucidated; these are seen in
metals, metal alloys, some gases, lipids and even in some viruses and recently
also in narrow molecular-weight-distribution polymers, monodisperse polymer
components, and supramolecular polymers. Together with their supramolecular
orientational memory Frank-Kasper phases will provide a first access to
biological precision. (2) The generality of the cogwheel double-helix, hat-shape
deracemizing and “rigid” solid-angle tobacco mosaic virus-like supramolecular
helical polymerizations accompanied by deracemization will be investigated and
elucidated. They will provide homochiral assemblies, of biological precision and
even higher, containing sequence-defined and monodisperse components obtained by
deracemization. (3) The scope and limitations of self-interrupted living
polymerization for the synthesis of monodisperse biological-like polymers by
non-iterative methods will be investigated and elucidated. Alternative
methodologies for the synthesis of monodisperse polymers will also be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.