* 2104988
* Geometry of Surfaces and Four-Dimensional Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Hung Tran, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 211,917.00

The goal of this project is to explore critical points of natural geometric
functionals, particularly in the fields of minimal surfaces with boundaries and
four-dimensional manifolds. These concepts arise naturally such as when one dips
a wireframe into a soap solution, forming a soap film, which is an example of a
minimal surface. Similarly, the world we are living in can be modeled as a four-
dimensional manifold with three spatial and one time directions. Thus,
advancements in this area will have applications in physics, biology, and
applied sciences. As a consequence, the project's objective is to advance
knowledge by exploring the following research directions. The project also
includes mentoring of students (at both the undergraduate and graduate levels)
and the organization of a mini-school aimed at broadening participation of
under-represented minorities in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
research direction in this project aims to study stationary surfaces with
boundaries, examining the first and second variations to draw out classification
and uniqueness results. In particular, motivated by Lawson and Willmore's
conjectures for minimal surfaces in a sphere, the PI will conduct a parallel
study for free boundary minimal surfaces in a ball. By introducing creative
ideas (Jacobi-Steklov eigenvalue, interpreting constraints as linear
functionals), the PI will develop an approach that gives a framework for further
investigations. The second thrust studies the connection between the geometry
and topology of a four-dimensional manifold. The PI aims to classify these
manifolds under natural conditions, particularly resolving a differentiable
sphere conjecture of the second kind and providing insights on one of Hopf's
conjectures and a folklore conjecture about Einstein metrics. The guiding
principle is that the Hodge star operator gives rise to several elliptic
identities in dimension four. The project also includes several mentoring
activities as well as impactful activities aimed at broadening participation of
under-represented minorities in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.