* 2104783
* Deconstructing and Reconstructing Oyster Cement to Create Inorganic Adhesives
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Wilker, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 482,034.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oyster reefs are one of the most
dominant factors for keeping coastal environments healthy. These cemented
structures, often kilometers long, absorb storm surge energy, filter water, and
hold silt in place. Recent insights are showing that oysters construct their
reef communities with a specialized adhesive (or “cement”) whose composition is
markedly different from all commercial and other biological adhesives. Given its
unique composition and its ability to work in wet environments, oyster cement
presents a different and largely unexplored view on what adhesives can be.
Efforts planned for the current project will help to understand the nature of
oyster cement and how this technology may be applied to create unique, new
adhesives. Such information will be adapted here to test the ability of new
cements to bond bone, which has a somewhat analogous composition and has been
difficult to adhere strongly. The interdisciplinary nature of these efforts will
help to advance several fields including marine biology, biochemistry, and
materials engineering. Outreach activities include working with high school
students for laboratory modules in the Women in Engineering Program at Purdue
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oyster reefs are one of the most dominant
factors for keeping coastal environments healthy. These cemented structures,
often kilometers long, absorb storm surge energy, filter water, and hold silt in
place. Recent insights are showing that oysters construct their reef communities
with an adhesive (or “cement”) that is predominantly made of inorganic calcium
carbonate and a minority of protein. Such a composition stands in stark contrast
to all commercial and other biological adhesives, which are made from organic
polymers, polysaccharides, or proteins. Experiments described herein begin by
identifying the proteins of oyster cement (Aim #1A). Expression of the
identified proteins (Aim #1B) will then be used to make protein-inorganic
formulations for understanding how the interplay between organics and inorganics
generates adhesion (Aim #2). These structure-function studies will help to
illustrate how a material with such inorganic content can exhibit high strength
adhesion. This knowledge will then be used to test a hypothesis stating that
bonding of bone may be achieved with adhesives that are hard and predominantly
inorganic (Aim #3). Outreach activities include working with high school
students for laboratory modules in the Women in Engineering Program at Purdue
University. Taken together, this work will show how biology creates unique
materials and guide the adaption of marine biological technologies to biomedical
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.