* 2104968
* Controlled symmetry breaking in semicrystalline polymer crystalsomes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2025
* USD 636,678.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semicrystalline polymers constitute
the large majority of polymeric materials in use today. While the basic
symmetries of polymer crystals are not different from their small molecular
counterparts, the long-chain nature of polymers does significantly affect their
crystallization behavior. Understanding the structure and morphology of
semicrystalline polymers is crucial to improving their properties and broadening
their applications. This project concerns the structural control of polymer
crystals. The overarching goal of this research is to achieve unique spherical
polymer crystals by controlling the crystallization conditions and/or the
polymer molecular structure and to elucidate the morphology and the fundamental
molecular-level processes involved in such curved-crystal growth. It is
anticipated that these well-controlled spherical crystals may find applications
in the fields of drug delivery and immunotherapy. The educational component of
the proposal includes: 1) Mentoring graduate and undergraduate students. 2)
Addressing the need for the education of modern polymer science by developing
two class modules that will be used in graduate courses at Drexel University. 3)
Involving high school students and teachers, particularly under-represented
populations, in the proposed research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-chain nature of polymers brings the most
interesting feature to their crystallization behavior: the intricate amorphous
domains in a crystalline material. The hierarchical morphology of the
intertwining crystalline and amorphous phases accounts for some unique
properties of semicrystalline polymers. Based on the correlation between crystal
morphology and translational symmetry, polymer crystals are divided into shape-
symmetry commensurate crystals and shape-symmetry incommensurate crystals
(SSICs). In the latter, crystal morphology dictates broken translational
symmetry along at least one unit-cell axis. This project aims to systematically
investigate a class of polymer spherical crystals in the context of SSICs. Two
approaches, namely a top-down templating technique and a bottom-up molecular
engineering method, will be employed to break the translational symmetry in
polymer crystals. The recently discovered spherical crystalsomes will be used as
the model system. Accordingly, the specific aims of the proposed work are: 1)
Understanding curvature-dependent crystallization and melting in polymer
crystalsomes. 2) Developing complex crystalsomes via morphological control. 3)
Fabricating crystalsomes using spontaneous translational symmetry breaking. This
project will advance the field of polymer crystallization and lead to a library
of crystalsomes as tailor-designed polymeric nanoparticles. Potential
applications for these include drug delivery and
immunotherapy.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.