* 2104833
* Exciton Spectroscopy and Engineering in Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* David Hsieh, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 11/30/2024
* USD 310,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Upon irradiation with light, an electron in a solid is
excited to a state with higher energy, leaving behind a hole – a missing
electron – in its initial state. The oppositely charged electron and hole
experience electrostatic attraction and, in electrically insulating materials,
can form an atom-like bound object dubbed an “exciton”. Excitons not only serve
as a platform for studying atomic physics phenomena in a solid-state environment
but are also central to the development of photonic and opto-electronic
technologies. To date, excitons have largely been studied in conventional non-
magnetic insulators where interactions between electrons are weak. But in
theory, excitons can also exist in a class of materials called Mott-Hubbard
insulators, where strong interactions immobilize electrons and can cause their
intrinsic magnetic moments to adopt myriad ordered arrangements. Such an
environment can endow excitons with highly unconventional properties,
potentially leading to a new generation of highly tunable and multi-functional
excitonic devices. Despite these opportunities, Mott-Hubbard excitons remain
experimentally elusive. This project directly addresses this problem by
deploying novel high-speed stroboscopic methods to probe the energetic,
dynamical, and spatial characteristics of Mott-Hubbard excitons in a range of
Mott insulating compounds. Products of this research are being incorporated into
a broad outreach plan that targets retention of underrepresented and
underprivileged groups in science. This includes developing an extensive
teaching and internship program for high school students in the Pasadena School
District and holding an annual workshop on Caltech campus for U.S. college level
students-of-color interested in pursuing graduate research in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Excitons in conventional rigid-band
semiconductors are well described as Coulomb bound hydrogen-like electron-hole
pairs. However, much less is understood about excitons in Mott insulators, which
consist of holon-doublon pairs bound by both Coulombic and spin exchange
interactions. The properties of these so-called Hubbard excitons (HEs), and how
they are influenced by the complex electronic and magnetic orders often found in
Mott insulators, remain open questions. The goals of this project are to
experimentally observe HEs and to explore their energetic, dynamical, and
spatial properties using a suite of ultrafast optical spectroscopic techniques
operating in the terahertz frequency range. Research activities are divided into
two major thrusts. Thrust 1 focuses on directly resolving HEs through intra-
excitonic transition spectroscopy, and on systematically characterizing their
dynamical behavior across Mott systems hosting different electronic and magnetic
orders. Thrust 2 focuses on using optical high-harmonic generation to perform
tomographic imaging of the spatial structure of HE orbitals. Strong field
manipulation of HEs through field-induced tunneling ionization experiments will
also be carried out. Establishing this fundamental understanding of HEs will
pave the way for future opto-electronics applications that leverage strongly
correlated materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.