* 2104205
* SBIR Phase I:  SMART Repeaters: Sensor-Enabled Submarine Fiber Optic Repeaters for Multi-Scale and Multi-Use Monitoring and Observing
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Matthew Fouch, SUBSEA DATA SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2022
* USD 254,816.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance the
proposed SMART (Sensor Monitoring and Reliable Telecommunications) prototype,
designed as a best-in-class pressure, temperature, and seismic sensor system to
be incorporated into new global submarine fiber optic cable networks. The
expected commercial impacts are significant, as the customer base for SMART
technology includes commercial submarine cable suppliers, government monitoring
agencies, scientific consortia and agencies, and internet content providers. The
development and deployment of SMART will enhance scientific understanding of
Earth’s oceans, seafloor, and subsurface via a fundamentally new approach to
long-term subsea sensor network deployments. SMART will therefore provide
essential new data to reduce disaster risk and improve global climate
understanding, thereby reducing societal and environmental vulnerabilities to
these long- and short-term threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project is to develop the first integrated SMART prototype system. This
innovative real-time deep ocean monitoring technology will catalyze fundamental
improvements in Tsunami Early Warning (TEW), Earthquake Early Warning (EEW),
global climate monitoring and telecommunications resiliency. The innovation is
to tightly integrate sensors into the amplifiers (“repeaters”) used to boost
signals in the optical fibers. Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components will
be utilized for nearly all physical elements of the system. The sensor assembly
includes a 3-axis accelerometer, absolute pressure gauge, and temperature
sensor, integrated with data acquisition circuits with suitable dynamic range
and precision, a common communications module, an interface suitable for fiber
optic cable spans up to 120 km in length, software and firmware necessary to
support the data path, an isolated power source, and precision timing. The SMART
repeater design is modular, allowing different sensors, adaptation to different
repeater housings, or use as a standalone unit. Technical hurdles to be
addressed include hardware development and integration, software development,
data acquisition and processing, power management, communications bandwidth, and
delivery of precision time and frequency references.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.