* 2104795
* CRII: AF: RUI: Markov Chains and Random Sampling on Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Sarah Cannon, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,583.00

Given a large collection of mathematical objects, how can you find a "typical"
element efficiently? The problem of randomly sampling from a large, complex set
arises across many areas including polling, estimating statistics of physical
systems, and randomized algorithms; studying randomly selected elements can
provide insights about likely properties and behaviors. For example, random
samples of political districting plans have been used to build baselines for
comparison and detect racial and partisan gerrymandering. However, the problem
of efficiently finding random elements in complex settings is often a difficult
one, and it can be hard to make rigorous guarantees about the processes
involved. More mathematical analysis is needed so that there can be confidence
in the conclusions produced&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way to generate random
samples is to use a Markov chain: iteratively make random local changes and
mathematically bound the mixing time, the number of iterations until the
configuration obtained is sufficiently random. Mathematical insight is needed to
rigorously understand these Markov chains and their sampling behavior. Another
approach is to generate random samples via self-reducibility using approximate
counting algorithms. While many approximate counting algorithms come from Markov
chains themselves, other approaches include decay of correlations,
interpolation, and most recently, the cluster expansion. This project focuses on
the following important problems for random sampling on graphs, involving
exciting theoretical questions with an eye toward relevant applications: (1)
Approximate counting and sampling for spin systems using the cluster expansion;
(2) Rigorously analyzing Markov chains used for sampling political-districting
plans and other problems with similar structure. This project is strengthening
the interdisciplinary connections between the theory of random sampling and
other disciplines like statistical physics and political science. The
investigator is also working to make this research area more accessible to
undergraduate students, through continued mentoring, writing and distributing an
undergraduate-level introduction to the theory of Markov chains, and creating
and teaching a new elective class related to these
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.