* 2104316
* Correlating atomic structure with metallic glass forming ability
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jan Schroers, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 454,379.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a liquid is cooled to become a
solid, like water solidifying into ice when cooled in a freezer, the atoms could
form a crystalline solid, where the atoms are arranged periodically, or a glass,
where the atoms are arranged randomly. Metal alloys can form metallic glasses
when cooled rapidly. Metallic glasses have properties that suggest improvements
in applications such as casings for electronics, batteries, and hydrogen, for
medical devices and implants, and applications in space for robotics gears and
satellite tanks. Whether the liquid becomes crystalline or a glass depends on
the cooling rate; the faster the liquid is cooled, the more likely it will form
a glass. The slowest cooling rate that still allows for glass formation is the
critical cooling rate, which is a key characteristic of any material.
Determining critical cooling rates and hence, quantifying the glass forming
ability (GFA), has been a very difficult and elaborate task in the past. Recent
work by the PI revealed that the GFA can be determined from the structure of the
glassy solid through x-ray diffraction measurements that gives information on
the arrangement of the atoms. Correlating these x-ray diffraction measurements
to the GFA provides a cutting-edge tool that will advance the science of glasses
and liquids significantly. Thereby, this research has the potential to develop
new metallic glasses faster to be used in a wide range of applications and
impact US manufacturing. The PI will also train the next generation of scientist
through an open, interactive approach in the spirit of the Materials Genome
Initiative (MGI) by broadly sharing all experimental data with the scientific
community and through outreach programs where high-school students learn and
teach about cutting edge materials science research by making YouTube videos.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vitrification, the
formation of a glass upon solidification of a liquid metal, which is quantified
in the critical cooling rate and referred to as the glass forming ability, GFA,
is a key characteristic of paramount importance for the physics, formation and
processing of glasses. However, quantifying glass forming ability has been
experimentally elaborate and its complexity has prevented use of computational
methods. These challenges have impeded progress in metallic glass science,
discovery and technology which takes place in a vast potential compositional
space. Preliminary results by the PI suggest that this grant can overcome
previous limitations of identifying GFA of alloys. The PI provides evidence that
the GFA is reflected in the structure the glass assumes and this structure can
be readily measured with standard x-ray diffraction measurements. The alloy’s
atomic structure is quantified in the full-width-half-max of the first
diffraction peak in the XRD spectrum, Dq, and the PI’s preliminary results
reveals a direct correlation between Dq and GFA; Best glass formers exhibit the
most disordered amorphous structure, reflected in their highest Dq in their as-
sputtered state which is furthest away from equilibrium. The Dq-GFA relationship
suggested that current models to describe the atomic structure of metallic
glasses are limited to the ideal glass state but do not describe the, vastly
larger in number, real glasses that occupy the higher potential energy states in
the potential energy landscape. To describe such real glasses, contributions of
entropy, and possibly kinetics have to be considered as well. Separately, by
exploring the Dq-GFA relationship over large compositional spaces and
temperatures or cooling rates, will provide insight into formation motifs of
metallic glasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.