* 2104747
* Dynamic coupling to the order and flows in active nematics and living liquid crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Robert Leheny, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 447,297.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nematic liquid crystals are fluids
composed of rod-shaped molecules that align along a common direction. The
properties of nematic liquid crystals are important for numerous technologies.
In “active” nematics, some or all of the rod-like constituents have a power
source that makes them self-propelled. As a result of this motion, active
nematics display spontaneous flow, which leads to behavior that is unlike
anything seen in conventional liquid crystals and that might serve as the basis
of new technologies. A central challenge in the study and application of active
nematics is developing approaches that can control this behavior. This project
addresses this need by introducing a new approach to interrogate the properties
of active nematics and to manipulate the flows within the materials. The central
idea of the research is to incorporate small magnetic objects into the liquid
crystals and then to use magnetism to manipulate the objects, thereby both
probing and influencing the material’s behavior. Among the broader impacts of
the project are research training and education for graduate and undergraduate
students in physics that will prepare them for careers in academia and industry
and a partnership with a local majority-minority magnet science high school to
provide talented Baltimore City students with opportunities for research
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active
matter describes a class of materials containing constituents that undergo self-
driven mechanical motion. These systems display novel collective phenomena that
present a challenge for nonequilibrium statistical physics and may form the
basis for future technologies. Particularly intriguing realizations are those
that introduce active constituents into liquid crystals, where a competition
between the activity-driven dynamics and the liquid-crystalline order can lead
to turbulence-like flows and the perpetual creation and annihilation of
topological defects in the ordered state. Key examples are “living liquid
crystals,” where motile bacteria are introduced into conventional liquid
crystals, and engineered “active nematics” formed from films of aligned
biopolymers that are driven into motion by molecular motors. The overarching aim
of this project is to develop and exploit new ways of interrogating and
manipulating active nematics and living liquid crystals to advance substantially
our understanding of the nature of these out-of-equilibrium systems and our
ability to modify their behavior. The experimental strategies are based on
incorporating magnetic entities into the systems, either magnetotactic bacteria
in the living liquid crystals or magnetic colloids in the active nematics. By
coupling to these entities with time-dependent magnetic fields, the research
aims to conduct precision measurements of the properties the active materials
and to demonstrate unprecedented command of their dynamical behavior. The
project and the techniques refined to accomplish it are designed to produce
significant impact on science and technology by informing and guiding future
studies in the rapidly developing field of active matter. They are further
designed to provide important building blocks for developing applications of
active structured fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.