* 2104551
* CRII: HCC: The Creation, Maintenance, and Disruption of Inequality in Online Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Marlon Twyman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,950.00

Online communities are rich sources of information and empowerment due to the
access they provide to knowledge and learning, skill development, and social
support. However, user participation varies greatly among members in online
communities; less active members tend to receive fewer benefits and lower status
within the community. Although general differences in how people use online
resources have been studied through the lens of digital inequality, which has
focused on access to reliable Internet services and confidence in technology
skills, less is known about what drives inequalities in online communities, or
whether those inequalities might lead to the marginalization of particular
people or subgroups. To better-understand these status and participation
inequalities, this project will analyze online communities as complex social
systems where outcomes are shaped by individual motivations; community norms and
governance; the design of platforms' interfaces, information flows, and
algorithms; and the structure of social networks. The goal of the project is a
deeper understanding of the mechanisms that lead to risks of inequality, as well
as design ideas for how community organizers and platform designers can create
more opportunity for equitable interactions online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
examine the emergence of inequality, this project will develop a novel
conceptual framework, the online inequality loop (OIL), to explain the emergence
and persistence of inequality in online communities. The phases of inequality in
the OIL framework demonstrate how inequality is created, maintained, and
disrupted through socio-technical interactions between users and platforms,
which co-construct intellectual communities that reward particular kinds of
contributions. In this process, community members become differentiated based on
the quality, quantity, and attention to their contributions made to the
community. This differentiation is often designed to recognize desirable
participation, but can also exclude or marginalize content and content creators
that focus on topics, interests, and preferences that are not as popular or
prevalent as others in the community. To better-understand how these
inequalities develop, the project team will analyze posting and recognition
behavior from three large online communities that focus on knowledge production,
software development, and data science. These analyses will focus on three main
phases of community lifecycles called out in the OIL theory, including creation,
maintenance, and disruption of participation inequality. Through the analysis,
the work will provide a generalized account of inequality in online communities,
classify multiple dimensions of online inequality, and identify kinds of
historical events that can shift community values, increase user activity,
generate new knowledge, and potentially provide opportunities to mitigate
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.