* 2104489
* CIF: Small: Coding-theoretic methods in discrepancy and energy optimization, with applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexander Barg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The project studies properties of sequences of zeros and ones formed of n bits.
Collections of such sequences, called codes, are used for representing data to
be stored in computer memory or transmitted over an optical cable. In many
applications in communications, statistics, and computer science it is
beneficial to choose a code that is in some ways uniformly distributed over the
set of all the possible binary sequences. These applications have led
researchers to define a large group of problems in applied mathematics both on
the theory side and in the domain of data processing procedures. The main topic
of this project is investigation of uniformly distributed codes, including their
construction, evaluation of the properties, a group of related geometric
problems, as well and their uses in applied problems of algorithm design,
computer vision, and economical representation of data. The project relies on
ideas drawn from recent developments in computer science as well as certain
classical methods in applied mathematics, and it aims at new characterizations
and applications of uniformly distributed sets of binary
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of uniform distributions has seen
ongoing development through most of the last century, motivated primarily by
problems of numerical integration of multivariable functions. In the context of
point sets on the surface of the sphere in n dimensions, approximation to the
uniform distribution is quantified by the quadratic discrepancy of the point
set, measured as the average number of points of the set in a region of the
surface of the sphere. Spherical point sets with small quadratic discrepancy
approach uniformly distributed collections of points on the sphere. This project
is devoted to an extension of this theory to binary codes that approximate the
uniform distribution on the Hamming space. Ways of advancing the theory of such
codes were suggested in recent works of the investigator, and they rely on
Fourier analysis on the Boolean cube, the theory of positive-definite kernels,
linear programming, and other tools from coding theory. Applications of this
work include estimating the error probability of decoding, derandomization of
algorithms, and some variants of the compressed sensing
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.