* 2104614
* Evaluating competing models of human technological adaptation
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Jacob Harris, Harris, Jacob
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 148,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Brian Wood at the University of California,
Los Angeles, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the relative roles of culture and cause-and-effect
cognition in the formation and maintenance of technological traditions. This
project seeks to (1) build upon theoretical and experimental research as to the
importance of causal knowledge and culture in the evolution of technology using
empirical data; (2) produce a comprehensive theoretical model of technological
evolution; and (3) assemble a detailed archive of the current projectile
technological stylistic and mechanistic
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Competing models of human evolution
differentially emphasize the roles of cumulative culture and individual cause-
and-effect knowledge in the evolution of complex technology. This project will
examine the capacities that underlie our ability to manufacture complex
technologies, an ability that has underwritten our evolutionary success and
subsequent expansion across the world’s habitats. Previous studies examining the
relative roles of causal understanding and culture in the development of complex
technologies are largely theoretical and limited by the uncertainty of their
external validity. The goal of this project is to evaluate competing models of
human technological adaptation using empirical data. The opportunity to examine
these processes in a naturalistic setting, allows us to test the generality of
prior research findings arising from experimental settings. To address the
research objectives of this project, a combination of technology-focused
interviews, structured behavioral observations, and guided focal-follows will be
performed. The proposed project will contribute new knowledge about the relative
importance of cultural, cognitive, and environmental covariates necessary in the
manufacture, use, and evolution of complex technology by testing hypotheses
about technological expertise and material culture variation within an
ethnographic context. Finally, the proposed project will provide a detailed
portrait of material cultural variation that can be compared to other cultural
contexts and used to track the evolution of this technology over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.