* 2104223
* I-Corps:  A contactless, non-intrusive, artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled contact tracing system for reducing the spread of viruses
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Mona Azarbayjani, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to use recent
advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learning to enhance public
health challenges in nursing homes. Fever, as a non-specific measure of
infection, is commonly observed in a broad range of diseases and pandemics. The
proposed AI-powered assessment system will create an effective, non-intrusive
tool for empowering nursing home facilities and clinics to combat the spread of
contagious diseases and future pandemics, all the while providing a higher
health resiliency for our communities. The proposed technology creates a real-
time health surveillance system that also may be adopted and customized to a
wide range of public health applications that require continuous, non-intrusive
health monitoring with predictive analytics and proactive decision making. The
proposed research has significant opportunities both in the public and private
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a monitoring system to mitigate the risk and control the spread of epidemic
viruses through real-time artificial intelligence, multi-sensor fusion, and
video data analytics. In contrast to existing approaches that have a narrow
focus with limited intelligence capabilities, the proposed technology offers a
holistic solution to enable scalable, reliable symptom assessment and contact
tracing from a distance with strict personal privacy measures ensured. By
utilizing both red green blue (RGB) and thermal cameras (off-the-shelf
products), it may be possible to provide a more precise system that is capable
of monitoring several health indicators simultaneously; e.g., body temperature,
respiratory rate, coughing, and sneezing while taking a non-intrusive approach.
The proposed device is equipped with an AI-enabled contact tracing system for
reducing the spread of viruses by identifying the potentially infected
individuals at the early stage. For privacy-aware contact tracing, the plan is
to leverage previously developed technology for real-time privacy built-in human
pose estimation, re-identification, trajectory analysis, and activity
recognition. The technology creates lightweight, end-to-end execution of real-
time computer vision based on RGB cameras, with the ability to perform at a high
frame rate on embedded and edge devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.