* 2104032
* Elements: A Deep Neural Network-based Drone (UAS) Sensing System for 3D Crop Structure Assessment
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jan van Aardt, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2023
* USD 583,703.00

This project develops a 3D reconstruction sensing system that can be installed
on unmanned aerial systems (UAS), to be used by agricultural researchers,
growers, and service providers to assess crop growth. Applying Artificial
Intelligence (AI) technology for large scale agriculture reconstruction
applications, the sensing system would be able to estimate crop structure for a
large coverage area at a much lower cost than current standards that rely on
light detection and ranging (LiDAR). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project would
develop and refine a deep neural network-based 3D assessment workflow, based
solely on a low cost and lightweight 2D LiDAR and color camera configuration.
Researchers, growers, and service providers would be able to extract detailed
crop structure and forecast yields, based on a 3D time series of crop growth.
The technology would provide a less expensive alternative to the current 3D
LiDAR sensor approach, and the sensing system could also be applied to related
areas such as high-throughput phenotyping and variation estimation of general
terrestrial vegetation. Outreach and extension activities are included, to
deliver research outcomes to the stakeholders, including agricultural
researchers, growers and service providers. PhD students, undergraduates, and
high school students will be trained through this project, including a summer
activity training high school students through the Rochester Institute of
Technology Imaging Science High School Summer Intern
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure within the NSF Biosciences Directorate, and by the Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems within the NSF Computer and Information
Science and Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.