* 2104296
* Atomic-Scale Heterostructures of Iridates and Ruthenates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ambrose Seo, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 365,641.00

Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates atomic-scale
quantum materials composed of iridium oxides and ruthenium oxides. Both
materials have attracted great attention due to their competing physical
parameters. Tuning the parameters is expected to be the key to advancing the
electronic and magnetic states of matter targeting new quantum technologies, but
experimentally realizing the tunability is a difficult task. This project
addresses exactly that point by synthesizing a new model system in which two
oxides can interact with each other in an ideal two-dimensional interface. The
project also investigates microscopic properties and structures using advanced
spectroscopy and microscopy. These research activities relate to education for
both graduate and undergraduate students. The United States desperately needs
professionals with strong expertise in advanced material synthesis and
characterization for both the tech industry and academia. Participating students
receive state-of-the-art material synthesis training and work with scientists
from National Labs. It provides an essential opportunity for students to develop
their careers. The project also raises science awareness among non-STEM majors
via a summer research program for prospective teachers and visiting classrooms
at local public schools in Kentucky, either in person or online. These outreach
activities not only provide a unique research experience to share, but also
raise awareness of cutting-edge science in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The project
investigates the two-dimensional interface between iridates and ruthenates,
where strong spin-orbit interactions (SOI) and electron-correlations (U)
coexist. Whereas tuning the parameters of U and SOI in condensed matter is
expected to provide nontrivial states, the experimental realization of tunable U
and SOI is a formidable task. The project’s atomic-scale epitaxial
heterostructure approach offers a tool to control the dimensionality and the
lattice-symmetry through strong interactions at a two-dimensional interface. The
confluence of U and SOI of the 5d and 4d extended orbitals at the interface is
expected to exhibit an unprecedented electromagnetic state. Since these new
heterostructures can stabilize metastable quantum phases as their interactions
are varied, the project explores the theoretically predicted phase diagrams of
exotic ground states. Hence, the results of this project fill the existing gap
between experiment and theory, allowing a better understanding of the strongly
correlated and spin-orbit-coupled electrons in condensed matter. To this end,
the project uses pulsed laser deposition with in-situ real-time monitoring
techniques to develop various epitaxial heterostructures of iridates and
ruthenates. Experimental characterization includes advanced spectroscopy and
microscopy such as infrared spectroscopy, resonance elastic/inelastic X-ray
scattering, and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy. Participating
students gain expertise in advanced material synthesis and characterization
techniques. The project also raises awareness of science through summer research
programs and outreach for local public schools in
Kentucky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.