* 2104575
* Collaborative Research: Surfing the order parameter - assembling nanoparticle structures through phase transitions in liquid crystal solvents
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Timothy Atherton, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 232,664.00

Non-technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on
understanding how nanoparticles can be used to form novel structures such as
capsules and foams by dispersing them in a liquid crystal. Liquid crystals are
ordered fluids commonly used in LCD displays, but this project uses the liquid
crystal in an unconventional way - as a solvent for nanoparticles. The novel
process the team are investigating offers a rapid, scalable and largely
unexploited alternative for particle assembly. They are using a custom particle
design, with high-speed microscopy and new computational approaches to tune the
interactions between the nanoparticles and the liquid crystal. The work plan
focuses on three fundamental scientific questions: 1) How are particles
transported by the fluid? 2) How does particle surface treatment control
structure formation? And 3) What range of structures are possible and how are
they selected? They are testing a range of particle sizes, and process and
compositional parameters in a close collaboration of experiment and theory.
Gaining fundamental understanding of these novel material systems will be
transformative in enabling rational design of multiscale structures from simple
components. The process is relevant to a wide range of applications, including
encapsulation technologies in medicine, skincare, cosmetics and food science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCM is a Hispanic Serving Institution and serves a diverse
yet educationally disadvantaged part of the state. The project team is committed
to mentoring students in STEM at all levels and through this collaboration
numerous graduate and undergraduate students are receiving cutting-edge training
to enhance their competitiveness in the workforce. Undergraduate research is an
integral part of physics programs at research intensive UCM and Tufts and at
SCU, a primarily undergraduate institution with a strong tradition of chemistry
research. UCM is partnering with the Tufts Visiting and Early Research Scholars
Experience program (VERSE) to recruit students from underrepresented groups to
begin research early in their careers. Partnerships created by this project are
building a strong link between three higher education institutions in both
research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on understanding physical
transport mechanisms for nanoparticles in liquid crystals and specifically how
they can be leveraged to sculpt nanoparticle-based structures. The process the
team investigate exploits the liquid crystal in an unconventional way, by using
this anisotropic fluid as a solvent for nanoparticles and tuning interactions
between these two materials. This process offers a rapid, scalable and largely
unexploited alternative for particle assembly. The team is investigating this
assembly process using custom particle design in a collaboration between The
University of California, Merced and Santa Clara University, with high-speed
fluorescence microscopy experiments at Merced and new computational approaches
performed at Tufts University. The work plan focuses on three inquiry-based
specific aims to be performed collaboratively 1) How are particles transported
by moving phase boundaries? 2) How does particle surface treatment control
structure formation? And 3) What range of structures are possible and how are
they selected? This project has the potential to develop a range of novel
nanoparticle-based structures, however, as well as illuminating the fundamental
mechanisms governing structure selection which are still largely unknown.
Gaining fundamental understanding will be transformative in enabling rational
design of multiscale structures from simple components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a broad scientific impact on the soft
matter community and beyond by providing fundamental insights into a novel
process relevant to a wide range of applications in particle transport,
aggregation and nanoscience. The team takes advantage of liquid crystal’s
ability to spontaneously segregate and organize nanoparticles by their chemical
and/or physical properties using well known materials. A key feature of the
process is that the structures (and formation mechanisms) depend only on
particle size – not composition. This means that any suitably functionalized
nanoparticle can be assembled – broadening the project’s impact beyond the
specific aims. It should be possible to achieve similar structures in a broad
range of chemical environments, opening up encapsulation technologies in
medicine, skincare, cosmetics and food science. Simulation codes from this
project will impact the scientific soft matter community as a resource for
future investigations. These codes will be disseminated as open-source
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.