* 2105019
* Equivariant Approaches to Chromatic Homotopy
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Hill, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 302,773.00

The project addresses directly the heart of algebraic topology: computing
invariants like numbers, groups, and rings to understand spaces. The goal of
algebraic topology is to systematically build a connection between algebraic
objects like numbers and geometric objects like spaces. This connection allows a
two-way flow of information, with algebraic invariants distinguishing spaces and
topological methods informing algebraic problems. Starting from foundational
work of Quillen, algebraic and algebraic geometry data like formal groups gives
rise to new invariants for spaces with striking properties. This project
combines this classical thread with much more recent developments coming from
equivariant algebraic topology. "Equivariant algebraic topology" remembers a
collection of symmetries inherent in a space as part of the data, systematically
grouping spaces with the same symmetries, and the numbers and invariants
produced must reflect this. This extra structure provides more nuanced
computations, giving more information about how the classically described
invariants change under symmetries. Equivariant algebraic topology has
experienced a renaissance recently due to the solution by the PI, Hopkins, and
Ravenel to the Kervaire Invariant One problem, one of the oldest outstanding
problems in algebraic topology. The solution introduced a host of new
constructions and techniques that have striking ramifications in classical and
equivariant algebraic topology, and this project focuses on unpacking some of
these new constructions, exploring their ramifications in classically studied
computations, and describing what they mean for algebraic topology in general.
Many of the projects focus on diversity in STEM. Building on the PI's prior
First Year seminar on Women in Math, the PI will create a diversity-driven
class, combining mathematical content and pedagogy with discussions of
representation and inclusion in mathematics. At the same time, the PI intends to
create more opportunities for students who do not see themselves as "math
people" to connect with algebra and geometry concepts using UCLA's "Maker
Spaces" to have students design and build concrete models. The PI will continue
conference organizing, especially conferences focusing on making space for early
career mathematicians and for advanced undergraduates, using these as a way to
connect students with the ideas and researchers in stable
homotopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using newly developed tools
in equivariant stable homotopy, the PI will study the slice spectral sequences
for certain chromatically meaningful quotients of hyperreal spectra. These are
closely connected to the classical approaches to studying K(n)-local phenomena
using the Hopkins--Miller higher real K-theory spectra, and at the prime 2,
computations here subsume all previously known higher real K-theory
computations. The project focuses mainly on concrete computations (both of
chromatically meaningful quotients of hyperreal bordism and of more traditional
objects like the dual Steenrod algebra), while also studying more abstract
questions of what kinds of multiplicative structures we can see. Finally, an
application of all of this machinery to the classical questions of orientability
of vector bundles is explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.