* 2105721
* Encouraging the Participation of Neurodiverse Students in STEM Graduate Programs to Radically Enhance the Creativity of the Professional Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Richard Christenson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 04/30/2024
* USD 499,749.00

Neurodiverse individuals, including those with ADHD, dyslexia, and frequently
co-occurring conditions like dysgraphia and dyscalculia, have unique skills that
may be assets in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics(STEM) fields
such as risk taking, divergent thinking, and spatial visualization. Encouraging
the participation of these students in STEM graduate programs will significantly
benefit the creativity of our professional workforce, which in turn will help to
identify groundbreaking solutions to the large-scale and complex scientific and
technological challenges facing the nation. In addition to supporting national
prosperity and competitiveness, increasing the participation of neurodiverse
individuals in graduate programs will significantly benefit the well-being of
these marginalized individuals who are currently highly underrepresented in STEM
education. This National Science Foundation Innovations of Graduate Education
(IGE) award to the University of Connecticut will embrace a strength-based
approach towards neurodiversity. By identifying the nature of the challenges
that neurodiverse students face in the prevailing one-size-fits-all model of
STEM graduate education, this project aims to pilot and test innovative
approaches to improve the sense of belonging, productivity, and overall
experience of neurodiverse graduate students. In doing so, this project will
generate knowledge that informs the development of more inclusive educational
practices that capitalize on the unique talents of neurodiverse individuals.
These practices will support the academic success of neurodiverse students and
empower these individuals to contribute to future scientific and technological
advancements. Changing the paradigm of disability, dysfunction, and disorder to
one of diversity not only enhances the participation of nontraditional learners
in STEM education but also benefits society and the nation at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By adopting a strength-based approach toward
neurodiversity, this project will be at the forefront of efforts to promote a
culture of inclusivity in STEM graduate education. Toward this end, the project
employs a theory of change model with four integrated activities to pilot and
test easy-to-implement interventions with high potential to support the success
of students with ADHD and dyslexia in STEM graduate programs. Activities will
encourage participation of these populations of students by adopting a strength-
based approach toward neurodiversity. This project aims to evaluate three core
hypotheses: 1) increasing neurodiverse students’ awareness of their unique
strengths and challenges enhances their self-efficacy and self-advocacy, 2)
providing opportunities for peer-to-peer interaction enhances the sense of
belonging and experience of neurodiverse students in STEM graduate programs, and
3) providing writing interventions focused on students’ metacognitive skills
enhances their writing productivity. The data from the integrated research plan
and formal evaluation will generate critical knowledge for the scale-up of the
proposed activities and inform future enhancements of STEM graduate education.
This project will generate data on the efficacy of evidence-based approaches and
interventions that are inspired by the framework of positive psychology to
inform the development of an inclusive graduate education environment. This
knowledge will be shared with engineering educators through a workshop at the
ASEE annual meeting and formal publications. Supported by a strong institutional
commitment, the multidisciplinary team of principal investigators and the
diverse project advisory board composed of university administrators,
researchers, industry leaders, philanthropists, and graduate students will guide
the recruitment, data collection, data analysis, dissemination, and outreach
activities of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals
of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate
education and to generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into
the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.