* 2105866
* I-Corps:  Layered Multi-functional Building Panel for Energy Efficient, Affordable Housing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Patrick Donahue, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a building panel construction platform to create energy-efficient
and affordable housing solutions. The platform integrates dissimilar materials
into new functional materials using an automated single-step manufacturing
method. By collapsing multiple base materials and multiple envelope functions
into a new building panel product, significant efficiencies are realized,
creating a building product that is faster to assemble, greatly reducing labor
costs, while optimizing dissimilar material attributes. The multi-functional
platform may meet the needs of a wide range of construction market segments,
including single-family residential, low-rise multi-family, and most
significantly, the growing mid-rise market. The same platform also may be
applied in the building renovation segment as an energy-efficient façade panel.
The automated manufacturing method is industrialized in nature and may be scaled
to produce high volumes of materials at speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a novel building panel construction
platform. The platform is a layered multi-functional, lightweight structural
building panel manufactured from dissimilar materials in a continuous flow
process. The range of layering materials may include — but is not limited to —
sheets of wood veneer, wood composite panels, agricultural composite based
panels, wood plastic composite panels, magnesium cement panels, gypsum panels,
other mineral boned fiber composite panels, metalized films, polyurethane foams,
biobased foams, and other functional layers. The platform may be configured to
address a wide range of climatic load conditions. The goal is for the building
material to meet all the performance requirements of a modern envelope. This
results in the exterior facades, structural elements, and interior elements most
often being assembled on-site. The array of building materials often makes the
construction process costly, cumbersome, and laced with inefficiencies. The
proposed development may alter the current construction
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.