* 2105367
* Immune-compatible Designs of Electronic Polymers for Implantable Devices with Suppressed Foreign-Body Responses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Sihong Wang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 99,999.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic biomaterials have
been more and more heavily used in/as bioimplants to directly interface with
biological systems, inside live human and animal bodies. The resulted devices
typically provide unparalleled functions in recording, studying and modulating
biological processes and physiological conditions. However, the functional
longevity of these materials under bio-implantation is commonly limited by the
foreign-body responses elicited by immune systems. The material improvements for
solving this problem, though highly desired, have been largely hindered by the
lack of fundamental knowledge about the immune behavior at such material-biology
interfaces, particularly with the influences from different material structures.
In this research, aiming at closing this gap on electronic polymers—an emerging
class of electronic material with higher mechanical compatibility with
biological systems, Dr. Wang proposes to carry out fundamental biomaterial
research on their interaction behaviors with immune-systems, especially at the
cellular level. Dr. Wang will create electronic polymers with varied chemical
structures, and perform in vitro cell experiments to characterize their
interaction behaviors with different types of immune cells and environment
during the typical foreign-body response process. This research will provide
essential data for understanding the influence of different material design
features on immune reaction pathways, and therefore guide the future development
of immune-compatible electronic polymers. The research activities will provide
learning and training opportunities for students at the interface of polymer
science, electrical engineering, and immunology. Supported by this research
project, a new program will be established with high schools in Chicago’s south
side community to bring both high school teachers and students into the
biomaterials research. The research and education results will be disseminated
broadly through peer-reviewed publications, seminars, conference presentations,
and websites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For bioimplants that directly interface synthetic
materials with biological cells and tissues in live biological systems, a long-
standing challenge to be resolved is the commonly existing foreign-body
responses elicited by immune systems. An emerging and promising direction for
solving the immune-compatibility problem for implantable electronics is to use
electronic polymers that have better mechanical compatibility with biological
tissues. However, progress has been hindered by the lack of understanding and
strategies for effectively combining molecular designs for immune-compatibility
and electrical conduction on polymeric materials, without sacrificing the other.
This research aims to establish the fundamental biomaterial understanding about
the interaction behaviors between electronic polymers of varied conjugated
backbones and side-chain structures with proteins and different immune cells
that make the overall foreign body responses. Specifically, the study will
include both commonly used design units for conjugated polymers, and newly
incorporated immune-compatible groups for the possible improvement of immune-
compatible properties. At the same time, for such new immune-compatible designs
of electronic polymers, studies will also be carried out on their structure-
property relationships in both electron and ion transport. The outcome of the
research can be expected to initiate a new research direction for the field of
biomaterials, which focuses on combining high electronic performance and immune
compatibility in a single material. Broadly, this research will make the
groundbreaking steps for realizing long-term biocompatible electronic polymers,
which will largely benefit the technological areas of implantable electronics
for medical diagnosis, disease treatment and biological studies. This
interdisciplinary research will provide training opportunities for students at
different stages for becoming the future workforce in the emerging area of
biomaterials and electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.