* 2105848
* New Anions to Understand Recognition Chemistry and Drive Hierarchical Assembly with Cyanostars
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amar Flood, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Amar Flood of Indiana University will
undertake a project to understand how to design molecular compounds to capture
negatively charged ions (anions) and use them to synthesize more complex
chemical compounds. The significance of studying anions stems from their many
global impact areas spanning from the use of nitrate and phosphate as
fertilizer, which impact food production and water quality, through to organic
phosphates that are the workhorse anions in lithium ion batteries. The
significance of anion-directed synthesis is inspired by Nature's use of bottom-
up self-assembly and has the potential to impact the future of nano-
manufacturing. The planned activity will benefit society by training graduate,
undergraduate and postdoctoral coworkers in research, communication and
collaboration both nationally and internationally. Inclusive practices will be
developed that foster a culture that embraces diversity and equity in STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics). This project also has the
potential to broaden understanding of anion-based chemistry for the public and
undergraduate communities with videos and laboratory experiments. Outputs from
this research are expected to offer benefits to researchers in other areas of
chemistry, and to industries that need to manipulate
anions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project on anion recognition and anion-
driven hierarchical assembly, Professor Amar Flood and his team will synthesize
a series of anions to control their modes of self-assembly, study their anion
recognition by cyanostar macrocycles, and examine their mechanisms and
cooperativities of self-assembly. The project has three Aims. Aim 1 seeks to
determine how the sterics, electronics and charge of substituents on anions
composed of trifluoroborates control formation of cyanostar complexes by using
synthesis, titration data and crystal structures. Aim 2 aims to establish the
correlation between the structures of substituted phosphates and their
mechanisms of threading inside cyanostar macrocycles and to make threaded
polymers with beads-on-a-string structures. Aim 3 seeks to expand the role of
anions in hierarchical self-assembly synthesis by understanding how anions and
cyanostar structures need to be programmed to produce specific architectures
that include network gels, cyclic polymers, and spherical
cages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.