* 2105384
* Genomic Structure of Founder Events in the 17th Century Chesapeake
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Raquel Fleskes, Fleskes, Raquel E.
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Deborah
Bolnick at the University of Connecticut, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist assessing how founder effects shaped patterns
of genomic variation during the 17th century colonization of the Chesapeake
colonies (Maryland, Virginia, and Delaware). This project seeks to (1)
characterize the genomes of archaeological individuals recovered from the
Jamestown archaeological site, compare their genomic variation with (2)
additional 17th century Chesapeake archaeological burials, and (3) with
contemporary descendant populations in the other regions to assess if and when
initial founder events contributed to contemporary genomic variation in the
region. This research utilizes a community engaged framework, in which
successive outreach programs and workshops held in collaboration with the
Jamestown Rediscovery Project share progress and the results of the research
with community stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When new populations are
founded, the founders carry a random subset of the total genetic variation
present in the ancestral source population, which can greatly influence genomic
variation in descendant populations. This is especially relevant for
understanding which of the multiple waves of migration have contributed most to
contemporary population diversity. Genomic comparisons between contemporary and
archaeological populations allows us to revisit this issue from a new
perspective. In this project, we will sequence the genomes of archaeological
individuals belonging to the first (A.D. 1607) settlers in Jamestown, Virginia.
Their genomes will be compared with additional archaeological genomes from three
sites in 17th century Chesapeake region as well as contemporary populations from
other regions. Through this approach, we will directly assess population
structure across archaeological sites, and determine the degree of similarity
with contemporary populations. Due to rapid population turnover characteristic
of 17th century Chesapeake settler populations, we expect that later population
movements in the 17th century Chesapeake contributed more to contemporary
population diversity than did earlier settlements. By analyzing the genomes of a
time series of archaeological samples throughout the 17th century, beginning
with the first settlers in Jamestown, Virginia, we can reconstruct the genomic
population structure through 17th century Chesapeake to determine how and when
founder events in colonization contexts began to contribute to present-day
population diversity in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.