* 2105219
* Collaborative Research: Spin Currents and Spin-orbit Torques in Single Layer Magnetic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Vivek Amin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 263,484.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Ferromagnetic materials are widely used in
digital information storage devices such as hard disk drives, which boast long-
term memory, high storage density, and cost-effectiveness. Compared to other
semiconductor-based memory devices, the operation speed of hard disk drives is
relatively slow, prompting the development of magnetic memories without moving
parts. To make such memory technologies competitive requires efficient control
of magnetism using electrical currents rather than magnetic fields. In recent
years, a novel mechanism called spin-orbit torque has been shown to electrically
control magnetism in both ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic materials—the
latter of which are far more prevalent in nature but currently underutilized,
despite offering several advantages over their ferromagnetic cousins like
potentially higher speed and density. However, the spin-orbit torques generated
in multilayer magnetic systems arise from several competing mechanisms that are
difficult to disentangle, widening the gap between experiment and theory and
preventing device optimization. This collaborative project aims to determine the
microscopic origins and behavior of spin-orbit torques generated within single
ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic layers using both theoretical and
experimental methods. Success in this research will help optimize spin-orbit
torques, thus expediting the development of faster magnetic memory devices used
for traditional information storage and for artificial intelligence
applications. This project trains graduate and undergraduate students in a
variety of research techniques and prepares them for the workforce in science
and technology. Planned outreach activities include establishing an online
seminar series inviting researchers from underrepresented groups in physics and
engineering to give talks combining their frontier research with their personal
experience in pursuit of their scientific career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Achieving efficient electrical control of magnetic order is
crucial for the development of memory technology. Spin-orbit torque—which is a
transfer of angular momentum from the atomic lattice of crystals to magnetic
order under an applied electric field—promises faster, more reliable, and more
energy-efficient switching than previous write mechanisms in magnetic memories.
While control of magnetism using spin-orbit torque has been demonstrated in
various devices, the role of the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic layers in
generating spin-orbit torques remains unclear, creating inconsistencies between
experiment and theory and preventing device optimization. This collaborative
project experimentally and theoretically characterizes boundary spin-orbit
torques generated within single-layer magnetic materials, eliminating competing
mechanisms from adjacent layers. The single-layer magnetic systems include
ferromagnets, non-collinear and collinear antiferromagnets. The boundary spin-
orbit torques are measured using the magneto-optic-Kerr-effect and the results
are theoretically interpreted using both semiclassical models and the first-
principles transport calculations. This collaborative research aims to
disentangle the spin torque contributions that must also occur in multilayers
while paving the way for single layer magnetic memories. It also undertakes the
first characterization of spin torques in single antiferromagnetic layers with
non-collinear and collinear magnetic order, broadening the role of
antiferromagnets in spin-orbit coupled nanostructures. This project trains
graduate and undergraduate students in a variety of research techniques such as
thin film growth, micro-fabrication, optical detection, first-principles
calculations, and semiclassical modeling, preparing them for the workforce in
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.