* 2105433
* Examining the Effects of Discrimination on Neural Circuitry and Self-Regulatory Functioning in Adolescence
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Natasha Duell, Duell, Natasha
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF’s Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Eva Telzer
and Keely Muscatell at the University of North Carolina—Chapel Hill, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist in advancing
scientific knowledge about associations among racial discrimination, brain
development, and self-regulation during adolescence, specifically among youth
identifying with marginalized racial and ethnic groups. Additionally, this study
investigates family values and school support as protective buffers against the
effect of racial discrimination on brain development. The study supported by
this award addresses the pressing need within the developmental literature to
understand the long-term impact of discrimination on adolescent functioning. The
timely and critical societal issue addressed in this study is of broad relevance
to scientists, parents, schools, and policymakers. Findings have the potential
to identify psychological processes affected by discrimination, cognitive
processes that may be targets for interventions aimed at helping adolescents
cope with discrimination, and potential mechanisms for social support within the
home and the school. Further, this study promotes a greater understanding of the
lived experiences of youth from marginalized racial and ethnic groups who are
currently underrepresented in research on neurodevelopment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adolescence is a critical period of development wherein
the brain undergoes rapid reorganization and in which life experiences are
formative to neurodevelopment. The life experiences of youth from minoritized
racial and ethnic backgrounds are underrepresented in neurodevelopmental
research, despite the fact that children and adolescents represent the most
racially and ethnically diverse age group in the United States population. One
salient experience among marginalized youth is racial and ethnic discrimination.
Despite this critical issue, the effect of discrimination on neural development
and implications for subsequent functioning are not well understood. The awarded
study addresses these gaps using longitudinal network analysis and graph
theoretic methods to identify associations among racial discrimination, neural
connectivity, and self-regulatory functioning among youth of color. Further, the
study examines familism and school support as protective buffers against the
harmful effects of discrimination. To answer these critical questions, the study
uses a subsample of youth from minoritized racial and ethnic groups (Asian,
Black, and Latinx; n = 5,705) ages 9-10 years at the first assessment and 11-12
years at the last assessment from the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development
Study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.