* 2105397
* Race and Rurality in the Pretrial Experience
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* John Eason, Eife, Erin
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. John Eason at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison Department of Sociology and The Justice Lab,
this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating the experience of rural pretrial release. The findings from this
project will further knowledge about two understudied phenomena: pretrial
release and rural criminology. The long-term implication of this work is to
reduce harms associated with being charged with a crime by documenting how
punitive surveillance is enacted upon people who are legally presumed to be
innocent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a person is charged with a crime, their
first court appearance is in bond court, where a judge assigns a dollar amount
and conditions for release. If the accused person can afford their bond, they
will pay to await their trial outside of county jail. This increases their
chances of a not guilty verdict and more lenient sentencing. Even so, previous
research illustrates how pretrial release is rife with carceral surveillance,
which prevents people from attending church, obtaining groceries, or holding a
stable job, all while they are legally presumed innocent. Criminology studies
are largely conducted in urban settings, but scholars have shown that criminal
legal contact both occurs in rural settings and functions differently in these
settings. In this project, I ask: How does pretrial release differ in rural
settings? This project relies on ethnographic observations and in-depth
interviews in two adjacent rural counties, which are demographically and
culturally similar but differ in one important aspect: commercial bail has been
prohibited in one but still operates in the other, allowing for a comparative
analysis of bond systems. Ethnographic observations of pretrial hearings will
provide information about how state actors determine bail amounts and conditions
in both counties. In-depth interviews (30 in each county, totaling 60
interviews) with people currently or recently on pretrial release will provide
insight into the lived experience of pretrial surveillance, highlighting its
impact on everyday interactions and encounters in rural areas. This knowledge
will strengthen the understudied area of rural criminology in a body of
literature that largely centers urban experiences. Additionally, by drawing a
direct comparison between two otherwise similar rural counties, this study will
also contribute an analysis of how certain bond systems influence pretrial
surveillance, showing how rural citizens experience pretrial release within both
for-profit commercial and state-run bond systems. This project will demonstrate
the importance of including all criminalized people in bond reform and other
efforts to end mass criminalization. Findings will contribute to public advocacy
work being conducted at the local and national levels on the abolition of money
bond and the harms of pretrial surveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.