* 2105482
* Collaborative Research: Understanding spatiotemporal dynamics of plant-soil feedbacks: Consequences for shrub-grass interactions in a dryland ecotone
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Yan Yi Chung, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2025
* USD 630,572.00

Understanding factors that allow species to migrate into new suitable habitats
has become increasingly urgent because of the rapid pace of human-caused
environmental change. This project combines field and lab experiments to
evaluate how plant-plant and plant-microbe interactions influence the migration
of creosote, one of the most common and important shrubs of the warm deserts of
North America (Sonoran, Chihuahuan and Mojave), into adjacent grasslands. The
expansion of woody plants at the expense of grassland, a phenomenon called shrub
encroachment, is global in scale and expected to accelerate under future warmer
climates and elevated atmospheric CO2. The microbes that live in and near plant
roots (the plant microbiome) likely play key roles in affecting the rate of
shrub encroachment but their influence on shrub establishment and migration
success has not yet been examined. To predict how plant-microbe and plant-plant
(in this case shrub/grass) interactions will drive or slow plant population
expansion in future climates requires evaluating the spatial and temporal scales
at which these interactions occur. Using both field and lab experiments and
mathematical models, this project will enable forecasts of how plant-plant and
plant-microbe interactions reshape the abundance and distributions of shrub and
grass species at the limits of their geographic distributions. Shrubland-
grassland dynamics affect the amount of carbon stored by an ecosystem, drive
rangeland management decisions, influence strategies to conserve biodiversity,
and extend over 330 million hectares of North America alone. This project trains
students at many levels, and builds partnerships with stakeholders and managers
to ensure knowledge transfer to the benefit of society. A science-art
collaboration is also embedded in the research activities, including the design
and creation of 3D-printed plant models and artistic interpretations of plant
morphologies. A museum exhibit of these models and microbe plant interactions
will be created to expand public outreach and create an aesthetic expression of
the inter-relationships of microbes and plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will elucidate how plant root and soil associated microbes
influence plant species range movements under environmental change. Research
activities include the acquisition of novel quantitative data on key parameters
that determine range spread: the spatial extent and temporal speed at which
plants influence their microbial environment and the relative strength of the
microbe/plant feedbacks compared to plant/plant competitive interactions.
Experiments on field observations will determine the underlying mechanisms of
plant-microbe interactions by addressing the following questions: (1) What is
the spatial extent of plant-soil feedback between foundation species at ecotones
where range limits collide? This question will be addressed using spatially-
explicit paired field and greenhouse experiments to quantify the spatial extent
of plant/microbe feedbacks as they influence both grass and shrub performance.
(2) How does elevated CO2 affect microbial feedbacks and coexistence between
foundation species at these ecotones? This question will be addressed using a
growth chamber experiment to contrast microbial feedbacks and competition
between grass and shrubs under ambient versus elevated CO2. (3) By what
mechanisms do plant species cultivate unique microbial communities through time?
This will be addressed with a field experiment to evaluate mechanisms underlying
soil and microbial modification by plants and the temporal scale of each
mechanism. Finally, quantitative models will be developed using the data from
these experiments and observations to address the question, (4) How do soil
microbes contribute to range expansion, contraction, or stabilization at species
range limits, and how will elevated CO2 change range limit dynamics? The project
breaks new ground ni evaluating plant/soil feedbacks in a spatial and temporal
context using a well-documented, ecologically important, and experimentally
tractable range shift: the encroachment of C3 woody shrubs into C4 grasslands in
the American Southwest. Shrub encroachment can dramatically alter biodiversity
and ecosystem processes, including carbon storage&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.