* 2105598
* Mechanistic Investigation of Radical SAM Methylases Involved in Tetrahydromethanopterin Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Eduardus Duin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 462,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Kylie Allen from Virginia Tech and Dr. Evert Duin from Auburn
University will study the mechanism of the enzyme known as MptM, a member of the
radical S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) methylase family of enzymes, involved in
tetrahydromethanopterin biosynthesis. Tetrahydromethanopterin is a modified
version of folate (vitamin B9) that is essential for methane production by
microorganisms known as methanogens. This project aims to uncover the unique
chemistry and the biological significance of MptM catalysis. In doing so, this
research has the potential to provide foundational knowledge toward a better
understanding of the formation of methane in the biosphere, with potential
implications for bioenergy applications. Students of various education levels
will be directly engaged in this research, thus inspiring the next generation of
scientists, and providing important interdisciplinary training opportunities.
Several STEM(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) outreach
activities will be expanded upon as a result of this funding, including hands-on
workshops for elementary students and summer programs for middle and high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to advance our
knowledge of radical SAM enzyme mechanisms through biochemical and spectroscopic
characterization of MptM- the founding member of the class D radical SAM
methylases. Specifically, this research will identify the methyl group donor(s),
determine the roles of three [4Fe-4S] clusters, and examine other key
mechanistic aspects of the two MptM-catalyzed methylation reactions in
tetrahydrobiopterin biosynthesis in methanogens. Genetic studies will also be
carried out to determine the in vivo functions and essentiality of two
homologous radical SAM methylases in a model methanogen. Taken together, these
projects will help to define the enzymatic mechanism and physiological functions
of radical SAM methylases in methanogens, expanding the ever-increasing
catalytic repertoire of radical SAM enzymes. Related putative class D radical
SAM methylases with currently unknown functions are found outside of
methanogens; therefore, this work will aid in characterizing a broad group of
enzymes likely involved in diverse natural product biosynthetic
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.