* 2105255
* Folding Colloidomers into Functional 3D Architectures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jasna Brujic, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to build complex
materials through the art of folding. Just like chains of amino acids fold into
proteins to perform a specific biological function, here short chains of
droplets coated with DNA are designed to fold into preprogrammed novel
materials. These folded structures serve as building blocks to seed further
assembly into unusual crystals with symmetries that are as yet unexplored. It
has been predicted that the creation of crystalline structures on the same
length scale as the wavelength of light can lead to materials with unique
properties, such as structural color. This work could lead to the development of
new dyes or even the creation of an optical transistor. A longstanding goal is
to integrate science education and research activities within the laboratory and
beyond. The PI is a founding member of a science education facility called the
Biobus, which is a mobile lab that provides school students from all
socioeconomic backgrounds with a research grade microscopy facility and welcomes
20,000 K-12 students every year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past decade has witnessed more major
innovations in colloidal materials than in the entire previous history of the
field. Instead of classical colloids with interactions such as Van der Waals and
depletion attraction that lead to aggregates or colloidal crystals, modern
designer particles come with controllable chemistry, specific interactions
enabled by functionalization with complementary DNA strands, directed by patches
and their geometry. Here the goal is to modify self-assembly via folding and
induce programmable arbitrary structures. Emulsion droplets serve as slippery
designer particles, which can reorganize during self-assembly. Inspired by
Nature’s creation of 3D materials via folding mechanisms, linear colloidomer
chains of droplets will fold by secondary DNA interactions into programmable 2D
or 3D architectures to make functional materials. Emulsion folding constitutes a
nonequilibrium system, driven by temperature protocols to reversibly unfold and
refold. The experiments are guided by numerical simulations and theory, which
optimizes the interaction matrices, as well as the time-dependent drive, in
order to achieve high yield and fidelity of structures with arbitrary shapes.
The goal is to achieve well-defined functionalities, while revealing self-
organizing non-equilibrium principles underlying droplet folding. As part of the
broader impacts, this project will yield 'Mayonnaise Robots' curriculum module
for educational outreach to K-12 students, which will allow students to design
and build their own folds and familiarize themselves with the art and science of
programmable design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.