* 2105811
* Bridging Locally Stress‐Constrained Topology Optimization and Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Glaucio Paulino, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 10/31/2024
* USD 498,773.00

Mechanics plays a fundamental role in the optimality of engineering structures
at various scales. Starting in the late nineteenth century, the field of
structural optimization grew out of key observations on the criticality of load
path and its implication on spatial deformation. Yet, as the field has evolved
in pursuit of complex engineering challenges, its focus has shifted towards
formulations of tractable optimization statements more than on mechanics guiding
structural optimization. This award will support the development of a general
topology optimization framework based on local stress constraints that will
bring the fundamental principles of mechanics at the center of structural
optimality. The theoretical and computational framework will be bridged with
advanced additive manufacturing techniques for convergent outcomes. The work
will empower the next generation of engineers to solve challenging structural
optimization problems involving a large number of local constraints, and to
connect topology optimization and additive manufacturing in an inexpensive and
easy‐to‐use way for education at all levels. Guided by theoretical,
computational, experimental, and manufacturing challenges, the award will
provide educational opportunities to K‐12 students through university programs
and integration of research with the graduate curriculum, and support
dissemination of the findings to the industry and the broader community through
computer codes, outreach meetings, and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research advances the theory needed to effectively couple mechanics and
optimization of highly constrained problems, the computational framework needed
to solve such problems, and the manufacturing approach to fabricate the
resultant spatially varying multi‐lattice parts. From a mathematical
perspective, a tailored augmented Lagrangian approach will be employed to solve
the stress‐constrained mass minimization problem by incorporating local
stresses. Specific contributions will include: (i) unifying local formulations
of the stress‐constrained topology optimization problems to handle a wide range
of failure criteria with a single strength function and analytically deriving
worst‐case stress states from infinite load cases that can be used to define the
stress constraints; (ii) reformulating the stress constrained problem to handle
an arbitrary number of linear, nonlinear, and/or microstructural materials and
deriving interfacial behavior that can be used to enforce stress constraints at
material interfaces; and (iii) engineering and experimentally validating
functionally‐graded, single‐ and multi‐lattice optimized parts using novel
manufacturing techniques, such as gray‐scale digital light processing (g-DLP)
without expensive stereolithography (STL) files. The research will explore a
multi‐phase design space with on demand structural
fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.