* 2105695
* Collaborative Research: SmartCAD: Guiding Engineering Design with Science Simulations
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Charles Xie, INSTITUTE FOR FUTURE INTELLIGENCE, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 05/31/2022
* USD 531,239.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, SmartCAD: Guiding Engineering
Design with Science Simulations, the Concord Consortium (lead), Purdue
University, and the University of Virginia investigate how real time formative
feedback can be automatically composed from the results of computational
analysis of student design artifacts and processes with the envisioned SmartCAD
software. Through automatic feedback based on visual analytic science
simulations, SmartCAD is able to guide every student at a fine-grained level,
allowing teachers to focus on high-level instruction. Considering the ubiquity
of computer-aided design (CAD) software in the workplace and their diffusion
into precollege classrooms, this research provides timely results that could
motivate the development of an entire genre of CAD-based learning environments
and materials to accelerate and scale up K-12 engineering education. The project
conducts design-based research on SmartCAD, which supports secondary science and
engineering with three embedded computational engines capable of simulating the
mechanical, thermal, and solar performance of the built environment. These
engines allow SmartCAD to analyze student design artifacts on a scientific basis
and provide automatic formative feedback in forms such as numbers, graphs, and
visualizations to guide student design processes on an ongoing basis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research hypothesis is that appropriate applications
of SmartCAD in the classroom results in three learning outcomes: 1) Science
knowledge gains as indicated by a deeper understanding of the involved science
concepts and their integration at the completion of a design project; 2) Design
competency gains as indicated by the increase of iterations, informed design
decisions, and systems thinking over time; and 3) Design performance
improvements as indicated by a greater chance to succeed in designing a product
that meets all the specifications within a given period of time. While measuring
these learning outcomes, this project also probes two research questions: 1)
What types of feedback from simulations to students are effective in helping
them attain the outcomes? and 2) Under what conditions do these types of
feedback help students attain the outcomes? To test the research hypothesis and
answer the research questions, this project develops three curriculum modules
based on the Learning by Design (LBD) Framework to support three selected design
challenges: Solar Farms, Green Homes, and Quake-Proof Bridges. This integration
of SmartCAD and LBD situate the research in the LBD context and shed light on
how SmartCAD can be used to enhance established pedagogical models such as LBD.
Research instruments include knowledge integration assessments, data mining,
embedded assessments, classroom observations, participant interviews, and
student questionnaires. This research is carried out in Indiana, Massachusetts,
and Virginia simultaneously, involving more than 2,000 secondary students at a
number of socioeconomically diverse schools. Professional development workshops
are provided to familiarize teachers with SmartCAD materials and implementation
strategies prior to the field tests. An external Critical Review Committee
consisting of five engineering education researchers and practitioners oversee
and evaluate this project formatively and summative. Project materials and
results are disseminated through publications, presentations, partnerships, and
the Internet.