* 2105054
* CRII: HCC: Sustaining Cognitive Flow in Physical Making
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Cesar Torres, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 02/29/2024
* USD 174,978.00

Getting "in the zone," whether it be from an immersive video game, playing a
sport, or knitting a sweater, is a natural response of the mind that allows
people to fully concentrate and cope with difficult, tedious, and often
repetitive tasks. This response, known as entering a cognitive state of flow,
has many known benefits within craft and making communities, including a
lessened impact of failure, a distorted sense of time, and a disappearance of
self-consciousness that are often associated with the "joy of making." This
project promotes the progress of science by developing a method of detecting
flow states from wearable sensor technologies. By better understanding how
tasks, environments, and individual characteristics influence flow, this project
will provide principles for designing and evaluating creative technologies that
support novice makers in developing positive coping mechanisms. The team will
also create tools and tutorials that will allow the methods to be taken up by
researchers and designers in making and related
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flow is a well-studied and valuable concept to
interaction design, yet researchers and designers are limited to using flow as a
form of qualitative assessment. By treating flow as an activity recognition
problem, this project will investigate how off-the-shelf physiological and
activity sensing can be used to unobtrusively recognize flow on a moment-by-
moment scale. Through documentation of users completing equivalent flow-
intensive tasks, this work will develop (1) the first open-access flow activity
dataset of its kind, (2) a benchmark deep learning model of flow, and (3) an
open-source qualitative analysis tool that provides real-time flow
characterization. This research will produce knowledge to reinforce and extend
our understanding of the body's response to flow states; in conjunction, case
studies will produce design exemplars to operationalize how flow can be used as
a design variable to induce or sustain flow states within creative
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.