* 2105418
* Developing equity-oriented data practices for small-scale fisheries
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Jenny Goldstein, Drakopulos, Lauren
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2023
* USD 125,499.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jenny Goldstein at Cornell University, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating
the social benefits and barriers to integrating new data and technologies in
fisheries science and management. Overfishing threatens global fisheries
sustainability, yet policies to reduce the impact of fishing are said to be
limited by critical data shortages. Digital technologies, such as cameras and
geospatial tracking devices, have emerged as low-cost tools for collecting data
on fishing activity. However, despite the widespread proliferation of data
collection technologies, little research has examined the relational practices
through which fisheries data are developed and deployed. This research examines
data sharing practices between non-governmental organizations (NGOs), fishers,
and other environmental governance actors to understand how digital fisheries
data is collected, shared and applied in environmental decision-making. Whereas
previous research has focused on planetary-scale environmental data networks,
this study foregrounds the quotidian embodied practices of collecting and
applying data and the complex interdependencies between the global and the
local. This project advances knowledge in key ways by theorizing the linkages
between data justice, gender and environmental equity in the Blue Economy, and
by exploring gendered experiences with environmental data, particularly in the
context of rural and resource-based livelihoods. The results can help inform
policies and institutional practices that empower women while also improving
fisheries sustainability with technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
employs a multi-sited case study of a new digital fisheries data collection
program. This research asks three questions: 1) How do new data streams and data
collection technologies enable or constrain fisheries participation, and in
particular the participation of women? 2) In what ways do the design and
development of data infrastructure and fisheries management strategies mutually
inform one another? 3) How can data practices support equity in the Blue
Economy? The research objectives are to: i) explore how fishers and women from
fishing households perceive digital fisheries data, its role, importance and
value, particularly in relation to their fishing livelihoods and; ii) evaluate
how fisheries scientists and managers use new data streams collected with
digital technologies. The Fellow will collect data through semi-structured
interviews with fishers, fisheries scientists and managers, and stakeholders
from the technology industry and through participant observation. The research
will result in the development of two actionable tools: 1) a data-sharing
protocol co-produced with fishers that NGOs can use to increase data
accessibility and 2) recommendations for equity-oriented data practices which
will be disseminated to policy-makers, NGOs and fisheries scientists and made
publicly available. The results of this study will inform key ocean policy
debates about fisheries data governance and provide empirical evidence for how
gendered access to fisheries data impacts fishing participation. The novel
fisheries data equity framework produced through this study has the potential to
transform research on the Blue Economy by shifting focus from extractive
technologies to data technologies as avenues for advancing more equitable
participation in fisheries and oceans governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.