* 2105958
* I-Corps: Aquatic debris cleanup using multi-agent unmanned surface vehicles and hotspot-based path optimization
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Jan Kleissl, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to benefit US
shorelines. The World Economic Forum predicts that by 2050 there will be more
plastic than fish in the world's oceans. Waterfront maintenance workers face the
brunt of the marine trash pollution issue as 80% of marine trash is sourced
near-shore. As a result, waterfront governments alone spend a total of $10.2
billion to clean these waterways. The proposed technology benefits ecosystems by
removing trash pollution from our shores, thereby preventing ecosystem
degradation and allowing people to both benefit from marine services now and in
the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project introduces the use of
Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USV) to maximize debris cleanup performance and
provide affordable solutions to cleaning these waterways. Solutions are being
developed to address the oceanic plastic pollution problem once the debris is
already in the ocean; however, insufficient effort is directed towards improving
shoreline pickup, which contains 80% of plastic debris. Human-operated methods
to collect the debris is inefficient and cost ineffective. This opens the door
to expand USV technology to waterway maintenance. Similarly, USV environmental
monitoring capabilities may provide data to the waterways and researchers such
as oxygen monitoring for algae blooms and affordable data capture. The team
currently has a working prototype and partnerships at the Jacobs School of
Engineering and Scripps Institution of Oceanography. The I-Corps customer
discovery activities will reveal the exact pain points experienced in these
waterways to inform the proposed technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.