* 2105373
* CRII: SHF: RUI: Custom Hardware Accelerators for Privacy-Preserving Image Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sunwoong Kim, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,408.00

Homomorphic encryption is an important cryptographic technique that allows
direct computation on encrypted data without decryption. The result of the
computation is entirely encrypted, and only the data owner can decrypt it using
a private key. As a result, data analysts such as cloud-service providers cannot
view any private or sensitive information from the data. Promising applications
of homomorphic encryption include financial and medical data analytics and
privacy-preserving machine learning, and homomorphic encryption can be also used
for more diverse applications such as genomics, national security/critical
infrastructures, and elections. Several emerging applications makes homomorphic
encryption increasingly essential. However, homomorphic encryption suffers from
slow processing speed, which renders it impractical for many critical
applications. In addition, it only supports addition and/or multiplication for
encrypted data, which limits the scope of its applications. This project will
address these issues using custom hardware accelerators and a numerical approach
that approximates several arithmetic and logical operations using addition and
multiplication. This project will broaden the scope of practical homomorphic-
encryption-based applications and provide opportunities for students to gain
experience in a variety of areas such as digital system design, software
programming, and cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
homomorphic-encryption-based image-processing applications. In typical
homomorphic encryption-based systems, a user encrypts private data on a local
device and sends them to a cloud server where a homomorphic encryption-based
application is performed. However, the inclusion of noise or brightness
distortion in the original images can negatively affect the results of the
application. Therefore, one of the goals of this project is to develop custom
hardware accelerators for homomorphic-encryption-based noise cancelling and
contrast enhancement using field-programmable gate arrays. They require division
and min/max functions for encrypted data, and these operations are being
numerically implemented. Another problem arises when data analysts convey
homomorphic-encryption-driven analysis results to a user. They can only refer to
specific data points associated with a section of the image, but not the
original image itself as it is encrypted. This can be problematic on the user's
side as they may not understand which part of the image the data analyst is
referring to. Thus, another goal is to develop a custom hardware accelerator for
an image-thresholding technique for highlighting regions of interest. It
requires comparison operations for encrypted data, and the numerical approach is
being used again. This project aims at reducing the computational runtime
overhead by one order to two orders of magnitude compared to software
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.