* 2105081
* Sparse Big Data Spectromicroscopy on Magnetic Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* L. Andrew Wray, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 407,472.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopy at synchrotron X-ray
facilities is often used to observe the quantum states of electrons inside
materials, and can yield critical insights for quantum science and technology.
Over the last decade, a new generation of synchrotron technology has begun to
greatly increase capabilities for focusing X-ray beams down to microscopic
scales. The measurements this enables are termed ‘spectromicroscopy’, and can
give far clearer images of electronic states by excluding any structural or
chemical variation that occurs outside the measurement area. In these
investigations, the research team is applying spectromicroscopy to uncover the
electronic states within structurally complex quantum materials that feature
exotic magnetic properties and may be of use for advanced information
technologies. Whereas traditional spectroscopy measurements look at just one or
two spots on a material, this research develops new capabilities to rapidly
survey naturally occurring regional differences across large patches of the
sample surface. These variations are analyzed to better understand the big
picture of how functional material properties can be controlled if you change
the chemical ingredients or material growth
procedure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
progress in light source technology is driving the worldwide development of
beamlines with highly focused micron- and 100-nanometer-scale beam spots. This
project uses spectromicroscopy implementations of the angle resolved
photoemission and resonant inelastic X-ray scattering techniques to uncover the
electronic structures underlying core properties of interest within selected
magnetic quantum materials. Particular focus is given to cases that have
presented challenges to the previous generation of spectrographs, such as select
topologically ordered materials that incorporate magnetic elements. A key factor
in achieving this ambitious goal is the use and further development of a suite
of techniques for analyzing sparse big data sets from measurements in which a
beam is rastered rapidly over a sample surface while recording spatially
resolved spectra. This approach simultaneously minimizes beam damage and makes
it possible to catalogue the regional variability of the electronic structure,
to identify the nontrivial interplay phenomena caused by quantum hybridization
and strong correlations. Algorithms and software created to address these
analysis challenges are made available to the broader spectroscopy community.
The research activities on advanced materials are integrated with facility tours
and other outreach for local K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.