* 2105744
* Development of Coarse-Grained Models and Computational Approaches for Studying Structure in Solutions of Cellulose Derivatives
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Arthi Jayaraman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2024
* USD 381,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellulose is an abundant naturally
found biopolymer and methylcellulose is obtained via non-toxic chemical
substitution of cellulose. The chemical process that leads to formation of
methylcellulose from cellulose disrupts the molecular-level interactions that
cause the insolubility of cellulose in water. The resulting improved solubility
of methylcellulose in water and its abundant natural raw material (cellulose)
makes aqueous solutions of methylcellulose useful in many applications as food
additives, paint removal agents, adhesives, emulsifying agents, and
biodegradable packaging materials. To tailor the physical properties of aqueous
solutions of methylcellulose for use in the above applications, there is a need
for fundamental research to understand the physical properties of aqueous
solutions and gels of methylcellulose as a function of temperature and
concentration, and the underlying molecular structure of methylcellulose chains
that drive these properties. Molecular simulations are cheap and effective in
comparison with real experiments and serve as valuable microscopic tools
providing molecular insight into structure within polymer solutions. For
methylcellulose solutions and gels, however, there are only a handful of
computational studies partly due to the complexity of these materials and partly
due to lack of good molecular models. This project is aimed at developing better
methylcellulose models and computational methods to enable fundamental studies
of structure of methylcellulose chains in water at different temperatures and
concentration and guide the practical use of methylcellulose solutions in a
variety of day-to-day applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will integrate
the model and computational method development into her interdisciplinary
molecular modeling and simulation of soft materials elective course at
University of Delaware. This course is offered once every two years and is open
to both undergraduates and graduate students in the (Chemical and Materials)
engineering and physical sciences (Physics, Chemistry) programs. The PI will
also include the data science aspects of the project in the Chemical Engineering
undergraduate course on Probability and Statistics for Chemical Engineers. To
improve recruitment and retention of women scientists within the computational
materials field, PI Jayaraman will continue to organize seminars/talks like the
successful WELCOME: Women ExceLling in COmputational Molecular Engineering
virtual monthly seminar series that she initiated in 2020-21. Such virtual
seminars will continue to provide networking opportunities to women graduate
students and early career researchers within the research community and help
with recruitment and retention of women and URM researchers in STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
proposes to develop new coarse-grained (CG) models and computational approaches
to understand the molecular interactions and chain packing in aqueous solutions
of methylcellulose for varying degrees of substitution and varying placement of
these substitutions. Substitutions involve replacing a methoxy by one-to-three
hydroxyls in each anhydroglucose unit of cellulose. The proposed computational
work will answer fundamental questions raised by experimentalists regarding
chain packing within fibrillar networks formed during thermoreversible gelation
of methylcellulose solutions. There is still debate over how methylcellulose
chains pack and assemble into fibrils with uniform diameters independent of
methylcellulose molecular weight and concentration. Recent structural
characterization using small- and wide-angle scattering and microscopy suggest
that previous computational studies may have predicted methylcellulose chain
packing within the fibrils incorrectly. This could be because past computational
studies on methylcellulose solutions have either used CG models that lack chain
geometry, chirality and/or directional hydrogen bonding interactions or used
atomistic models which cannot capture the experimentally relevant length and
time scales of chain assembly into fibrils. Thus, there is a need for a better
CG model to represent methylcellulose chains with essential monomer-level
chemical details and enable simulations to predict how chains interact and pack
into fibrils at experimentally relevant conditions. The proposed work consists
of three specific aims: 1) develop a new CG model for methylcellulose,
leveraging recent success with CG polysaccharide model development by the PI, 2)
develop a computational approach involving an artificial neural network enhanced
genetic algorithm and molecular reconstruction to reverse engineer the chain
packing within fibrils from experimental scattering results obtained from
extensive published experimental studies, and 3) apply the developed approaches
to study a broad range of methylcellulose solutions and extension of CG model
for potential studies of other cellulose derivatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike previous computational studies of methylcellulose
solutions, the proposed CG model would not assume at the start any
methylcellulose fibril structure or chain packing, such as toroidal chain
conformations and stacking of toroids to form fibrils. Instead, this
understanding of how chains pack within fibrils will be obtained from ‘bottom
up’ assembly using the CG model of short methylcellulose chains guided by
atomistic information and ‘top down’ molecular reconstruction of published
experimental scattering profiles of percolated fibrils formed from assembly of
long methylcellulose chains. The machine learning enhanced CREASE (computational
reverse engineering analysis for scattering experiments) approach may overcome
the limitation of fitting scattering profiles with a possibly
inaccurate/incorrect analytical model and provides microscopic packing
information beyond what a correct analytical model fit would provide. A wider
use and testing of this machine learning enhanced CREASE for materials beyond
methylcellulose solutions will be facilitated by a collaboration with scattering
experts at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.