* 2105329
* CRII: III: Knowledge Graph Completion with Transferable Representation Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Muhao Chen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Knowledge graphs (KGs) provide both open-world and domain-specific knowledge
representations that are integral to many artificial intelligence (AI) systems.
However, constructing KGs is usually very costly and requires extensive human
effort. While representation learning offers a solution by automatically
inferring missing knowledge in the embedding space, KGs are constructed
independently thereby missing complementary knowledge available in other KGs. In
fact, the independently created knowledge is often interrelated across different
perspectives. For example, knowledge about The Tale of Genji (the oldest
Japanese novel) in an English KG may be enriched with complementary knowledge
readily available in a Japanese KG; in the proteomics domain, verification of
Protein-protein interaction is also in parallel to the study of the genomic
functions of the proteins that are annotated by the Gene ontologies. In
particular, this project studies a novel direction of transferable
representation learning for KGs, which seeks to associate the interrelated
knowledge from different isolated sources in a common embedding scheme using
minimal supervision, and allowing complementary knowledge to easily migrate
across different KGs. The outcome of this project will create universal
knowledge representation for different sources, fields and languages, therefore
supporting applications with cross-domain or low-resource decision making. The
outcome will broadly improve the utility of the knowledge in computational
research including AI, natural language understanding (NLU) and recommender
systems, as well as interdisciplinary research in biology, pharmacology and
social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to develop
new data-driven machine learning methods for automatic KG completion. Such a
method will be able to automatically combine isolated KGs, allow complementary
knowledge to transfer across them, and efficiently infer globally missing
knowledge based on what is known. This project will systematically solve several
key technical challenges of leveraging incidental and auxiliary supervision
signals to capture various types of knowledge association. Furthermore, it will
develop technologies to support robust inference in a multi-source knowledge
transfer setting with noise-aware meta-learning and constrained inference,
particularly for knowledge curated for low-resource domains or languages. The
investigated technologies will be evaluated on various KG completion tasks, and
several downstream tasks in areas of NLU, bioinformatics and medical
informatics. The results of the project will be disseminated by publishing
papers, releasing open-source software and learning resources, organizing
tutorials and workshops, and creating new courses on knowledge base construction
and natural language processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.