* 2105247
* Interdisciplinary Study of Smallholder Farmers and Agrobiodiversity in Michigan
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Laura Schmitt-Olabisi, Mullaney, Emma G
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Laura Schmitt
Olabisi at Michigan State University, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating the relationships between
smallholder livelihoods and agricultural biodiversity in the state of Michigan.
The state of Michigan provides a unique opening for inquiry into these dynamic
relationships. It is at once one of the most diversified agricultural industries
in the country, a highly heterogeneous social and physical farming landscape,
and home to some of the country’s leading agricultural research institutions,
extension services, and field stations. Three important questions have been
insufficiently explored in interdisciplinary scientific research: First, how do
those involved in small scale farming conceive of and engage biological
diversity? Second, how do these relationships vary within and across lines of
social difference, particularly gender, class, and race? Third, how do these
relationships shape agrobiodiversity conservation and livelihood outcomes and
whose purposes do they serve as a result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
promises important contributions at multiple levels, from theory to practice. It
advances the literature on the political ecology of agricultural development,
which tends to take for granted the framing of subsistence and commercial
agricultural systems as mutually exclusive paradigms, by unpacking how different
actors negotiate these systems in relation to one another. Interdisciplinary
scholarly work has highlighted a need for case studies and theoretically-
rigorous analyses that directly relate particular geographies of agricultural
practice to broad economic, political, and institutional change. The responses
of small-scale commercially- and subsistence-oriented farmers to recent economic
restructuring and volatility in the United States remain understudied, as does
Michigan as an agricultural region. This research also studies the perspectives,
practices, and decision-making processes of community organizers, agricultural
scientists, and extension agents, thus responding directly to calls within
geography for livelihood analyses of actors within development and political
institutions. An innovative methodology centered on the triangulation of
ethnographic observation with interviews and participatory modeling will
illuminate how relationships between smallholders, agrobiodiversity, and
development institutions have developed over time, providing critical insight
into what interventions and policies might better support and sustainable and
just agricultural future. The proposed research investigates the complex
relationships between smallholder livelihoods and agricultural diversity using
two distinct yet synergistic methodological approaches: 1) ethnographic study of
farmers’ everyday lives, including their spaces of work and leisure; and 2)
participatory modeling of farming system dynamics. The training and professional
development proposed here will prepare the Fellowship Candidate for a lifelong
career of advancing scientific understanding of complex social and agricultural
systems, to serve underrepresented student groups and increase diversity in the
interdisciplinary sciences, and to contribute to international environmental
assessments and policy-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.