* 2105612
* EAGER: Exploring the Quantum-Mechanical Basis of Odorant Detection by Olfactory Receptors
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Weitao Yang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The sense of smell is a significant physiological advantage exploited by many
organisms including humans and it may be adversely affected by illnesses, such
as caused by viral infections as exemplified recently by the COVID-19 disease.
Yet, the mechanism by which organisms are able to detect and differentiate
between thousands of different odors, which are transmitted by small chemical
molecules named odorants, is currently not known. There are two competing
hypotheses regarding the first steps in the complex odorant detection reaction,
which is carried out by dedicated receptors in specialized olfactory cells. The
first hypothesis assumes that odors are encoded in the shape of odorant
molecules and their shapes are identified by receptors’ interior cavities into
which odorants fit similar to how a correct key fits into a lock. The second
hypothesis considers that smell is related to odorant molecules vibrating at
specific frequencies and these molecular vibrations are probed and detected by
receptors through a complex, quantum mechanics-based electron tunneling
mechanism. This project aims at exploring the vibrational hypothesis of odor
detection by exploiting cutting edge quantum-mechanics based experimental
measurements and computational modeling of the interaction between vibrating
odorants and tunneling electrons in the absence and presence of olfactory
receptors. Quantum mechanics-based modeling of the interaction between vibrating
odorants and electrons will accompany experiments and will clarify the
experimental results. This exploratory research will significantly contribute to
an understanding of one of the most fundamental biological sensing mechanisms
and may help in future developments of artificial “noses” with near single-
molecule detection sensitivity. The project will provide ample opportunities for
training of postdoctoral, PhD and undergraduate students in multidisciplinary
fields involving quantum chemistry, nanotechnology and
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the
understanding of one of the frontiers of quantum effects in biology with a set
of experimental and theoretical investigations aimed at providing evidence
confirming or rejecting the model of Quantum Mechanical-based olfaction
mechanism. This model, known as the “Vibrational Theory of Olfaction, VTO”
relates molecules’ scent to their vibrational spectra and postulates that odor
recognition involves quantum mechanical inelastic tunneling of electrons through
the odorant-bound receptor. However, this mechanism has remained unproven and
controversial. This project will use scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to
measure the tunneling current in the absence and presence of odorant molecules
in the nano-junction as well as the dependence of the tunneling current on the
bias voltage (tunneling spectroscopy). In the second phase of the project,
Odorants will be reconstituted in lipid nanodiscs that will be attached to a
conductive surface for STM measurements aimed at capturing inelastic electron
tunneling. In addition, computational studies of the inelastic tunneling in the
presence of odorant molecules in the tunneling junctions will be used to model
the experimental conditions and to provide microscopic understanding of electron
tunneling. The inelastic effects calculated will be used to compare with
experimental data and provide insight on the roles the vibrational modes.
Inelastic electron tunneling through odorant molecules will be studied with
state-of-the-art quantum mechanical formalism. This project is supported by the
Molecular Biophysics cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.