* 2105726
* IGE: Stakeholder-Driven Sustainable Development Experiences for Enhancing STEM Graduate Education
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Rachel Brennan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 05/31/2024
* USD 458,240.00

Graduate students trained in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
are essential for supporting innovation in sustainable development strategies,
particularly for enhancing resiliency to unprecedented global challenges such as
climate change, human migration, and pandemics. However, there is growing
concern that STEM graduate education may be falling short on preparing the
nation’s workforce to face these global challenges. Equipping students with
transformative skills in STEM is necessary for their future success, and for the
sustainable development of society. This National Science Foundation Innovations
in Graduate Education (IGE) award to Pennsylvania State University will engage
underrepresented graduate students in real-world international experiences.
Students will develop creative solutions to complex sustainable development
challenges as an integral part of team working in close collaboration with local
communities. Each year, a cohort of 12 graduate students will advance technical,
ecological, and social strategies for sustainable development in 1- to 6-month
research internships at different sites around the world. To empower them to
effectively and compassionately advocate for change where it is needed most,
participants will also receive modular professional development training in
science communication, multiculturalism, global leadership, and environmental
justice. As a result, students will be better prepared to pursue diverse
professional careers in sustainable development, increasing the capacity of the
future workforce to solve important environmental challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this IGE project is to improve the
scientific basis of environmental decision-making, and increase the likelihood
of successful implementation of sustainability strategies now and into the
future. To meet this goal, this program aims to advance project-based learning
through hypothesis-driven contextual systems research in sustainable
development. Collaborative, stakeholder-driven research topics intersect at the
water-energy-food nexus and include: water treatment and reuse; renewable energy
production; nutrient management; sustainable agricultural systems; reducing air
pollution and carbon emissions; remote sensing for environmental impact
assessment; and climate change mitigation. Sustainable development provides a
unifying and motivational theme under which faculty and students can work
together across traditional academic boundaries, providing inherent
opportunities for teamwork and transdisciplinary collaboration. This initiative
is strategically designed to train and empower students that are members of
underrepresented groups to develop and mobilize sustainable development
solutions together with stakeholders and leading experts. Further, this project
will build the foundational principles of transformative graduate education in
sustainability that can be replicated at community-engaged institutions
everywhere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to
pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.