* 2105555
* IGE: Learning the Entire Pipeline: Analyzing and Improving Graduate Engineering Education through Communities of Practice
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Cesar Delgado, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 332,184.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to North Carolina State University will support groundbreaking research on how
graduate students in critical Engineering domains learn to put academic
knowledge into practice while working in diverse, interdisciplinary teams. In
order to prepare students to transfer their classroom experiences to
professional practice, engineering education needs to improve students’ ability
to work in multidisciplinary teams, deal with diverse opinions, ideas, and
backgrounds, and broaden their education to understand the impact of engineering
solutions in a global context. This project adopts a highly developed
theoretical framework called “communities of practice” (CoP) and applies,
researches, and further extends CoP theory in graduate classes across Civil
Engineering, Computer Science, and Electrical Engineering. This approach has a
strong emphasis on collaboration, teamwork, knowledge as doing, and
communication across disciplinary and cultural backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By applying this approach in three engineering courses
from three different engineering departments at North Carolina State University,
this project will yield insights around student interactions and learning within
different team settings: 1) integration into a professional engineering
environment, studying how students interact with professionals and how the
academic and professional communities learn from their encounters; 2) engagement
in interdisciplinary projects in teams that bring together two disciplinary
communities; and 3) engagement in interdisciplinary projects with teams that
work on subsystems which need to be integrated into one working whole. This
project will focus on how diversity plays out in CoPs, examine what factors lead
to productive participation by all, what challenges inhibit participation and
investigate approaches to structuring academic CoPs to support equitable
learning and contributions by all. Through this approach which involves various
settings and granularities in three different courses, this project will develop
a broader view of how engineering students learn in different team settings. The
proposed approach can help to bridge the gap between theory and practice,
facilitating the development of a workforce that can work within and across
teams, projects, and domains. To help apply the proposed approaches to other
disciplines, we will develop and disseminate a set of guidelines in our future
publications and presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education.
The goals of IGE are to pilot, test, and validate innovative approaches to
graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move these
approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.