* 2105233
* CRII: SCH: Domain-guided Machine Learning for Clinical Decision Support in Epilepsy
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yogatheesan Varatharajah, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,998.00

Despite the nationwide shortage of neurologists, present-day neurological care
relies heavily on time-consuming visual review of patient data by trained staff.
This is particularly emphasized in the field of epileptology where
epileptologists spend a substantial amount of their time on visually reviewing
and interpreting lengthy multi-channel time series of brain electrical activity,
called electroencephalography (EEG). This burden not only contributes to the
escalation of epileptologist burnout, but also introduces reviewer bias and
potential errors in clinical decisions. The goal of this proposal is to develop
a machine-learning (ML)-based decision support framework that works together
with epileptologists and focuses their attention to actionable information. We
will leverage the computing expertise of Illinois and the clinical domain
expertise of our collaborators at the Mayo Clinic and demonstrate significant
innovations across the data-science lifecycle to achieve the aforementioned
goal. The data and the methods utilized in this research will serve as examples
in advanced interdisciplinary classes and training healthcare professionals. We
also believe that the natural appeal of healthcare applications will stimulate
the interest of undergraduates and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a set of novel
domain-guided analytical methods to process time-series EEG data, extract
actionable information and provide clinical decision support for diagnosing
epilepsy. The intellectual merit of the proposed research is in addressing an
unmet need in the field of epileptology through the development of novel
explainable machine learning architectures guided by clinical domain expertise.
Our proposed work includes, a) development of a fully automated and efficient
EEG preprocessing pipeline by leveraging the cheap inference capability of deep
learning-based approaches; b) designing novel ML models, guided by domain
expertise, that capture the spatio-temporal dynamics of EEG data; c)
interpretation of model predictions and quantification of prediction uncertainty
for clinical decision support; and d) demonstration of the framework in the real
world by developing a robust analytical tool to augment expert review of EEGs
and improve the sensitivity of epilepsy diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.