* 2105307
* Effects of early life adversity on the pace of aging in rhesus macaques
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Lauren Brent, Patterson, Samantha
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 146,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. James Higham
at New York University, Dr. Noah Snyder-Mackler at Arizona State University, and
Dr. Lauren Brent at the University of Exeter, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating whether early life adversity
reduces life expectancy and accelerates aging in free ranging rhesus macaques
(Macaca mulatta). Exposure to social and ecological hardships during early
development can exert negative effects on aging health and survival in a wide
range of species including humans. However, the biological mechanisms underlying
these consequences of early adversity are not well understood. Given the rapidly
growing aging-population, there is an urgent need to determine the type of
factors and their timing that affect variation in the pace of aging. The present
study has the unique benefit of incorporating historical data with expansive
longitudinal biological sampling to produce the most comprehensive model of
early life adversity and aging to date. Further, by studying a close primate
relative in a naturalistic environment, this research takes a comparative
evolutionary approach and adds to our understanding of the context in which
these early life effects evolved and how they vary across species and
environments. This research fills important gaps in our understanding of the
mechanisms and evolution of human aging health and can thus improve our
understanding of how to address disparities in human health stemming from early
life adversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adverse experiences in early life can have
profound lasting consequences, such as increased susceptibility to diseases, but
exactly how early life adversity influences the physical, physiological, and
cellular declines that begin prior to disease and death is less understood. The
present research investigates how early life adversity predicts lifespan and the
pace of aging in a population of free ranging rhesus macaques. No other
population of nonhuman primates offers the opportunity to study early life
adversity in relation to multiple domains of aging. The proposed study
capitalizes on long-term demographic data alongside detailed behavioral,
molecular, physiological, and physical data to characterize each animal’s
adverse experiences early in life (e.g., parental loss, low social status,
social isolation, and presence of a competing sibling) and evaluate how this
predicts survival and longitudinal aging across domains. Repeated biological
samples are collected from individuals, which include endocrine and immune
biomarkers (e.g., HPA-axis function, immune activation, inflammation), molecular
biomarkers (e.g., DNA methylation, telomere attrition, mitochondrial function),
and physical biomarkers (e.g., body condition, facial aging, joint mobility,
gait speed). By conducting a study with both a lifespan perspective and an
expansive set of biomarkers measured longitudinally across adulthood, these
findings will establish a comprehensive model for the evolution of early life
effects, as a foundation for future research in comparative biological
anthropology and evolutionary medicine. The multi-output analyses will identify
whether early life adversity affects some domains of aging more than others and
if some domains of aging precede others. Together the results of the proposed
study will shed light on the evolution of responses to early life adversity, and
contribute to our understanding of how and why individuals age
differently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.