* 2105387
* Antimicrobial-Membrane Interactions in Living Bacteria
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Hai-Lung Dai, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 510,684.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Hai-Lung Dai of Temple University is studying
how bacterial membranes regulate their interactions with the surrounding
environment, in particular those containing antimicrobial agents. The goal of
this project is to provide fundamental knowledge that holds potential for future
development of more effective antimicrobials that destroy disease-causing
bacteria and reduce bacterial resistance to antibiotics. The role of small
molecules and synthetic proteins in changing the permeability of bacterial cell
membranes will be studied by quantitatively examining the response of small
molecules whose interaction with light allows for their very sensitive detection
when bound to cell membrane components. This powerful light-based method will be
used to test how tiny holes are formed in the membrane upon membrane interaction
with nearby chemicals or by changing how molecules move through channels in the
membrane of bacteria. Professor Dai will integrate high school, college, and PhD
students into the research program, providing a highly diverse group of students
a very broad scientific skill set to help them pursue their career goals.
Further broadening the impact of the project is a summer camp for Philadelphia
inner city middle school students. In sum, the project will help strengthen the
scientific workforce by training and exposing young minds to research aimed at
providing answers to important fundamental questions about the chemistry of
bacterial membranes with the ultimate goal of providing information key to
addressing bacterial infections and antibiotic resistance. The significance of
the research area is evidenced by the growing problem of antimicrobial-resistant
bacterial infections, which are predicted by the World Health Organization and
the United Nations to result in the death of 10 million people annually by 2050.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, Professor Dai will examine how the complex
wall structures of bacteria exercise their regulatory functions on external
molecules like antimicrobials. We will delineate, using both nonlinear optical
spectroscopy and microscopy approaches, a variety of membrane transport
mechanisms. These will include those based on import channels, efflux pumps, and
lipid bilayer permeability, which play key roles in regulating intracellular
concentrations of molecules critical to bacteria viability and protecting the
bacteria from harmful compounds or an over-abundance of what would otherwise be
thought to be useful compounds. The research will provide fundamental
understanding of how antimicrobials interact with the various components of
bacterial membranes to make them more permeable and reduce the protective
functions of the membrane. Experiments will be designed to gather data critical
for understanding how membranes perform their regulatory functions for living
cells, as well as for designing strategies for developing more effective
antimicrobials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.