* 2105195
* Mechanisms to support word learning in a non-native language
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Shiloh Drake, Drake, Shiloh
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Melissa M. Baese-Berk at the University of
Oregon, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating processes that affect language learning as an adult. We
effortlessly incorporate new words like kvetch and Google into our native
language structure, but we have much more difficulty learning how words are
structured in the languages we learn as adults. Languages like Arabic present a
particular challenge for English speakers to learn due to its word formation
processes being dramatically different from English: for example, while book and
cat become books and cats in English, kitaab (book) and qitta (cat) become kutub
(books) and qitaat (cats) in Arabic. Which factors affect how well we learn
these patterns in languages that we learn as adults?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
knowing more about the factors that influence adult word learning and exploring
the types of errors that adults make in the early stages of learning a language,
we can develop a more nuanced view of how language learning happens in the fully
developed adult mind. This research will also provide insight into one of the
key theoretical questions in language acquisition: Why are we able to continue
learning and integrating new words in our primary language throughout our
lifespan, but have difficulty learning nativelike structural properties of words
in languages we acquire as adults? The three proposed manipulations take
advantage of common techniques and limitations in the second language classroom
to better connect the existing psycholinguistics literature in processing and
the existing second language acquisition and pedagogy literature. The proposed
project uses an artificial grammar learning paradigm that incorporates different
word formation patterns while different learning scenarios are tested. This will
provide us with further knowledge about which of the scenarios are most
effective for word learning, and can be incorporated into classroom
pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.