* 2105118
* A novel approach for increasing radiation resistance of multicomponent alloys using synergistic solutes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Pascal Bellon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2025
* USD 710,620.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials employed in current nuclear
reactors suffer from detrimental evolutions triggered by their continuous
exposure to irradiation by energetic particles, resulting in limited service
life. The research explores a novel approach to dramatically suppress the
kinetics of some of these evolutions through minor addition of alloying
elements. Since it is now known that addition of one solute can only imperfectly
meet the many functions required for that goal, here a combination of
synergistic elements is pursued. Atomistic simulations and modeling are used to
identify the most effective combination of such alloying elements, and nanoscale
experiments are designed to test and validate the proposed approach on model
metallic alloys, including Cu-based alloys. This research impacts broadly the
development of alloy design strategies for new materials that are critical to
advanced energy technologies. The program supports the development of workforce
in the Science, Technology, Engineering and Math fields by supporting two
graduate students and several undergraduate students. The research is integrated
with undergraduate education by developing modeling modules and by implementing
active learning techniques in the courses taught by the
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
fundamental research investigates the use of solute additions for trapping point
defects toward the design of radiation resistant alloys. The motivation stems
from the recognition that the sustained fluxes of point defects to sinks such as
grain boundaries and dislocations is the main factor contributing to the long-
term degradation of materials during irradiation. In alloys, moreover, defect
fluxes often couple to chemical fluxes, resulting in irradiation-induced
segregation or even precipitation at sinks. An attractive solution is to
increase point-defect recombination by adding point defect-trapping solutes. The
challenge is to identify the best solutes that can trap point defect
efficiently, without being progressively removed from the matrix by solute drag
due to defect fluxes. The proposed research introduces the novel idea of using
synergistic solutes to meet these multiple requirements, employing first
principles calculations to determine solute-point defect interactions and self-
consistent mean-field theory to calculate defect and solute transport
coefficients. The experimental program aims at measuring directly the effect of
solute on the overall vacancy diffusion and on solute drag. This is achieved by
measuring the broadening and the drift of thin marker layers placed at strategic
positions in a Cu thin film using atom probe tomography. The proposed
experimental program is complemented by kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. The
broader impact of the research includes the development of alloy design
strategies for new materials that are critical to advanced energy technologies.
The project will also establish an international collaboration with Dr. T.
Schuler, from CEA, France, on the modeling of point defects and solute coupled
transport. In addition, research and teaching will be integrated by developing
computational modules for undergraduate courses and by mentoring undergraduate
students through research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.