* 2105604
* Using Whiptail Lizards to Understand the Integration of Environmental and Host Genetic Effects on Host-Associated Microbiota
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sharon Bewick, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2024
* USD 623,931.00

Animals, including humans, harbor large numbers of different microbes on and in
their bodies – so called host-associated microbiota. Recently, scientists have
begun to realize that host-associated microbiota are important determinants of
host health. Microbes in an animal’s gut, for instance, help digestion and can
even help determine whether the animal is lean or obese. Meanwhile, microbes on
an animal’s skin can influence everything from wound healing to susceptibility
to cutaneous disease. Despite the importance of host-associated microbiota to
host health, there is a surprising amount of variation in the microbiota on one
host relative to another. How do these differences emerge? More specifically,
are these differences a result of nature (i.e., host genetics) or nurture (i.e.,
host environment)? Because most animals are genetically unique, it can be hard
to determine whether inter-individual differences in host-associated microbiota
are a result of host genetics, environment or both. In whiptail lizards, there
are entire populations of genetically identical clones. What’s more, these
clones are closely related to other, sexually reproducing whiptail lizard
species where each individual lizard is genetically unique. By comparing inter-
individual variation in host-associated microbiota across different environments
in clonal lizard populations versus sexually reproducing lizard populations, it
will be possible to assess the relative importance of both host genetics and
environment on host-associated microbiota. This research also provides an
opportunity to train undergraduate students in research and scientific
communication to help train the next generation workforce in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategy for this project is to use 16S rRNA gene
sequencing to characterize and compare intraspecific variation in the bacterial
and archaeal gut and skin microbiota of four hybrid parthenogenetic Aspidoscelis
species and their bisexual parents. Microbiota of each lizard complex
(parthenogen + bisexual parent(s)), will be examined within a single vegetation
community (low environmental variation), across different vegetation communities
(intermediate environmental variation) and, for a subset of systems, across
broad geographic ranges (high environmental variation). The first hypothesis is
that variation will be smaller in parthenogens as compared to their bisexual
parents. The second hypothesis is that inter-individual variation in lizard
microbiota is driven by the environment, and that microbiome variation will be
smaller at lower levels of environmental heterogeneity. Determining the
underlying causes of inter-individual variation in host-associated microbiota
will identify rules governing host-associated microbial community assembly and,
by extension, host health, fitness and ecological success. Results from this
work will have implications for both understanding microbial community assembly
and guiding host conservation. As an example, knowledge of the factors that
promote healthy host microbiomes will help to clarify trade-offs between
preserving landscape diversity versus host genetic diversity during reserve
selection. Undergraduate students who are supported by this proposal will have
the chance to perform research and to also develop podcasts about biology
research to broaden participation and to train students for careers in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.