* 2105312
* Fundamental Studies on Spider Egg Case Silk Biomaterials and their Mimics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Jeffery Yarger, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silk is a fascinating, naturally
occurring biomaterial that has had a large impact on human civilization.
Although silkworm silk is the most investigated biomaterial, in part because of
wide availability, the diversity of spider silks available can lead to new
generations of hitherto unexplored biomaterials. Spiders produce many different
forms of silk including ones used to construct egg cases. Spider egg case silk
proteins and biopolymer fibers have scarcely been studied, compared to spider
dragline silk (commonly used to as the scaffolding of spider webs) and silkworm
silk. Yet, its mechanical properties (i.e., toughness) and conserved and
repetitive gene sequence have been studied and shown to be significantly
different from other spider silks. The molecular structure- and mechanical-
function relationship in spider egg case silks and biomaterial composites with
nanoparticles will allow for the development of new bionanomaterials with
predictably tunable optical, mechanical and thermal properties. This
biomaterials research brings together aspects of biochemistry, biomaterials and
bioengineering, which requires a diverse scientific team, including physicists,
chemists, biochemists and bioengineers from Arizona State University (ASU) and
collaborations with Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). This multi-institutional
and multi-disciplinary research will expose graduate, undergraduate and high
school students to modern transdisciplinary research and modern communication
and teamwork tools for building and maintaining research across multiple labs
and institutes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spiders produce different forms of silk proteins or
spidroins, of which, tubuliform and aciniform silk is used to construct egg
cases. The mechanical properties (i.e., toughness) and conserved and repetitive
gene sequence are known for many spider’s egg case silk proteins and shown to be
significantly different from other proteins used to make the more commonly
studied dragline spider silks. The proposed research team plans to explore the
structure-function relationship in spider egg case silks, spider silk
polypeptides derived from spider egg case silk protein motifs, and biomaterial
nanocomposites of egg case silks with nanoparticles. Using recently developed
methods for obtaining appreciable quantities of isotopically enriched spider egg
case silks, molecular structure and dynamics will be investigated using advanced
magnetic resonance techniques. Besides natural spider silks, significant effort
will be placed on peptide mimics derived from spider egg case proteins
repetitive motifs, allowing structure-function studies, self-assembly and
potentially in the long-term overcoming the bioproduction bottleneck for
practical application. Using both spider silk polypeptides and processed spider
egg case silk, nanoparticle-silk composite biomaterials with tunable properties
will be designed and generated for specific biomaterials applications. The
biocompatibility of the spider silk polypeptides, their mimics and
nanocomposites will be studied comprehensively in vitro and in
vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.