* 2105048
* Transport on van der Wals Superconductor Heretostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2026
* Philip Kim, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 03/31/2026
* USD 380,000.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is a robust macroscopic
quantum state that can be utilized for various modern technological applications
based on low energy dissipation and quantum coherence. This project will enable
the investigation of emergent quantum phenomena associated with extremely thin
crystals of high-temperature superconductors. We will build stacked atomic
layers of thin superconductors combined with other atomically thin crystalline
materials to form more complex quantum systems for this study. The electronic
controllability demonstrated in our low-dimensional device structure allows us
to investigate the intriguing interaction between electrons and magnetic field
vortices near the transition, leading to quantum device applications based on
our discoveries. We will develop a novel experimental method to manipulate our
superconductors for stacked device forms to achieve this goal. The diverse
functionality achieved by complex device structures enables experimental
investigation of electronic, magnetic, and thermal properties of resulting
structures. We will also develop a theoretical framework to deepen our
understanding of high-temperature superconductivity. The proposed study of
atomically thin stacked superconductors will promote our understanding of
emergent physical phenomena in quantum materials and offer a platform for
building quantum technology. New physical properties discovered in this quantum
material system can enable novel device applications, such as electronics and
magnetoelectronic superconducting devices. A tight combination of research and
educational/outreach activities will raise the next generation of science and
engineering leaders.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The
research focus of this project is investigating emergent physical phenomena near
the superconductor-insulator transition in van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures
formed by atomically thin high-temperature superconductors (HTSs). Based on our
current understanding of fluctuation effects and non-equilibrium states in
2-dimensional (2D) superconductors, we will demonstrate the fabrication of 2D
vdW superconductors for hybrid heterostructures to achieve complex and diverse
functionalities. We study local electronic compressibility in those systems by
employing charge-sensitive graphene nanoribbons on top of atomically thin HTS.
We also investigate magneto thermoelectric effects and vortex viscosity in a 2D
vortex system near the vicinity of the superconductor insulator transition (SIT)
regime. Furthermore, we plan to build double-layer devices for vortex and charge
drag experiments for detecting magnetic monopoles and their dynamics to
understand the vortex-Cooper pair duality. Finally, we will develop a reliable
theoretical framework to understand topological obstruction for splitting Cooper
pairs into single electrons in the presence of magnetic monopoles near the SIT.
The engineering capability of 2D vdW heterostructures comprised of HTS and a
deep understanding of the vortex-Cooper pair duality will result in novel
functionalities, leading to research breakthroughs in quantum materials with
emergent phenomena. We also integrate a tight combination of research and
educational/outreach activities for nurturing the next generation of science and
engineering leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.