* 2105932
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Modeling and forecasting phenology across spatiotemporal and taxonomic scales using ecological observatory and mobilized digital herbarium data
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Susan Mazer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2026
* USD 528,399.00

Environmental change of all kinds – including climate change, urbanization, and
wildfire – affects the seasonal timing of life cycle events in plants worldwide.
Most notable are the effects of environmental conditions on the seasonal onset
and duration of flowering. The timing of flowering within and among species is
important for the persistence of natural populations because it affects
interactions between plants, and the availability of flowers and fruits for the
animals that depend on them. But the effects of environmental change on
flowering differ among species and regions. This project aims to understand and
forecast changes in flowering and fruiting among thousands of different plant
species across the continental U.S.A. This project takes full advantage of
millions of observations of flowering times collected by scientists working with
the National Ecological Observation Network (NEON) and citizen-scientists
contributing observations from their homes, neighborhoods, and public lands to
the National Phenology Network (NPN). The researchers will augment these records
of flowering times with the data from millions more herbarium specimens that are
available on-line to detect the responses of flowering times to the past century
of climate change. These observations will be combined with soil quality, plant
cover, land use history, climate, and disturbance data to better understand how
different environmental conditions influence species-specific and regional
flowering times. Finally, the researchers will use statistical models to
forecast short and long-term changes in future flowering times. The combined
dataset will be a valuable resource available to other researchers examining the
effects of environmental change on plant species and community traits. In
addition, the research will provide educational opportunities for K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers. The project
will also engage citizen-scientists who will contribute to a database of
flowering times observed from herbarium collections through the CrowdCurio
crowdsourcing platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant phenology–the seasonal timing
of key developmental events–is essential for species’ reproductive success.
However, critical gaps remain in our understanding of phenology across space,
time, and taxa. Increasingly, online herbaria and associated data are being
mobilized to address these knowledge gaps because they provide extensive data
that can be used to detect phenological responses to climatic change within and
among biomes, functional groups, and taxonomic groups. In this project, the
standardized, replicated, and focused phenological observations provided by NEON
and the USA National Phenology Network will be harmonized for the first time
with the taxonomic, spatial, and geographic breadth of herbarium data. First,
flowering times derived from herbarium specimens will be assembled and augmented
to include &gt; 4400 plant species that collectively span much of the
continental US, with specific attention to key regions that have been digitized
but overlooked: prairie, alpine, and urban biomes. Second, sources of variation
in phenology within and among species, geographic regions, and higher taxa, and
the effects of numerous understudied extrinsic factors (e.g., fire history, soil
quality, disturbance) will be modeled. Third, forecasts of near- and long-term
changes in the phenological behavior of populations, species, and communities
will be modeled to better understand phenological responses at multiple
ecological, phylogenetic, and temporal scales. Collectively, these efforts will
help to elucidate plausible mechanistic responses to climatic and geographic
factors that will determine species’ future phenology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Division of Environmental Biology/Macrosystems
Biology and NEON-enabled Science Program and the Division of Biological
Infrastructure/Capacity: Cyberinfrastructure Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.