* 2105133
* CRII: III: Discovering Complex Mixture Patterns in Spatial Data to Advance Resilience of Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yiqun Xie, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 174,983.00

Our communities have continued to face unprecedented challenges in recent years,
including food-shortages, the COVID-19 pandemic, and natural disasters
exacerbated by climate change such as droughts, hurricanes, and fires. To
improve the resilience of communities, a key challenge is to understand “where”
existing weaknesses are in order to make timely policy intervention and changes
in planning. The goal of this project is to investigate novel data science and
computational techniques to identify such vulnerabilities using emerging spatial
and spatiotemporal big data such as Earth observation data (e.g., satellite-
based crop maps), urban points-of-interest, biodiversity databases, geo-tagged
social media streams, etc. Specifically, this project will explore the detection
of mixture patterns – a new pattern family that focuses on compositions of the
types of data points in space and time – which is necessary in revealing many of
the vulnerabilities. For example, regions with low crop diversification are
subject to devastating impact of a single disease, and places with low economic
diversification are vulnerable to changes in supply or demand for a single
sector. If successful, the results will lead to improved resilience in various
domains, including agriculture (e.g., lowering risks of food shortages), economy
(e.g., reducing impact of disturbances such as COVID-19), ecosystems (e.g.,
biodiversity) and many more. More broadly, mixture patterns may also help
improve other data science techniques. For example, in machine learning, mixture
patterns of error types may be used to inform better architecture designs or
training strategies. Proposed techniques will be disseminated via open-source
packages on GitHub as well as incorporation with popular software/tools to
enhance research infrastructure and promote reproducible research. This research
will also facilitate development of new undergraduate courses at the University
of Maryland and help engage students from underrepresented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to result in multiple data
science and computing innovations. First, it will explore novel statistically-
robust formulations of mixture patterns (e.g., new test statistics and point
processes) to allow explicit control of the rate of spurious results, which is
critical in real-world applications with limited resources and high societal
impact. Second, it will design scalable computational frameworks to identify
mixtures patterns with irregular shapes to capture real-world mixture processes
with complex footprints. A unique challenge is that local- and pattern-level
mixture signatures can be different, which violates the assumption of local-
criteria-based search paradigms widely used in clustering-type of techniques.
New algorithmic designs will be explored to bridge this gap. Finally, it will
investigate new spatiotemporal formulations to capture the non-stationarity of
mixture patterns across spatial scales and time-series. If successful, the
results will expand data science knowledge with new pattern families, and have
the potential to transform related domain science research by opening new lenses
for data analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.