* 2105495
* Singlet Fission, Triplet Upconversion, and Thermally-Activated Delayed Fluorescence: Controlling Exciton Dynamics with Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Mircea Dinca, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2026
* USD 480,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and controlling the interaction of
light with matter is of fundamental importance for a number of technologies
including solar photovoltaic cells, which absorb light to produce electricity,
and light-emitting diodes, which use electricity to produce light. The processes
that control the efficiency of these modern-day devices depend on many
variables. Some of these variables, such as the structure of the molecules that
make up the devices, we can control by molecular design. However, some variables
are still difficult to control because they depend on how molecules are arranged
spatially with respect to each other, rather than the individual structure of
each molecule. This supra-molecular arrangement cannot typically be dictated by
traditional chemical synthesis. With this project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program and the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program in the Division of Materials Research, Prof. Dinca and his research
group tackle this challenge: to ultimately control how molecules are arranged
with respect to each other such that when light interacts with the solids made
by these molecules, the energy formed, called an exciton, can be quantified and
directed. This provides a deeper understanding of how energy is transported
within solids, to ultimately provide a blueprint to increase the efficiency of
modern devices such as organic photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, and other
optical devices. As part of this award the principal investigator also provides
training for graduate and undergraduate students in issues related broadly to
synthesis of materials, as well as photophysical investigations and related
analytical techniques, and engages in outreach activities in the Boston
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Excitons are bound
electron-hole pairs that form when light interacts with matter. Although much is
understood about how excitons form and how they travel within solids, little is
known about how to control them. As such, despite the importance of exciton
dynamics for determining efficiencies in a range of technologies from solar
cells to light-emitting diodes and organic lasers, there are no clear synthetic
handles on controlling the relative orientation of the organic components that
give rise to excitons. Indeed, the distance and angles between chromophore
molecules in the solid state, is intimately involved in determining exciton
diffusion and lifetimes, but current techniques and materials do not allow
systematic control of these metrics. This project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program and the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program in the Division of Materials Research investigates a class of solids
where the distance and the angles between organic molecules can be
systematically tuned even in the sub-angstrom regime called metal-organic
frameworks. Prof. Dinca and his research group use metal-organic frameworks to
demonstrate the ability to control exciton formation and dynamics. In
particular, this project focuses on three important processes involving
excitons: singlet fission, triplet upconversion, and thermally-activated delayed
fluorescence. All three processes depend critically on the relative orientation
of neighboring organic molecules, as well as on the molecular conformation or
shape of the particular chromophore involved in light
absorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.