* 2105471
* Dynamics, Embeddings, and Continuous Symplectic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Daniel Cristofaro-Gardiner, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2022
* USD 79,878.00

This is a project about systems that evolve in time, called dynamical systems.
Dynamical systems are fundamental across the sciences, but the mathematics
underlying their study is very difficult, many important questions remain open,
and new ideas are needed. A main theme of this project is to use a geometric
approach to bring fresh insight to this field. Recently, the PI and
collaborators used techniques from symplectic geometry to settle a longstanding
question about certain dynamical systems. They showed that a particular
dynamical system would take an infinite amount of energy to produce and used
this to establish a new dichotomy in the set of systems: the finite-energy ones,
and the rest. This dichotomy will enable a deeper understanding of the
classification of dynamical systems and should allow for the resolution of
several questions that have attracted wide interest. This project involves
further research in this direction. One goal of the project is to find a further
dichotomy for the finite-energy systems. By bringing a geometric approach to
bear on questions about dynamical systems that have resisted solution by other
methods, the project aims to showcase the power of these kinds of techniques. At
the same time, an idea at the heart of the approach comes from studying when one
symplectic shape can be deformed into a subset of another, and research in these
directions should deepen our understanding of symplectic geometry. The project
also has a substantial education component. The PI has previously worked to
broaden participation in mathematics, foster equity, and support educational
efforts in the field through prison education, research training in geometry at
the high school and undergraduate levels, and course design. The project
supports this work and related activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
involves a series of research investigations touching on the related fields of
symplectic dynamics, symplectic embeddings, and continuous symplectic geometry.
The main emphasis is on questions in low dimensions where powerful gauge
theoretic techniques are available. The PI and collaborators recently settled
the longstanding "Simplicity Conjecture" partly by contributing to the theory of
periodic Floer homology spectral invariants. The project aims to further develop
this theory and solve several longstanding questions; for example, to prove an
analogue of the Simplicity Conjecture in higher genus. The project also aims to
clarify the dynamics of Reeb flows, study infinite staircases in symplectic
embedding problems, investigate questions about topological symplectic
manifolds, and study higher-dimensional symplectic packing
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.