* 2105012
* CRII: OAC: A Computational Framework for Studying Transport Phenomena in Complex Networks: From Biological Towards Sustainable and Resilient Engineering Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Nariman Mahabadi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,381.00

Transport networks are found everywhere in living systems, from the veins in the
leaves of plants to the networks in our bodies: the respiratory system that
handles the flow of air, the circulatory system that carries nutrients through
blood circulation, and the networks of nerves and brain cells that transport
electrical impulses. Because biological networks are necessary for transporting
essential resources (blood, oxygen, water, and nutrients), they are critical for
health and survival. Therefore, there is a clear need to explore the fundamental
principles of these networks to better predict how they will behave under
unexpected conditions in order to prevent potential failures. Exploring the
underlying mechanisms of biological flow will not only advance the current state
of knowledge of biological transport networks but can provide exceptional
opportunities to solve complex problems in discrete calculus, graph theory, and
optimization. This would, in turn, lead to improvements in engineering transport
networks that are critical for maintaining human life in ways that will make
them more durable and operate with greater efficiency, from networks that are
large in scale, such as traffic systems, irrigation and water delivery systems,
and power grids to networks that are small in scale such as fuel cells, solar
cells, or artificial organs. The computational framework developed in this
project will advance our knowledge of biological vascular networks, which can
lead to optimized bioinspired solutions for many engineering transport networks
such as water distribution and drainage networks to the treatment of
cardiovascular diseases and more efficient drug delivery through the use of
nanoparticles. Since the developed models for leaf venation networks in this
project are critical to plant performance, the results can also enhance
productivity of ecosystems and will have applications in agriculture. As such,
this research project aligns with NSF’s mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance national health, prosperity and welfare. This work
incorporates multidisciplinary research collaborations that will make a
significant contribution to education, outreach, and diversity by engaging
undergraduate students, including underrepresented students, in research and
incorporation of biology and engineering in outreach programs for K through 12
students.z&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over billions of years of natural selection,
nature has evolved complex topologies to solve a wide range of problems. A
conspicuous class of such topologies are the ramified heterogeneous structures
in numerous biological systems that transport resources, such as leaf venation
networks, the root and axis system of plants, and the cardiovascular system of
animals and humans. The evolution and function of such branched structures is
not only critical for an organism’s survival and fitness but has also inspired
scientists and engineers to improve the performance of many engineering flow
networks such as fuel cells, solar cells and synthetic organs. The overall aim
of this project is to 1) develop a robust and efficient computational framework
to study transport phenomena in complex biological networks, 2) apply the
framework to study the rules of nature that optimize mass and heat transfer in
biological networks, and 3) assess the feasibility of bioinspired principles to
design sustainable and resilient engineering networks. The proposed framework
will enable the development of transformative models that not only advance our
knowledge about underlying biophysical phenomena in highly heterogeneous
biological networks but also provide new opportunities to apply bioinspired
solutions for many engineering applications. The proposed research will result
in a highly efficient and robust framework that enables (1) a fundamental
understanding of the performance of complex biological transport networks and
their biophysical characteristics and functions which are essential for
survival, (2) an understanding of multiphysics coupled transport phenomena in
highly heterogeneous biological networks, (3) an assessment of the resilience of
networks to damage and varying fluxes and an understanding the underlying
mechanisms and principles used by biological systems for optimization of cost
and performance, and (4) assessment of the feasibility and scalability of the
biological mechanisms as bioinspired solutions for practical engineering
problems that range from micro to macro in scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.