* 2105167
* Decoupling of DNA unwinding and synthesis in the replisome induces genome instability
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Michael Trakselis, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 05/31/2025
* USD 805,201.00

The long-held textbook viewpoint on DNA replication is that the replisome is a
stable multiprotein complex assembly that seamlessly coordinates coupled
synthesis on the leading and lagging strands. However, recent evidence indicates
a more dynamic replisome, where individual protein components exchange during
replication, creating stochastic processes of DNA unwinding, priming, and
synthesis. A more dynamic replisome would be useful in responding to various
roadblocks or challenges to DNA replication progression. Still, enzymatic
coordination at the replication fork must be maintained, otherwise one activity
may dominate, creating excess and dangerous replication intermediates. This
project will determine the molecular contacts between replisome proteins that
act to coordinate and control DNA unwinding with synthesis. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be trained in techniques of advanced enzyme kinetics,
precise genetic manipulations, and novel biochemical and cellular assays.
Scientific outreach programs will encourage local elementary school students to
explore the wonders of their own genome through "DNA Days".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By definition, the advancement of the replisome is
dependent on the DNA duplex unwinding activity of the hexameric helicase to
create single-strand templates. Once it is unwound, the polymerase holoenzyme
rapidly resynthesizes duplex DNA. This project will integrate complex in vitro
biochemistry experiments with in vivo genomic editing and correlated cellular
assays to characterize and quantify multicomponent molecular contacts required
to maintain replisome coupling. This research will also determine and
differentiate coupled kinetic enzymatic processes from those that are linked
directly through multisubunit replisome contacts. The resulting data, methods,
and findings will be broadly distributed and will provide deeper insights into
the mechanisms for replisome control and coordination of multiple enzymatic
activities necessary for proper genome
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded by the
Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
in the Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.