* 2105766
* CPS: Small: Inkjet Printed Flexible Electronic CPS with Context-aware Events of Interest Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Bashir Morshed, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 430,531.00

This project will develop novel, body-worn, flexible sensors fabricated using
low-cost inkjet printing technology on thin film polymers, develop novel
algorithms capable of automatically detecting health events in different
contexts, and develop a novel data reliability metric by analyzing sensor and
context data in real-time. The project will produce practice components for test
and validation in a clinical setting with cardiac patients to determine their
effectiveness for monitoring heart conditions. If successful, the project will
provide patients and clinicians with a tool to improve health monitoring in
natural environments. The research is expected to impact additive manufacturing
methods, flexible electronics, health monitoring, and smart and connected
communities initiatives. It will also provide training for undergraduate and
graduate students and expose the next generation of scholars and workers to
these technologies through a Summer Code Camp for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next generation Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) must
utilize resilient and reliable cyber/physical interfacing, be economically
viable, and be capable of processing extremely large data automatically and
reliably. Achieving this requires overcoming current technological barriers
associated with seamless integration of computation and physical domains and
meaningful interpretation of multimodal and multigrain data of scalable CPS.
Balancing theory with experimentation, this project will: 1) produce
foundational engineering process for CPS interface with thin-film flexible
electronic electrodes and low cost sensors fabricated with inkjet printing; 2)
develop new algorithms for autonomous processing of sensor data to detect
context-aware events of interest and data reliability metric for closed-loop CPS
using real-time machine learning implemented at edge; and 3) deploy CPS practice
components in a real-life pilot study to explore detection of cardiac episodes
and explore various closed loop feedback approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.