* 2105084
* CRII: CPS: Society-in-the-Loop Personalized Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Salma Elmalaki, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This project explores frameworks, tools, and methodologies that enable fairness-
aware, privacy-aware, society-in-the-loop, personalized Internet-of-Things (IoT)
systems. Thanks to the rapid growth in mobile computing and wearable
technologies, monitoring complex human context becomes feasible, which paves the
way to develop human-in-the-loop IoT systems that naturally evolve to adapt to
the human and environment state autonomously. Nevertheless, as we move forward
towards a long-standing desire to build effective, pervasive computing systems
that are both autonomous and personalized, we can push the envelope of these
systems to have a positive collateral effect on society. We can design the
personalized systems that are aware of and can mutually adapt to the context of
their surroundings for the collective benefit of the users. This requires new
computation paradigms and algorithms to achieve our vision for society-in-the-
loop personalized computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing such personalized
IoT applications faces many challenges that arise from "human variability." Such
variability stems from different humans, exhibiting different behaviors when
interacting with IoT applications (i.e., inter-human variability), when
interacting with the same IoT application (i.e., intra-human variability), and
when interacting with a group of humans in the same environment (i.e., multi-
human variability). To harness these variabilities, this project develops: (i) a
framework for "adaptation fairness" when multiple humans co-located in the same
environment; (ii) a suite of algorithms for "adaptation agents" to harness human
variability, (iii) protocols for collaboration among "adaptation agents" on
coordination strategies, and (iv) methods to protect private information held by
adaptation agents. Empirical validation is conducted in two very different
domains of interaction, the UCI testbeds for automotive advanced driver
assistance systems and for smart home automation. The project engages graduate,
undergraduate, and high-school students in the research, test, and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.