* 2105929
* Development of an ultrafine aerosol particle mobility analyzer with separation and sensitivity enhancement and real-time monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2025
* Carlos Larriba Andaluz, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2025
* USD 303,265.00

The goal of this project is to develop a new instrument to measure accurately
the size distribution of nanoparticles sampled in a variety of environmental
applications. The new instrument will enhance the sensitivity, selectivity, and
detection speed of ultrafine particles up to 100 nanometers in size, which are
referred to as PM0.1 particles. Particles of this small size arise from the same
natural or human-made sources that produce larger particles, but PM0.1 particles
may pose special health threats because they readily enter the body. Improved
measurement techniques could help with the detection and control of PM0.1
particles in the environment. The instrument that will be developed is an Ion
Mobility Spectrometer (IMS). The IMS will use an electric field that varies
spatially to restrict diffusion of particles in the gas phase and therefore will
enhance the resolution of measurements of the particle size distribution. In
addition, the IMS system will be coupled to a mass spectrometer so that particle
mobility can be correlated with particle mass. The use of this new instrument
will improve our fundamental understanding of aerosol and nanoparticle
characterization and transport in the gas phase. The research team will conduct
activities that demonstrate principles of aerosol science to K-12 students,
especially those from underrepresented groups, in summer camps. The team will
also communicate the role of aerosols in climate change and pollution through
K-12 teacher/mentor awareness symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aerosols are
generally classified by size obtained from their mobility in the gas phase. Most
often, mobility-based size distribution functions of aerosol particles are
measured with a scanning mobility particle sizer (SMPS). While the SMPS has been
highly successful, it has several shortcomings that could be addressed by
employing different techniques. For example, diffusional broadening leads to a
degradation in resolution for most operating commercial devices. Furthermore,
SMPSs typically require minutes to complete voltage scans. This duration limits
the information that can be obtained when aerosol samples vary rapidly in time,
which can occur when sampling near aircraft or roadways. These challenges are
exacerbated for measurements of PM0.1 particles in the gas phase. Despite
continued experimental and theoretical interest, there is still a knowledge gap
in the theoretical understanding of momentum transfer of particles that lie in
the free molecular regime (1-100nm). The proposed research is expected to impact
the aerosol field through increases in instrument separation/resolution by
restricting diffusion broadening of nanoparticles, classifications of small
aerosols through a mass-mobility and size relationship and quick, low signal-to-
noise scans to study rapidly varying aerosols (up to tens of milliseconds per
scan for particles smaller than 10 nanometers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.