* 2105661
* IGE: Enhancing Doctoral Research Training through Cascading Mentorship (Anteater Huddles)
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Barbara Sarnecka, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 05/31/2024
* USD 420,299.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award
to the University of California-Irvine will test a cascading mentorship program
for science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) doctoral students.
A centuries-old model of doctoral mentoring assumed that students learn by
working alongside their faculty advisors at the lab bench. However, research as
evolved into a team activity with advisors and students serving different roles
and rarely working together at the same task. In this environment, students
typically learn most research skills from advanced graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers rather than their faculty advisors. Cascading
mentorship describes such a model of mentoring from a rich network of faculty
and peers. Doctoral students who receive cascading mentorship are much more
likely to develop strong research skills than those who do not regardless of the
quality of mentoring received from their primary faculty advisors. However, not
all students are trained in large, well-functioning labs with ready-made
cascading mentorship networks. In addition, factors such as shared or dissimilar
cultural identity with the majority of faculty and differences in first-
generation studentsâ€™ access to faculty mentors, friends, or family members with
doctoral degree experience may result in differences in the quality of
mentoring. Thus, when doctoral programs fail to provide rich networks of
cascading mentorship, it is the students from minority communities who are
likely to suffer most.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, approximately 65
advanced graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in cognitive science
will be trained to lead cascading mentorship groups of five to ten doctoral
students each. The groups will use proven pedagogical methods to help members
plan their research, organize their time, and learn to produce the forms of
writing on which academic success depends such as: literature reviews, funding
proposals, research reports, etc. This project will address research questions
related to four scale-up challenges: 1) group leader effects, i.e., whether the
approach works when these mentorship groups are led by advanced graduate
students rather than by a faculty member; 2) implementation cost, i.e., whether
these groups can be supported in a way that is affordable for most doctoral
programs; 3) long-term effects of cascading mentorship over a period of years in
a variety of domains including: writing quantity and quality; progress through
the graduate program; mental health and well-being; and 4) broad suitability,
i.e., whether the model is equally effective for all students or whether only a
subset of students benefit. Results from this project will help departments
decide whether to adopt a cascading mentorship model program-wide or offer this
model as an option for a subset of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.