* 2105583
* Quantum Correlations in Information Theory, Their Interplay, and Their Limitations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Anna Vershynina, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 215,000.00

This project will advance mathematical knowledge of quantum information theory.
This work is in line with Quantum Leap, one of the NSF's 10 Big Ideas. One of
the goals of the Quantum Leap Big Idea is to develop next-generation quantum
technologies. But any technological advancement has usually been long-preceded
through theoretical mathematical progress. This project deals with questions in
quantum resource theory, in particular a theory of entanglement. Quantum devices
use quantum systems to encode and process information. These systems make it
possible to harness the effects of purely quantum phenomena such as
superposition (the ability of being in "two places" at once) and entanglement
(strong connections between two parts of the system) to drastically increase the
security and the speed of computational devices. Because of entanglement two
spatially separated particles can affect each other instantaneously, a
phenomenon which was initially considered to be paradoxical, even by Einstein.
One of the best-known protocols - quantum teleportation - relies on entanglement
to destroy a quantum state in one place and perfectly recreate it in another
distant location. While entanglement became one of the most valuable resources
in quantum theory, many attributes of its behavior remain unknown. The broader
impact of this award is to promote progress, diversity, and access to science on
all levels of society and to broaden participation from underrepresented
communities in STEM. The major broader impact goals are: 1) to enhance training
of graduate students in quantum information at the University of Houston; 2) to
improve educational opportunities in STEM for students in local middle-schools
in the economically challenged neighborhoods; 3) to increase public education in
STEM and quantum information science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entanglement is only
one quantifier of "quantumness" in a system. Other measures include coherence,
discord, and mutual information. Entanglement theory has gained its strong
mathematical footing in the 1990's, but a closely related coherence theory
started only recently. This project will establish proper mathematical limits on
and relations between these measures, unify them, and classify them. It is well-
known that under certain parameters, entanglement and coherence are dual to each
other, in a sense that coherence can be converted to entanglement via incoherent
operations, and vice versa in the asymptotic limit. This project will
investigate this relation for different entanglement and coherence measures.
Moreover, the Principal Investigator will develop and investigate properties of
newly proposed correlation measures. A closely related question is the
distinguishability between two quantum states. How well we can distinguish
different physical states determines how much information we can encode into a
certain system and how quickly we can manipulate it. One of the main problems
that this project will focus on is the continuity of these quantifiers, which is
a natural property of any quantum system. In other words, if the states are
close when measured by one of these distances, how close are they when measured
by another? Or how well can these states be distinguished? Or what is the
structure of states that are close to each other?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.