* 2105550
* I-Corps:  Learning-based Navigation Technology-enabled Service Robots for the Retail Industry
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Dinesh Manocha, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a retail service robot utilizing state-of-the-art, human-friendly
navigation technology developed for densely crowded environments. As per the
current industry estimates, retailers are losing $1 trillion worldwide due to
inventory aberrations. Retail customers are frequently disappointed by out-of-
stock items because of poor inventory management, leading to reduced customer
loyalty. To survive current market trends in which most items may be purchased
online, brick-and-mortar stores need to modernize, and use automated solutions
wherever possible to free up associates’ time and focus more on the customer
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a robot enabled with state-of-the-art collision avoidance
technology. It is capable of operating in crowds of a density greater than 1
person/square meter. The robot detects pedestrian movements using commodity
visual sensors and smartly plans a path that is least obtrusive to humans. The
collision avoidance technology also significantly reduces (by &gt; 50%) the
occurrence of the robot suddenly freezing or halting, which is a common
phenomenon in dense scenarios. The I-Corps program will help better understand
the applications of such a robot in the retail industry. The proposed robot will
navigate in a densely crowded store and will perform volumetric scans to capture
real-time data about the items on the shelves and customer buying patterns,
leading to an increase in efficiency and accuracy in managing a store’s
inventory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.