* 2105109
* Photo Controlled Magnetic Properties of van der Waals Layered Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Tunna Baruah, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent discovery of quantum magnets in
the post-silicon era offers the possibility of novel applications in computing,
database storage, and communications. To realize these applications, tuning the
magnetic properties of these materials is an ultimate goal of physics and
materials science research. A rapidly evolving research area, controlling and
manipulating the magnetic properties of quantum magnets using light, has just
begun. The goal of this project is to use external light as a control parameter
to drive quantum magnetic phases, to advance our knowledge and understanding,
and to control the emergent phases. In this project, photoexcitation across
broad time-scales (seconds to femtoseconds) is used to control and manipulate
the magnetic properties of these new classes of materials. Outreach activities
train army personnel and veterans at Fort Bliss and White Sands Missile Range in
the El Paso region. This project further provides research and peer-coaching
opportunities as well as professional development seminars to further foster
education in STEM fields in UTEP, which is predominantly (81%) a Hispanic
serving institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newly
discovered (quasi) two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) magnets show
unexpected magnetic properties (monolayer ferromagnetism, giant second harmonic
generation, etc.,) associated with the reduced dimension, which has generated a
great deal of excitement in the recent past. Previous works have shown that
electric field, electrostatic doping, external pressure, and mixed halide
chemistry can control the magnetic properties of these materials. Unlike the
above approaches, ultrafast photoexcitation is known to control and manipulate
the magnetic properties of materials much more rapidly and effectively which
allows developing light controlled spin electronics. Previous researchers have
measured the magnetic properties of these layered materials using light.
However, controlling and manipulating their magnetic properties using light has
largely been unexplored. The main objective of this research is to establish a
comprehensive fundamental scientific knowledge and understanding in controlling
and manipulating the magnetic behavior of vdW materials upon photoexcitation. Of
specific importance, the two main goals of this combined experimental and
theoretical effort are to (a) study the magnetic properties in quasi-2D and 2D
CrX3 upon photoexcitation, and to (b) gain in-depth understanding on magnetic
exchange interactions and 2D correlations near magnetic order in quasi-2D CrX3
alter upon photoexcitation. This effort has the potential to be extended to
other emerging vdW magnetic metals, both at the quasi-2D and true 2D limit. This
project provides research and educational opportunities for Hispanic students,
army personnel and veterans at Fort Bliss and White Sands Missile Range in the
El Paso region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.