* 2105226
* Variational Methods in Singular Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Georgios Daskalopoulos, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 454,629.00

Physical phenomena tend to obey the least action principle, namely moving in
trajectories that make the action locally stationary. If the action is given by
Dirichlet energy, then the stationary points are in some cases geodesics
(shortest paths), and in other cases harmonic functions and various
generalizations of these notions familiar from elementary physics. In this
project, the PI will study stationary solutions either related to harmonic maps
obtained by minimizing Dirichlet energy or best Lipschitz maps (sometimes called
infinity harmonic) obtained by minimizing Lipschitz constants. Both problems
have interesting applications to geometric topology and group theory. The
project also includes significant training and mentoring of junior
mathematicians (students, post-doctoral researchers, junior faculty)&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The work of Eells-Sampson in the 60's launched an explosion of
research for harmonic maps between Riemannian manifolds. Many important
applications followed in minimal surface theory, Kaehler geometry and rigidity
of group actions on manifolds among others. More recently, the seminal work of
Gromov-Schoen and Korevaar-Schoen on harmonic maps to metric space targets
initiated major progress in understanding phenomena associated with singular
spaces, like rigidity of groups acting on buildings and the completion of
Teichmueller space. In the first part of the project PI will study several
problems in harmonic map theory for singular geometry with applications to
Teichmueller theory. In the second part PI will study the calculus of variations
of functionals associated with the sup-norm of the gradient of maps between
Riemannian manifolds. Such functionals yield solutions of fully non-linear
degenerate PDE's with very challenging regularity properties and whose singular
set gives geometric realizations of topological objects like geodesic foliations
and laminations related to Thurston theory. The PI will also train graduate
students and maintains a robust mentoring program for all junior researchers in
his department. The latter provides guidance and support to post-doctoral
researchers and junior faculty on a range of issues related to professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.