* 2105221
* Collaborative Research: Mental Health Opportunities for Professional Empowerment in STEM (HOPES)
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Anna Sala, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 189,253.00

The National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to
Montana Technological University, Montana State University-Billings, and the
University of Montana will develop and test a suite of innovative strategies to
improve the mental health and resilience of graduate students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). To accomplish this goal, the
project includes interventions for both graduate students and the faculty
mentors with whom they work closely, and it seeks to help transform the cultures
of the departments to become more supportive and inclusive. This project
addresses a gap in proven approaches to help graduate students manage the
significant mental and emotional stresses and pressures they face. Counseling
available on campuses mostly is designed for undergraduates, and little is known
about how to empower STEM graduate students to cope with the stresses of their
challenging research projects; overcome stigma, self doubt, and social
isolation; and promote help-seeking and a sense of belonging. The situation is
even tougher for women and minority students, veterans, students with
disabilities, and students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Improving the well-
being of diverse graduate students will boost their prospects for successful
STEM careers – thereby accelerating science and engineering progress and
contributing to American economic growth and competitiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to design and pilot an innovative
model for fostering graduate students’ life-long skills for mental health
awareness and well-being, while transforming the way faculty engage with
graduate students. The first step will be to conduct baseline surveys of
students and faculty to obtain information needed to prioritize and design
educational interventions. Project components will include: 1) activities to
reduce stigma; 2) facilitated psychoeducational peer mentoring to assist
students in developing effective coping strategies and enhanced resilience; 3)
STEM faculty workshops aimed at implementing holistic mentoring, enhancing
inclusiveness, and transforming departmental climates; and 4) activities
engaging advisors and advisees together in collaborative problem solving. After
refining the approach and demonstrating effectiveness on the three campuses, the
team will assist three other universities in adapting the approaches to
demonstrate scale up. Overall, the project will establish an innovative,
effective, and replicable model for improving STEM graduate education by
elevating positive mental health to an important outcome. Evaluation feedback
will help improve the activities and measure progress toward achievement of the
goal. Activity descriptions, facilitator guides, curricula, and scale-up guides
will be published and disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the IGE program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR). The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test,
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.