* 2105004
* CRII: CNS: Blockchain-based Distributed Machine Learning for Mobile Crowd Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Qin Hu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,823.00

Facilitated by multiple sensors on mobile devices, mobile crowd sensing (MCS)
relies on the mobility and characteristics of mobile users to perceive the
physical world in real time, inspiring massive innovative services. Despite its
prevailing deployment and great potential, conventional MCS devices transmit all
sensing data to the requestors, overburdening them with high communication and
computation resource consumption. This becomes even worse in practice since
redundant workers are recruited for quality consideration, thus offsetting the
major advantage of economical monitoring and frustrating resource-constrained
requestors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to integrate sensing and
learning for MCS without the consumption of excessive resources. Specifically,
given that sensing data is being collected through dispersed edge servers,
blockchain-based federated learning (FL) is introduced to protect data privacy
and achieve distributed machine learning (ML) with performance enhancement of
trustworthiness and efficiency. The technical contributions of this research
include the extension of trust from on-chain to off-chain procedures via
incentive mechanism designs for eliciting trustworthy submissions from
distributed edge learners. It also aims to establish instantly reliable
computing environments in an off-chain manner for guaranteed efficiency of
distributed ML in MCS, with both the intra-environment consensus protocol design
and inter-environment interaction analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
outcome of this project will contribute to improving the availability and cost-
efficiency of MCS, making the perception of the physical world more economical
and intelligent. The main technology of blockchain-based distributed ML can
benefit society by enhancing applications involving temporal-spatial data
collection and calculation. Success of this project will enhance things such as
internet of things (IoT), smart cities, wireless networking, and more. The
research will be closely integrated into the education and training of students
while advancing curriculum development with new theories and methodologies. This
project plans to inspire future generations of diverse researchers to join
science and engineering. Rapid dissemination of research findings will be
realized through publications to top conferences and journals. All designs will
be publicly available on the PIs website for broad adoption and future research
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.