* 2105253
* The Impact of Federal Housing Policies on Racial Inequality
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Omer Ali, Ali, Omer
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. William
Darity, Jr. at Duke University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the impact of federal housing policies on
racial inequality. The goal of this research project is to advance our
understanding of the root causes of racial inequality by examining the role
played by discriminatory housing policies. Studying the impact of New Deal
housing policies on blacks and whites will test a narrative attributing present-
day racial disparities in home-ownership and wealth to federal programs that
favored white households. The findings of this study have the potential to shape
our understanding of the origins and persistence of racial inequality; a
phenomenon that affects all Americans through its impact on political discourse,
government policy, and individuals' views about public policies, including
criminal justice, taxation, social programs and public school
finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explain the ubiquity of black disadvantage, an
emerging narrative points to the federal government's New Deal housing programs
as culprits in exacerbating and congealing racial disparities by discouraging
black home-ownership and promoting residential segregation. The objective of
this project is to interrogate this narrative by bringing data to bear on its
hypotheses. The research plan involves using full count census data from the
1930 and 1940 decennial censuses to estimate the short-term impact of the
Federal Housing Administration's (FHA) mortgage guarantee program on black and
white home-ownership, home values, and socioeconomic standing. A second
objective involves using census data samples starting in 1950 to estimate the
long-term impact of the FHA's mortgage program on these same outcomes. A novel
instrumental variables strategy will be used to gain causal leverage on this
question, as counties that receive higher levels of FHA lending may also exhibit
elevated racial disparities for unrelated reasons. Original data collection from
the National Archives will shed light on the geographic distribution of FHA
mortgages at the level of individual addresses and present a descriptive account
of FHA mortgage recipients. Data collection from the 1950 census of housing will
extend the duration of time for which we can measure program activity by a
decade. The project seeks to produce the first comprehensive empirical
evaluation of an important federal program that has likely shaped the racial
geography of urban areas across the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.