* 2105478
* Differential Equations and the Geometry of Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jeff Viaclovsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 498,448.00

The focus of this project is to better understand the relationship between the
geometry and the topology of a space. The latter, topology, is the study of
properties of a space that are invariant under continuous stretching or bending
of a space. Geometry involves understanding distances. For example, if the
surface of our planet is viewed as a sphere one can measure distances on it by
computing arclengths of great circles. One can imagine deforming the Earth by
pushing in or pulling on small or large regions to warp the geometry. There are
many ways to make this notion precise in terms of minimizing a total energy
measurement. This idea can be generalized to higher dimensional objects called
manifolds, which are generalized versions of the surface of our planet. For
example, the space that we live in is three-dimensional, and if one includes
time, we are in a four-dimensional universe. In order to understand these types
of higher-dimensional objects, one attempts to find the best way to measure
distances on them that use the least amount of energy, and maximize the
symmetries of the space. These projects will define appropriate energies on such
spaces, and seek out the important optimal geometries that minimize the total
energy. The PI will participate in mentoring, outreach and organization of
conferences in the mathematics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical
terms, this research will use solutions of partial differential equations, which
are geometric in origin to study properties of differentiable manifolds. The
main areas of concentration of the PI's research are the study of gravitational
instantons in dimension four (both compact and complete non-compact), the study
of collapsing sequences Ricci-flat metrics on K3 surfaces, the construction of a
global moduli space of scalar-flat Kahler ALE metrics, and the study of the
orbifold Yamabe problem. In ongoing work with Hein, Sun, and Zhang, the PI has
constructed new examples of Ricci-flat metrics on K3 surfaces, which collapse to
an interval, with Heisenberg nilmanifolds occurring as fibers in the regular
collapsing regions. In this case, gravitational instantons of type ALH-star
bubble off, and it is of interest to have a better understanding of this class
of instantons. In joint work with Chen and Zhang, the PI has constructed
examples of collapsing sequences of Ricci-flat metrics on the K3 surface that
has both ALG and ALG-star bubbles, and it is also of interest to have a better
understanding of these types of instantons, which have quadratic volume growth.
In joint work with Han, the PI will conduct further study of the moduli space of
scalar-flat Kahler ALE metrics for certain groups at infinity and finding new
examples of such metrics on non-Artin components of deformations of isolated
quotient singularities. In joint work with Ju, the PI is studying compactness
and existence results for the orbifold Yamabe problem, which differs
substantially from the smooth case due to the failure of the positive mass
theorem for ALE metrics. Finally, the PI is committed to integrating research
and education and cultivating intellectual development on many
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.