* 2105328
* Understanding Grain Boundary Multiplicity and Its Role in Deformation Mechanisms of Nanocrystalline Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Huolin Xin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 483,381.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grain is a crystallite where the
atoms are periodically arranged. The interface between differently oriented
grains, i.e., grain boundaries, strongly influences, if not determine, many
mechanical and physical properties of materials, such as strength, ductility
(materialâ€™s ability to bend before breaking), and resistance to radiation
damage. Increasing scientific data suggests that grain boundaries in metals can
have many different kinds of atomic arrangements (also known as multiplicity),
and the transition between them leads to significant property changes. If we
have a better understanding of grain boundary multiplicity and its structure-
property relationship, scientists and engineers can devise synthesis strategies
to tailor grain boundaries towards enhanced mechanical performance of
nanostructured metals. In this project, Dr. Penghui Cao and Dr. Huolin Xin at UC
Irvine will use forefront computational modeling and electron microscopy tools
to study grain boundary multiplicity at the atomic level and reveal its critical
role in determining how nanocrystalline metals deform. A fundamental
understanding of grain boundary multiplicity could facilitate the design of
engineering metals with desirable mechanical properties for structural
applications, such as aerospace and nuclear energy systems. The project-based
education plan aims to attract the participation of high school students from
diverse backgrounds and thereby motivate and enable underrepresented minorities
to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on revealing the 3D atomic
structure of grain boundaries and fundamentally understanding how grain boundary
structure multiplicity influences plastic deformation mechanisms of
nanostructured metals. Scientifically, we hypothesize that the plastic
deformation mechanisms in nanocrystalline metals can be tuned by tailoring grain
boundary multiplicity. To test this central hypothesis, we propose research
tasks combining atomistic simulation, reaction pathway simulations, theoretical
modeling, electron tomography, and in-situ transmission electron microscopy
experiments. This integrated computational and experimental study aims to
address four major questions: (1) How to determine the 3D atomic structure of
grain boundaries, revealing boundary defects, structure units, and multiplicity?
(2) How do grain boundary defects and multiplicity influence mobility and
migration mechanisms of grain boundaries? (3) Is it possible to control plastic
deformation by tailoring grain boundary state and structure multiplicity, which
results in enhanced plasticity and ductility in nanocrystalline metals? (4) What
are the new deformation mechanisms which can be enabled by defective grain
boundary or transformed boundary? The physical insights gained from this
research will advance the exploitation of structure-property relationships in
nanostructured metals, laying the groundwork for effective tailoring of
mechanical behaviors through controlling structure, multiplicity,
crystallographic distribution of boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.