* 2105269
* CRII: SaTC: GridAI: Physics-based Machine Learning Models and Algorithms for Attack-Resilient Smart Grid Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Ravikumar Gelli, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 174,914.00

Securing networked cyber-physical systems, such as an electric power grid, has
emerged as paramount to national and economic security. Adversaries exploit the
vulnerabilities in both cyber and physical domains and deploy stealthy
multistage cyberattacks to disrupt the smart grid’s reliable operation. This
project will leverage physics-based Machine Learning and Deep Learning
algorithms to build an attack-resilient cyber-physical smart grid
infrastructure, aiming for advanced levels of cyber-physical system security for
the smart grid while simultaneously enhancing the system resiliency and
reliability. The project leverages physics-based Machine Learning and Deep
Learning algorithms to detect data-integrity, denial-of-service, and distributed
denial-of-service cyberattacks. The project likewise pursues multidisciplinary
education of graduate and undergraduate students, including underrepresented
minorities.

The project’s two primary goals are -- i) Detecting anomalies on both
measurement and control signals using physics-based machine learning algorithms
against data-integrity cyber attacks for cyber-physical smart grid applications,
and subsequently develop suitable mitigation strategies for system operators.
ii) Reconstructing the missing data due to denial-of-service and distributed
denial-of-service cyber attacks under both normal and perturbed grid conditions
using physics-based deep learning algorithms to ensure reliable and continuous
data frames provided for cyber-physical smart grid applications. The proposed
physics-based machine learning and deep learning attack-resiliency algorithms
will be designed, trained, tested, and evaluated using hardware-in-the-loop
cloud infrastructure. The project will leverages collaboration with utility
companies for training and inferring practical machine learning and deep
learning models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.