* 2105918
* RUI: Exciton-Phonon Interactions in Solids based on Time-Dependent Density Functional Perturbation Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2025
* Xu Zhang, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2025
* USD 149,431.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational
research and educational activities to advance the understanding of interactions
between excited electrons and lattice vibrations in semiconductors and
insulators. When an electron is excited to a higher-energy state, it leaves an
empty spot with a positive charge known as a hole. The electron and the hole can
be strongly bound to each other in an excitonic state. The interactions between
phonons (quantization of lattice vibrations) and excitons play a crucial role in
many chemical and materials problems. The goal of this research is to develop an
accurate, versatile, and efficient first-principles approach to compute exciton-
phonon interactions in extended and condensed-matter systems. The method will
have applications in energy conversion and storage, ranging from photovoltaics
to photocatalysis, photodetectors, photo-synthesis, optoelectronics, light-
emitting diodes, and biosensors. In this project, the PI will apply the method
to study the exciton-phonon interactions in two-dimensional van der Waals
heterostructures, which are the new frontier for novel optoelectronic and
photovoltaic device applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also
provide cutting-edge educational and training opportunities to undergraduate and
graduate students as well as postdoctoral scholars, who will gain valuable
experience in computational materials science. The PI is fully committed to
broadening participation and enhancing diversity in materials research and
education by strengthening opportunities for underrepresented groups. A graduate
course on the first-principles method will be developed to prepare the students
for the research activities. The PI will also reach out to local high schools
and community colleges through targeted recruitment, workshops, summer camps for
high-school teachers, and curriculum development in community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research and
educational activities to develop a novel computational methodology for the
study of coupled electron-ion dynamics with electronic excited states in
semiconductors and insulators. Understanding, predicting, and ultimately
controlling exciton behavior and coupled exciton-ion dynamics are central to
diverse chemical and materials problems. Accurate and efficient first-principles
methods are highly desired for quantitatively computing exciton-phonon
interactions in real materials applications. The project goal is to develop an
accurate, efficient, and robust first-principles approach to capture exciton-
phonon interactions in semiconductors and insulators based on time-dependent
density functional perturbation theory. The method developed will allow
calculations of the exciton band structure, charge density, and ionic forces
associated with the exciton state, non-adiabatic couplings between exciton
states, the exciton-phonon coupling matrix, and exciton dynamical processes in
extended solid systems. Fully unconstrained noncollinear magnetism will be
implemented to determine excitonic properties in materials with a prominent
spin-orbital coupling effect. Several levels of parallelization will be
exploited, rendering computational codes amenable to massively parallel
platforms. In this project, the method will be used to study the phonon-assisted
interfacial charge and energy transfer in two-dimensional transition-metal
dichalcogenide-based van der Waals heterostructures, unraveling the momentum
transfer between excitons and phonons as well as intra/interlayer exciton-phonon
interactions during interfacial exciton dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.