* 2105525
* The Topology of Contact Type Hypersurfaces and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bulent Tosun, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 156,405.00

This project, jointly funded by Topology and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), centers around the geometry and
topology of 3- and 4-dimensional spaces, mathematical objects known as
symplectic and contact structures, and interactions between these. Symplectic
and contact geometries are not just a natural language for some aspects of
classical physics, but also naturally arise and find applications in many areas
of modern mathematics and mathematical physics. The techniques spring from gauge
theory, Floer theory, holomorphic curve techniques, and the theorems and
conjectures find applications and connections in several fields, such as: smooth
manifold topology, hyperbolic geometry, dynamics, complex analysis in several
variables, and complex algebraic geometry. Building on his extensive and
collaborative research, the PI aims to study many unique questions and
conjectures that sit at the intersection of symplectic/contact topology and
smooth manifold topology in low dimensions, and complex analysis. The proposed
research and its outcomes will greatly impact our current understanding of
geometric topology in low dimensions. As an integral part of this project, the
PI will help mentor graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in his research
area, maintain an active topology group at the University of Alabama by
organizing seminars, workshops and conferences, and devote time to initiate a
math circle in Tuscaloosa.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate
underlying connections between low dimensional smooth manifolds and certain
geometric/analytic structures defined on them. The first long-term research
objective of this project is to understand symplectic and complex geometric
aspects of 3-manifold embedding problem in 4-space, and related
symplectic/holomorphic rigidity phenomenon that develops. Specifically, the PI
will work towards a complete resolution of Gompfâ€™s conjecture that such
embeddings are impossible for non-trivial Brieskorn spheres, determining the
topology of contact type hypersurfaces and rationally convex Stein domains with
prescribed boundary, and exploring their implications for smooth 4-manifold
topology. The second long-term research objective concerns contributing concrete
and satisfying connections between gauge theoretical invariants,
symplectic/contact geometry and hyperbolic geometry. Towards this latter
project, the PI will specifically work on two outstanding problems of existence
and classification of tight and fillable contact structures on closed, oriented
3-manifolds. Many special cases of the latter project are understood due to work
of the PI with his collaborators and other researchers in the area, but what
links them remains to be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.