* 2105290
* Giant Polymer Brushes: How Fluid-Like Hyaluronan Brushes Minimize Biofilm Adhesion
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Jennifer Curtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is surprising how much can be
accomplished by changing the properties of a surface. When made hydrophobic, a
surface repels water and can, for example, protect paper or wood from moisture
intrusion and damage. When made reactive to a specific gas or biomolecule, it
can become an ultra-sensitive detector, for example a biosensor for coronavirus
particles. One very successful way to control surface properties, so as to
create designer materials like those described above, is to anchor polymers to
the surface at such a high density that they align and stretch away from the
surface because of crowding by their neighbors. This configuration is known as a
polymer brush. Polymer brushes have been used in a stunning variety of practical
applications. This grant has a twofold scientific purpose. The first purpose is
to leverage nature’s molecular machines to produce polymer brushes by growing
molecules directly from the surface. Amazingly, this new technology enables the
production of polymer brush layers nearly one hundred times thicker than the
those achievable with conventional techniques. This presents exciting new
properties for the strategic design of materials. The second purpose is to
address an important problem that plagues mankind: the formation of biofilms –
that is communities of recalcitrant bacteria entrenched and protected in a
mucous-like goo of their own making. Polymer brushes are a popular strategy to
delay biofilm attachment but ultimately, they still fail. Motivated by promising
preliminary results, the project explores in this grant whether the giant
molecular-machine generated brush and its corresponding fluid-like interface can
lead to a surface that the bacteria are unable to tether to – a new strategy
only recently introduced in other contexts. To ensure that any bacteria which
still manage to adhere are quickly eliminated, the researchers will embed
antimicrobials within the large volume of the brush. Together, these measures
will result in the maturation of an exciting new polymer brush technology
addressing the age-old problem of bacterial infection and contamination of man-
made materials. In outreach and education, the Curtis lab will publish a series
of short playful cartoon videos about the science, biomaterials, and
applications of this interdisciplinary project. The videos will be shared on a
You Tube channel and disseminated widely. Topics will include anti-microbial
materials, biofilms, polymer brushes, and molecular machines for making
polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer
brushes are an important tool for engineering interfaces in a variety of
applications such as drug delivery, implants, catalysis, and anti-microbial
materials. This grant will focus on pinpointing the origin and extent of the
anti-fouling properties of a non-traditional, ultra-thick polymer brush recently
established in the Curtis lab. Fabricated by surfaces coated with hyaluronan
synthase, the enzyme-derived brushes are the thickest ever created by almost two
orders of magnitude. Preliminary results demonstrate that these hyaluronan
brushes repel bacteria and prevent biofilm adhesion for up to a week, performing
an order of magnitude better than hyaluronan films, which are recognized as
having superior anti-fouling properties. The Curtis lab will test the hypothesis
that the superior performance of theses brushes arises from their fluid-like
interface, similar to other recent very successful materials introduced for
anti-biofilm applications. In addition, they will optimize the anti-fouling
performance of the brushes with systematic studies of its dependence on brush
grafting density and molecular weight. Lastly, to maximize the anti-biofilm
properties of the brush, they will immobilize biocides throughout the material
to create a multi-functional biointerface with optimal anti-microbial
performance. More broadly, this research will contribute to the continued
development of a new class of polymer brush, which is expected to find broader
applications in materials science. In outreach and education, the Curtis lab
will publish a series of short playful cartoon videos about the science,
biomaterials, and applications of this project. The videos will be shared on a
You Tube channel and disseminated widely. Topics will include anti-fouling
materials, biofilms, polymer brushes, etc. Additionally, Dr. Curtis will
continue her efforts to increase diversity in STEM by using the period of this
grant to establish contacts and build lasting relationships with faculty,
advisors, and students at historically Black colleges and universities. These
activities have the primary goals of (1) building effective relationships to
help improve recruitment and retention of minority students and (2) learning
through conversations how to enhance the climate at Georgia Tech to make it more
welcoming and supportive for students of color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.