* 2105257
* CRII: RI: Modeling and Understanding the Invisible World in Thermal Modality
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Guoyu Lu, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 04/30/2023
* USD 174,890.00

Most current scene modeling and understanding algorithms target at visible
scenes with sufficient light supplied and the exposed objects. However, it is
common for situations to occur in which there is little light or objects are
hidden, such as nighttime in outdoor or indoor environments when the power
outage happens, water press of plants, and hollows in the bridge deck. Thermal
images capture the long-wave infrared signals to generate images and have broad
applications in transportation, agriculture, and surveillance. This project
develops 3D modeling and understanding methods based on thermal images. The
developed 3D modeling technology can enable autonomous driving vehicles to
detect the scene depth from thermal images to avoid traffic accidents. With a 3D
thermal model, hidden gas pipes in buildings and cracks in bridges can also be
inspected more reliably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
addresses the 3D thermal sensing and understanding issues through the following
thrusts: (1) thermal image feature detection and extraction, (2) translation
between thermal and visible images, (3) unsupervised 3D thermal reconstruction
methods based on both image sequence and a single image, and (4) 3D thermal
model understanding, particularly for nighttime and invisible objects. The
algorithms developed in this project will enable 3D reconstruction and
understanding tasks for invisible scenes. The output from this project will
allow related services provided for visible objects and during the daytime to be
also available for invisible objects and during nighttime, such as hidden object
inspection and navigation in the nighttime. The enhancement of invisible scene
processing capability will improve safety and cybersecurity across different
scenarios, from daytime to nighttime and from exposed objects to invisible
object properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.