* 2105033
* EVOLUTIONARY CONFLICT AND PHENOTYPIC DIVERSITY IN SOCIETIES
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Michael Goodisman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 816,570.00

Biological organisms display remarkable diversity in form and function. For
example, individuals frequently belong to distinct functional classes, such as
the male and female sexes. However, because individuals within species generally
possess the same set of genes, the development of distinct classes is expected
to be constrained. The goal of this research is to study the constraints on the
development of distinct classes in social insects. Social insects represent
excellent study systems because insect societies are composed of distinct
functional classes such as the queen, worker, and male castes. In addition,
social insects, such as bees, wasps, ants, and termites, have great ecological
and economic importance. This research will analyze the physical forms, gene
functions, and genome sequences of social insects to understand the importance
of the shared genome on the development of distinct classes. The research will
also include several broader impacts that will extend the influence of this
research to educational activities aimed at training and educating the public.
This research is significant because it will provide insight into the genetic
mechanisms associated with the development of distinct functional classes and
the causes of organismal diversity within species. &lt;br/&gt;Phenotypic
diversity is a hallmark of metazoan taxa. However, phenotypic evolution is
constrained by intralocus conflict, which occurs when individuals within species
possess traits that have a common genetic architecture. This research will
explore intralocus conflict in social insects and determine if conflict has
constrained phenotypic evolution in societies. Study of genetic conflict in
societies is particularly interesting because individuals may experience both
intralocus caste conflict, which occurs between the castes, as well as
intralocus sexual conflict, which occurs between the sexes. This research will
test intralocus conflict theory. First, the research team will determine genetic
correlations for morphological traits in queens, males, and workers. Second,
intralocus conflict will be studied at the molecular level by testing
predictions about genetic correlations for gene expression phenotypes. Finally,
evidence for intralocus conflict will be detected by examining population
genomic variation. This program will also promote teaching, training, and
learning. Research will be incorporated into university classes, city-wide
activities, and disseminated in the popular media. Overall, this research
program will result in one of the most thorough empirical investigations of
intralocus conflict theory and provide insight into the mechanisms affecting
phenotypic diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.