* 2105065
* Science of Co-Amorphous Molecular Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sindee Simon, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 331,506.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Co-amorphous molecular glasses are a new class
of materials that are composed of two or more types of different small
molecules. Combining two or more of these types of molecules into extended
solid-state materials leads to co-amorphous molecular glasses that have better
properties than the individual component systems. By investigating how
parameters such as molecular size, shape, flexibility, and chemical interaction
sites impact the properties of glasses made from binary mixtures of different
types of molecules, researchers at North Carolina State University provide a
fundamental understanding of co-amorphous molecular glasses. These insights and
novel materials have the potential to advance the use of co-amorphous molecular
glasses in pharmaceutics, energetics, agrichemicals, and personal care products.
Advantages of using co-amorphous molecular glasses include, for example for
pharmaceutics, high bioavailability and high stability during storage. The
project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
in the Division of Materials Research, also includes training of two graduate
students and undergraduate researchers in cutting-edge research in glass
chemistry and physics, thermal analysis, and rheology. Additionally, as part of
this award, Profs. Simon and McKenna organize a one-week-long soft materials
camp for junior high school students. It is called "Exploring Materials and
Recycling" and leverages the longstanding summer engineering camp program
developed and managed by The Engineering Place (TEP) of the North Carolina State
University College of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;This research, which is supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, focuses on a
wide range of binary co-amorphous molecular glasses in order to develop a
framework for the rational design of new glassy solids with improved properties.
The role of molecular size, shape, and flexibility on co-amorphous glass
formation, as well as the importance of the strength of and mismatches in
specific interactions, are examined by calorimetry, rheology, and spectroscopy
for glasses created by combinations of pharmaceutical materials, mock
energetics, and small molecule additives or excipients. Major unanswered
questions in the field of co-amorphous molecular glasses are addressed,
including how dynamic, thermodynamic, and kinetic properties, including the
glass transition temperature (Tg), crystallization rates, and glass stability,
are interrelated and influenced by molecular structure and interactions. In
addition, thermodynamic activity coefficient models are used to relate the
molecular interactions and the synergistic increases in Tg that are often
observed in co-amorphous glasses. The stability of the co-amorphous glass
against crystallization is modeled and characterized in the framework of the
time-temperature-transformation (TTT) diagram using extensions of classical
models of nucleation and growth kinetics. The importance of the work is in
providing fundamental new knowledge for the nascent field of molecular glass
engineering that is anticipated to facilitate the rational design of new glassy
solids that can be engineered on demand for a given
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.