* 2105113
* RUI: Materials Physics with Kinetoplast DNA
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexander Klotz, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 474,957.00

Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA is best known for its role in
carrying genetic information, but DNA molecules can also be used as renewable
and biodegradable materials, as well as tools to improve the interface between
the human body and synthetic components such as prosthetic implants. Enabling
the use of DNA as a biomaterial requires an understanding of its physical
properties at the molecular level. Nature produces DNA with complex structures
beyond the coils found in our cells: parasites from the trypanosome family,
which cause diseases like Sleeping Sickness and Leishmaniasis, have a complex
DNA structure called a kinetoplast. A kinetoplast is a linked network of
thousands of small circular DNA molecules connected like medieval chainmail
armor. Materials with this complex connected structure are not found elsewhere
in nature and are difficult to produce artificially, so the properties of this
type of material are not well understood. The researchers seek to advance
understanding of DNA biomaterials by studying kinetoplasts, learning about their
material properties, and investigating how trypanosome cells produce them. Their
proposed experiments include studying how chemical conditions change the size of
kinetoplasts, stretching the kinetoplasts to measure their material strength and
toughness, comparing the kinetoplasts to materials not made of connected rings,
and exploring how systems of connected molecules pass through very small holes.
All of these aspects are relevant to the biomaterial design process. The
significance of this research is that it will provide information needed to
expand the use of DNA as a biomaterial and to develop other materials based on
molecular linking. The broader impacts of this work involves training a diverse
group of students and conducting experiments that will extend to other fields,
including the study of two-dimensional materials such as graphene, for which
kinetoplasts may serve as a useful model system to bring graphene technology
closer to public use, as well as parasitology, where the study of kinetoplasts
may allow researchers to better understand ways to prevent the parasite’s
reproductive cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its role in carrying genetic information,
DNA has been explored as the basis of renewable and degradable polymer
materials, as part of coatings to improve the biocompatibility of implants, and
as a substrate for drug delivery. The biomaterial uses of DNA require an
understand of its physical properties on the molecular level. The topology of a
molecule has a significant effect on its material properties. Kinetoplasts are
complex DNA structures found in the mitochondria of trypanosome parasites; each
kinetoplast consists of thousands of circular DNA molecules topologically linked
in a two-dimensional network akin to medieval chainmail armor. This work focuses
on the material properties of kinetoplasts as part of a broader investigation
into DNA’s role as a biomaterial and to provide insight into the physics of
topologically complex synthetic molecules. The researchers will investigate the
effects of solvent chemistry on the equilibrium conformation of kinetoplasts by
measuring parameters such as the radius of gyration, which is determined by the
competing effects of bending rigidity and thermal fluctuations. Optical tweezers
will be used to stretch kinetoplasts, measure their force response and elastic
moduli, and quantify the strength of catenane (linked ring) non-covalent bonds.
Nanopore sensing will be used to measure the response of kinetoplasts and
smaller catenated DNA structures under extreme deformation, which is critical to
determine appropriate conditions for biopolymer processing applications.
Degradation of the kinetoplasts by restriction enzymes will be used to tune
their mechanical properties, ascertain their network topology, and better
understand how trypanosomes create these complex structures. As a broader
impact, a Pen Pal program will be launched to connect youth from
underrepresented groups with student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.