* 2105474
* RCN: Instrumentation for Quantum Biology (I-QuBio)
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Jennifer Ogilvie, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/28/2026
* USD 345,999.00

The high efficiency of energy transfer during photosynthesis in certain algae
that live in low life settings is believed to be due to quantum effects. This is
just on example of possible quantum effects in biology. The tantalizing
possibility that subtle quantum effects may influence and optimize biological
processes presents both an exciting frontier and an extreme challenge to the
research community as they seek to understand mechanisms that govern life
processes. This project addresses the experimental bottleneck that exists in
unambiguously proving, or refuting, hypotheses about quantum effects in living
systems. The Instrumentation for Quantum Biology Research Coordination Network
(I-QuBio RCN) will bring together a diverse community of scientists from around
the world to collaborate on method development for the field known as “Quantum
Biology”. Quantum Biology is a frontier scientific effort, requiring a new
generation of interdisciplinary researchers who can communicate across
scientific boundaries. Through hybrid in-person/online workshops and training
schools, this network will provide quantum biology practitioners with community
to discuss and advance the experimental infrastructure required to advance the
field within the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-QUB RCN will increase
the connectivity of the nascent community on Quantum Biology across several
axes: geography; cross-disciplinarity; integration between experiment and
theory; research across different scales ranging from molecules to whole
organisms; and career stages, with an emphasis in training and integrating a
young workforce of Quantum Biology researchers. The aim is to enable better
measurement, through the tools of quantum mechanics and apply them to precision
measurement of biological phenomena. The goal is to utilize the exquisite
control that biology provides to develop quantum-enhanced probes that are
compatible with biological imaging. This project is supported by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.