* 2105570
* Modular interplay of transcription and translation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Nitin Baliga, Institute for Systems Biology
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 712,000.00

This project advances the understanding of the extraordinary success of microbes
in adapting to diverse niches by modulating the interplay between the key
cellular processes. This understanding is essential to manipulate microbial
processes with applications ranging from bioenergy production to environmental
sustainability and human health. For example, with such understanding the
modification of how pathogens rapidly transition into a persistent-like state
upon encountering a potentially lethal environment or the engineering of
microbial strains for biotechnology applications and bioremediation, would be
possible. Additionally, this project engages women, minorities, and
systematically marginalized students and teachers, to develop and disseminate a
standards-aligned high school curriculum module on adaptation and evolution in
extreme environments. The development of a new high-school curriculum provides
teaching with instruments optimized for teachers and relevant to current world
issues and is accessible across all 50 states in the US and 144 countries
worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modular interplay of transcription and
translation is foundational to the evolution of all organisms. Although the
fundamental importance of ribosomes in protein synthesis has long been
recognized, its capability as a regulatory element in gene expression has thus
far been mostly overlooked. In order to manifest in phenotype, changes to
modularity of a transcriptional regulatory program must have direct consequences
on the coordinated synthesis and action of proteins (i.e., transcription
factors, enzymes, etc.). Similarly, specialization of ribosomes requires
parallel changes in transcriptional regulation so the specialized ribosomal
subunits are made in the right environmental context, together with the pool of
transcripts that need to be selectively translated. This research aims to
elucidate how modular regulation of transcription generated through the
expansion of a transcription factor family facilitates the coordinated
recruitment of specialized ribosomes to pools of transcripts that encode
functions required for adaptation to a new environment. The first aim
investigates genome-wide changes in transcription, ribosome footprints and
protein levels in the wild type and transcription factor mutants of H. salinarum
during relevant environmental shifts. The second aim maps genome-wide binding
locations and protein-protein interactions of transcription factors, and
quantifies the composition and subunit stoichiometry of assembled ribosomal
complexes in the same environmental contexts. The third aim characterizes
transcriptome-wide and environment-specific consequences on ribosome recruitment
and translation efficiency through rational reengineering of the transcriptional
co-regulation of specialized ribosomal subunits. Finally, the fourth aim
translates findings from this project to a high school classroom by developing a
curriculum module on adaptation and evolution in environmental extremes. The
successful execution of these aims allows elucidation of how heterogeneity is
generated within the translation system and how a diverse population of
ribosomes mediates environmentally relevant cellular phenotypes and
physiological state transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.