* 2105489
* The Lean Canvas for Invention:  A Team-Based Framework for Research Development, Mentoring, and Career Readiness
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Barry Sullivan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,870.00

Developing a science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) workforce is
critical to our nation's ability to compete with innovation and competition
globally. However, graduate training programs in STEM are not preparing students
for changes in the nature and availability of work, shifts in workforce
demographics, rising competition, macro ethics, and unremitting and striking
innovations in technologies and research methods. The National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) recommends that STEM graduate
education respond to workforce needs, connect theory to practice, utilize
project-based learning, guide the exploration of diverse career paths, and
develop core competencies as well as transferable professional skills. The
National Science Foundation Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to the
University of Utah will respond to these recommendations by examining the impact
and feasibility of a bold, new, transformative, team-based approach to graduate
research development and entrepreneurship in engineering that optimizes the
quality and consistency of mentoring interactions and relationships among
members of the research team, and fosters graduate students’ professional
competencies and workforce readiness. This project not only helps graduate
students develop the skills and knowledge to be successful in their discipline,
but also enhances the quality and effectiveness of peer and faculty mentoring
relationships to create a more inclusive, supportive, and productive research
environment. Results will inform the education community on best practices for
training the next generation of STEM scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lean
Canvas for Invention (LCI) is a web-based course that was recently developed and
initially previously piloted. It will help research teams think through a
research problem and plan and implement both team and individual research
projects. This project will expand the basic LCI by including formalized
mentoring and career development. The first research objective is to apply the
expanded LCI with seven research teams and examine differences in student
outcomes (e.g., quality of research proposals, critical thinking skills,
research self-efficacy, etc.) between those who participated in the LCI and a
representative sample of non-LCI peers. The second research objective is to
provide mentoring training and resources through interactions among students,
faculty, and relevant industry stakeholders on a regular and structured basis.
Quantitative surveys and qualitative focus groups with LCI participants will
evaluate the perceived quality, characteristics of, and satisfaction with their
mentoring relationships and how mentoring influenced graduate students’
persistence attitudes. Pre- and post-intervention surveys with LCI and non-LCI
peers will examine students’ and faculty’s sense of belonging within the
research team, the academic department, and the larger field of engineering. The
third research objective is to foster the development of professional
competencies and workforce readiness by helping students create an
individualized career development plan including career aspirations, goals, and
action steps that will be reviewed at specific time points. Career exploration
resources, as well as structured networking opportunities with professionals in
the engineering-related industry, will be provided. Pre- and post-intervention
surveys with LCI and non-LCI peers will examine differences in the development
of STEM core competencies as well as progress towards degree and workforce
readiness indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are
to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.