* 2105448
* CAREER: Pushing the Performance Limit of Composite Structures: Integrated Modeling of Manufacturing Processes and Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Dianyun Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will focus on understanding
fundamental aspects of fiber-reinforced polymer composite manufacturing
processes, developing high-fidelity, physics-based models to predict the
processingâ€“performance relation of fibrous composites, and building an inclusive
workforce pipeline for the U.S. composites manufacturing industry. Adoption of
lightweight composites for structural components is transforming the
transportation industry, which pursues improved vehicle performance, better fuel
economy, and reduced emissions. However, manufacturing these advanced composites
involves complex processes that inevitably cause part variability and unintended
defects, such as voids, fiber wrinkles, residual stresses, and geometric
distortions. The lack of robust modeling tools makes the composite manufacturers
heavily reliant on trial-and-error approaches to minimize part variability,
resulting in high manufacturing costs and limiting innovations for new process
and part designs. This research project will develop an in-depth understanding
of defects and variability arising from manufacturing processes, and will
elucidate the correlation between the constituent properties, processing
conditions, and structural performance. The resulting predictive models will
lead to significant cost savings in new process and product development which
achieves consistent and improved quality of composite components. The research
program will be integrated with a diverse range of education and outreach
activities, including developing an online certificate program in composites to
prepare students for jobs in advanced manufacturing, providing research
opportunities to college and high school students, and informing the general
public about the societal impact of composites and career opportunities through
museum demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to predict the
processing-induced defects and develop manufacturing strategies to improve the
performance of advanced fiber-reinforced polymer matrix composites through an
integrated multi-physics and multiscale modeling framework in conjunction with a
novel in-situ process monitoring method. Specific aims include: (1)
investigation of wrinkle formation through a novel, fabric architecture-based
hyper-thermo-viscoelastic model; (2) prediction of dual-scale voids and
dimensional variability through a coupled flow-compaction-cure model; and (3)
integration of processing-induced defects and data from in-situ process
monitoring sensors with composite performance prediction. Our knowledge of
composites manufacturing will be significantly increased through: (1)
formulation of a novel fabric architecture-based mechanics model to capture
fiber wrinkling during the draping and curing processes; (2) incorporation of a
unique hyper-thermo-viscoelastic model to dictate the constitutive response of a
curing composite; (3) implementation of coupled resin flow and curing models to
investigate void formation and migration; (4) integration of processing-induced
defects with performance predictions; and (5) novel in-process and in-service
monitoring techniques for life-cycle assessment. The research will result in an
integrated physics-based process and performance modeling framework for virtual
design, manufacturing, and analysis of advanced composite structures. This will
accelerate the adoption of new materials, processes, and part designs for
enhanced structural performance through computational modeling, effectively
breaking down the walls between manufacturers, engineers, material scientists,
and researchers, which will transform the traditional methodology for composites
manufacturing and design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.