* 2105826
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human-Environmental Interactions in Deglaciating Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Anaïs Zimmer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 10/31/2022
* USD 13,767.00

The doctoral dissertation project investigates plant establishment and soil
formation in recently deglaciated alpine landscapes. Most mountain glaciers are
predicted to disappear by the end of the 21st century, leaving significant ice-
free land. People and ecosystems depend on these glaciers, but as the glaciers
melt, natural resources (e.g., water and pastures, ecosystems services (e.g.,
carbon storage), cultural identities, and tourism decline. These new lands,
however, offer opportunities to study social and ecological adaptations. This
study will show how communities adapt to the loss of glaciers. One experiment
will be to study the role of grazing animals in enhancing proglacial landscape
formation. The project reinforces partnerships between local communities,
governmental entities, NGOs, and researchers working across continents to
promote scientific advancements of social and ecological adaptations in
proglacial landscapes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Melting mountain glaciers are
exposing large new land areas and this project investigates how postglacial
ecosystems could contribute to indispensable services for local and downstream
populations in future glacier-free valleys. This doctoral dissertation project
uses plot studies of plant species, soil fertility, and geomorphic surfaces
across a range of alpine landscapes where glaciers have melted over the last
hundred years. By studying the migration of alpine plant communities to higher
elevations and ecosystem formation, the research characterizes the main
processes occurring in these ice-free landscapes. The study also combines
intensive sampling, UAV (drone) surveys, satellite imagery, and an experiment to
test if introducing grazing animals can accelerate ecosystem formation. By
applying the same research design in multiple locations, this project provides
reproducible data and generalizable knowledge regarding social and ecological
adaptations in deglaciating landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.