* 2105301
* Heterogeneous agent modeling of the personal data economy
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Katherine Strandburg, Benthall, Sebastian
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Katherine Strandburg at New York University
School of Law, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating heterogeneous agent modeling of the personal data
economy. Digital platforms have come to mediate every aspect of social and
economic life. The economy of personal data collected by these services
intersects the financial system through credit scoring institutions and the
valuations of companies. It also intersects the real economy through its role in
marketing. Data’s value and impact come in part from how it mediates and
connects heterogeneous actors. The proper regulation of this data economy is an
urgent political matter. This research addresses the fundamental scientific
question of the macroeconomic properties of personal data as it flows between
social contexts, sectors, and platforms. The work will contribute to both a
general economic theory of privacy as well as methods in computational economics
and finance. New modeling techniques that address personal data’s hybrid role as
strategic position and tradable asset will be disseminated in open source
software research toolkits. Salient results will be presented to federal
agencies to advise regulation of the digital economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research applies and extends heterogeneous agent modeling (HAM) methods used in
macroeconomics and financial research. Heterogeneous agent modeling (HAM)
includes both rational agent stochastic dynamic programming (SDP) and zero-
intelligence agent based models (ABM). The data economy case motivates
fundamental research about how to synthesize SDP and ABM into a framework that
supports endogenous information flows. Heterogeneous actors in the economy of
personal data are marked by different levels of bounded rationality, including
the ability to foresee consequences of intertemporal choice. Their interactions
may also result in unknown or uninvestigated emergent properties. Through the
investigation of particular aspects of the data economy, such as its
intersections with the credit system, product development, and data intermediary
governance, this work will develop modeling tools that combine HAM with insights
from Pearlian causality theory, Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes,
and the institutional economics of Ostrom and
Williamson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.