* 2105161
* Elucidating the mechanism of millimeter-long transport of photogenerated carriers in topological insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Dong Yu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 02/29/2024
* USD 251,996.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When light is absorbed by a material
such as a semiconductor, the number of free electrons and holes increases,
resulting in increased electrical conductivity. This phenomenon is known as
photoconductivity. Understanding how photocarriers transport charge is key to
many important applications such as solar cells and light detectors. A new
category of fascinating materials, called topological insulators, has been
discovered over the past decade. These materials have unique electronic
properties at the surface and may find technological applications. The principal
investigator’s research group has recently demonstrated unusual long-distance
transport of photogenerated charge carriers in topological insulators at low
temperatures. This suggests the formation of a quantum state known as an exciton
condensate. If confirmed, this quantum state has potential uses in quantum
computing. The aim of this project is to study this phenomena by a variety of
experimental techniques and understand the physical mechanism behind it. This
project also educates and trains undergraduate and graduate students in the
rapidly advancing research area of quantum and spintronic devices and offers
outreach activities targeting K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s recent experimental studies of three-
dimensional topological insulators (TIs) have revealed unusual non-local
photocurrent. Remarkably, the locally photogenerated carriers can transport over
a millimeter along the intrinsic Sb-doped Bi2Se3 nanoribbons before
recombination at up to 40 K, accompanied by an internal quantum efficiency as
high as 60%. The observation of highly dissipationless transport of
photogenerated carriers implies the formation of superfluidic exciton
condensate. The goal of this project is to elucidate the physical mechanism of
this highly nonlocal photocurrent generation. A suite of innovative spatially,
temporally, and spectrally resolved techniques are applied to achieve this goal.
Spatially resolved helicity-dependent photocurrent and the surface magneto-
optical Kerr effect is investigated to understand the spin polarization and
spin-momentum coupling of the photogenerated carriers at the TI surface.
Infrared photocurrent spectroscopy, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
(ARPES), and scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) will be performed to provide
evidence for excitonic gap opening in the surface Dirac cone. Thinner and more
intrinsic samples and topological materials beyond Bi2Se3 are studied to achieve
higher critical temperatures. If confirmed, topological exciton condensation is
expected to provide a new and exciting paradigm exploiting chiral superfluidic
excitons towards high temperature quantum logic and novel spintronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.