* 2105350
* Investigating Obsidian and Ochre Exchange
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Alejandro Figueroa, Figueroa, Alejandro
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 148,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Brandi
MacDonald at the Archaeometry Laboratory of the University of Missouri Research
Reactor, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating the various dimensions of ochre and obsidian exchange among small-
scale societies. Using a number of specialized archaeometric techniques and a
combination of field, collections, and laboratory work, this project is
reconstructing the networks used to procure, distribute, and use these key
geological resources. Ultimately, this research uses the long-term perspective
provided by archaeology to better understand what exchange networks can tell us
about how small-scale societies navigated the competing demands for
(in)equality, reciprocity, cohesion, and conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
dynamics of interaction and exchange in small-scale societies are still not well
understood, particularly in areas where chiefdoms developed alongside state-
level societies. It has often been assumed that these societies imitated their
neighbors or were smaller and less developed versions of them, despite decades
of archaeological and ethnographic research showing otherwise. This project
systematically examines the structure and scale of the networks used by
societies to exchange ochre and obsidian by evaluating the degree to which these
were controlled by powerful individuals and polities (if at all), how they
changed over time, and whether and when these were impacted by major local and
regional transformations, including the development and collapse of large
polities and intense periods of drought. To do this, the project is
reconstructing the consumption patterns of obsidian and ochre by identifying and
characterizing sources of each and conducting a large-scale provenance study on
rock art and obsidian samples from a diverse range of contexts using neutron
activation analysis (NAA), laser-ablation inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), portable x-ray fluorescence spectrometry (pXRF), and
scanning electron microscopy (SEM-EDS). Equally as important, this project
provides opportunities for training and collaboration with researchers and local
indigenous communities in the use and application of archaeometric techniques
and in the study and protection of archaeological
heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.