* 2105995
* SBIR Phase I:  Robotic vertical glass sorter powered by machine vision and artificial intelligence for accurate, accessible, sustainable, and cost-effective glass recycling
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Parag Tandon, OPTISORT, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,644.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will address the over 10 million metric tons of glass disposed of
annually in the U.S. While 100% of glass is recyclable, only 33% is actually
recycled, as it is challenging to sorting and transport used glass prior to
recycling. Traditional methods for these key functions dramatically reduce the
value of the glass due to transportation costs and required warehouse space for
sorting glass from other waste and separate the colors of clear, brown, and
green. Even modern U.S. glass sorting facilities require warehouse space of more
than 250,000 square feet for horizontal runway and belt systems to clean and
sort waste streams well enough for an automated glass sorter to continue. This
leads to high costs, manual labor, negative environmental impact for the
machines, and high levels of glass that is not recycled. The proposed project
advances a robotic system to sort efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project will target a prototype hopper and
actuator control system, AI engine for detection and sorting, and field
performance study. The main development challenges include enhancing the camera
and sensor network of the prototype platform; developing and validating an AI
engine for rapid classification of falling glass; and developing actuator
controls, and system integration and functional testing to specifications.
First, the prototype will be enhanced including the mechanical design, material
flow, sensor network, and actuators for the sorting mechanisms. Next, using
prerecorded videos of falling glass and waste under different conditions, an AI
engine will be developed and validated to accurately classify glass colors and
trigger an actuator sequence. Once algorithms have been validated offline, the
hardware and algorithms will be integrated at a system level and validated for
performance in real-time operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.