* 2105391
* CRII: III: Toward the Compression of Pangenomic DNA Sequence Data Using Context-Free Grammars
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Alan Cleary, National Center for Genome Resources
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

DNA sequence data is becoming ubiquitous in various domains of science, such as
medicine and agriculture. However, the volume of these data and the rate at
which they are being generated is rapidly outpacing storage and analysis
capabilities. This project aims to address both the storage and analysis issues
by developing new techniques for compressing DNA sequence data such that
analyses can be performed directly on the compressed data. Specifically, the
project aims to compress collections of DNA sequence data from the same species,
or pangenomes. In addition to reducing data storage costs and transmission
times, this will enable the analysis of pangenomes at an unprecedented scale
which could aid researchers seeking to understand the genetic basis of complex
diseases in medical contexts, or similarly complex traits that are targets of
directed breeding efforts in agricultural.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of this project is to develop new methods for compressing pangenomic DNA
sequence data. The motivation comes from the fact that these data are too large
to store uncompressed but must be continuously analyzed by the research
community. This project addresses the issue by building on preliminary work that
compresses collections of strings using context-free grammars in a manner that
allows the string content of a compressed collection to be updated over time.
The first aim of the project is to develop new algorithms for compressing
multiple genomes of the same species in a manner that enables search and
computation directly on compressed archives. The second aim is to develop
methods for mapping sequencing reads to compressed archives. The third aim is to
develop methods for compressing reads by using their mappings to integrate them
into the compressed archive while enabling search and computation. The fourth
aim is to develop methods for performing searches directly on compressed read
archives. And the fifth aim is to implement these methods in an open-source
software package including an Application Programming Interface for use by
biological data science researchers. This project will innovate both DNA
sequence data compression techniques and general data compression techniques. It
will also enable pagenomic analyses at scale across industry and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.