* 2105145
* CRII:SCH:RUI: A Digital Identity System for Accelerating Medical Communications within Rare Disease Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,10/31/2021
* Peng Zhang, Belmont University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2021
* USD 160,482.00

Patient identity matching is a process that locates a patient in a healthcare
database using a unique set of personal information. Rare diseases are
conditions that affect fewer than 200,000 people in the US, and due to the small
patient populations, they receive significantly less scientific and commercial
attention compared to more commonly studied medical conditions. As a result,
highly motivated and active patient communities often form around rare diseases,
creating and maintaining patient registries for patients to share data and
knowledge about their conditions to promote disease discovery. However, many
registries have been one-off solutions that identify patients in disparate ways,
creating a major barrier to linking patients across multiple highly centralized
registries. The objective of this project is to address this need by developing
an interoperable and efficient identity system to support necessary
communications around rare diseases, while simultaneously providing
interdisciplinary research experience to computer science undergraduate
students.

This project will design, deploy, and evaluate a digital identity system driven
by interoperability across data management systems. The goal of the proposed
approach is to accelerate the patient identification process by creating unique
representations of patient identities and a supporting platform that facilitate
the management and exchanges of those identities to ensure interoperability. The
technical aims of the project are divided into three threads. The first thread
creates a standardized digital identity model for rare diseases, which aims to
uniquely represent patients without directly exposing sensitive, ambiguous
patient identifying information to significantly reduce patient mismatching
rate. The second thread develops a Rare Disease Identity System (RDIS)
infrastructure, which will enable uniform and interoperable representations and
transactions of patient identity to accelerate clinical communications. The
third thread focuses on integrated evaluation of RDIS with the use of the
digital identity model created in the first thread. In particular, the overall
effectiveness of the system will be evaluated based on the ease of identity
collection and verification process, the scalability of the system in terms of
the overall and average throughput of transacted synthetic patient profiles, and
the average turnaround time it takes to identify a subset of patient profiles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.