* 2105182
* Structurally Specific Isotopic Shifts Across Analytical Separations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexandre Shvartsburg, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2024
* USD 521,040.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry and partial co-funding from the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI), Alexandre Shvartsburg at Wichita State University is
developing fundamentally new analytical approaches to molecular structure
characterization based on separations of natural isotopologues - species with
different isotopes (elemental forms) for one or more atoms. The Shvartsburg
group combines sophisticated analytical methods including mass spectrometry
(MS), ion mobility spectrometry (IMS), and advanced chromatography to assess the
impact of isotope substitution on the separations of isotopologues in various
media to determine their molecular geometries. The resulting new methods are
expected to enable identification of a wide range of molecules, such as
metabolites in biological samples, environmental contaminants, and explosives
and chemical agents relevant to topical forensic and security applications. This
research project will provide hands-on training for next-generation scientists,
as well as broad educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students at WSU and regional universities through courses and stand-alone
lectures on IMS and MS methods and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research relies on the dependence of the transport of ions or molecules on their
isotopic composition in a structurally specific manner. Measured shifts of
separation parameters between natural isotopologues can reflect analyte
geometry, enabling identification of isomers and disentangling their mixtures.
Isotopic envelopes have long been used in MS, but not in analytical separations
limited resolution. For this reason, observed shifts in liquid chromatography
(LC) elution times as a function of isotopic substitution have generally been
treated mass effects without structural significance. Recently, the major gains
in resolving power of IMS have enabled detection of isotopic shifts in both
linear IMS--based on absolute mobility--and differential IMS--capturing the
mobility increment in strong electric fields. MS selection after separation
combined with replicate statistics will allow the Shvartsburg team to exploit
the small shifts between non-isomeric isotopologues. Dr. Shvartsburg and his
group are exploring this capability and extending it with instrumental upgrades
utilizing ultrahigh-resolution Orbitrap MS to disentangle nominal isobars to
extract information about exact isotopologues. This project will expand this
methodology to the study of a range of organic compound classes, morphologies,
and elemental compositions, including anabolic steroids and fatty acids with
transposed double bonds. If successful in these endeavors, the Shvartsburg
team's ability to extract structural information from the splitting of isotopic
envelopes is expected to find broad application in separation
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.