* 2105394
* Biocultural Heritage and Social-Ecological Resilience
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Flora Lu, Esbach, Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 74,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. João Biehl at
Princeton University and Dr. Flora Lu at the University of California, Santa
Cruz, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
examining the mechanisms through which Indigenous governance and stewardship
fosters social-ecological resilience. In numerous locations and contexts,
Indigenous institutions and cultural practices have resulted in positive
environmental outcomes, such as promoting biological diversity, maintaining
ecosystem services, and curbing deforestation. These outcomes are important
globally because Indigenous peoples manage over 25 percent of the world’s land
surface. This study explores these dynamics through a partnership with
Indigenous communities, where accelerating deforestation and degradation, linked
to resource extraction and urbanization, threaten their health, well-being, and
sovereignty. Through a combination of ethnographic, human ecological, and
spatial methodologies, this research will examine the connections between
Indigenous biocultural heritage, institutions, and cultural values and their
ecological impacts. A robust communication strategy ensures that results will
inform both academics and the general public about how Indigenous practices
build resilience and support conservation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Interdependent
relationships over millennia between humans and their surroundings gave rise to
a diversity of Indigenous territories across the planet. Drawing on rich
biocultural heritage, Indigenous peoples have developed sophisticated
institutions that simultaneously maintain ecosystem services and relationships
with territory. This study investigates features of biocultural heritage,
including the knowledge, innovations, and practices used by Indigenous peoples
to gauge, interpret, and respond to internal and external feedbacks, transmit
knowledge, and adapt to changing social, environmental, and political contexts.
How do Indigenous peoples utilize their biocultural heritage in this manner,
what limitations do they face in doing so, and why? This research will address
such questions by leveraging a long-term partnership, where threats such as
climate change and extractivism represent a microcosm of those impacting the
broader region. A multi-methods approach (quantitative, qualitative,
ethnographic, participatory) will support an examination of the coupling,
decoupling, and potential for recoupling of biocultural heritage with specific
territories. Results from this research will describe how diverse threats impact
the resilience of Indigenous territories, and support how we theorize and
understand territory. This work will contribute to the fields of human ecology,
landscape ecology, land education, and social-ecological systems theory. More
broadly, this research will support biological and cultural conservation by
highlighting the importance of diverse Indigenous values and approaches, and
inform the on-going production of a participatory planning instrument for
territorial governance. The project also builds local capacity, training, and
mentoring by including Indigenous researchers. Finally, the project has built in
mechanisms for research dissemination, for academic and policy audiences,
including engaging media sources to broadly communicate research
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.