* 2105430
* Moving Beyond Bias: Structural Competency in Medical Education
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Marie Plaisime, Plaisime, Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the co-
sponsorship of Dr. Mary Bassett of Harvard University and Professor Dorothy
Roberts of the University of Pennsylvania, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating how structural racism, race-
based medicine, and racial bias influence micro- and macro- processes in
clinical interactions. Health provider bias, stereotyping, and discrimination
may undermine patient care and contribute to poor health outcomes in racially
stigmatized groups. Previous researchers have posited several theoretical models
and testable hypotheses; however, less is known about the multilevel
sociological environments in which clinical decisions are made and how cognitive
biases can translate to racial differential treatment and health disparities.
Medical education has struggled with confronting how structural forces impact
racialized groups within the discipline. This study uses sophisticated
quantitative modeling and qualitative approaches to explore beyond individual
behaviors and beliefs by investigating factors that shape clinical decisions and
patient-provider relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
project, entitled Moving Beyond Bias: Structural Competency in Medical
Education, is to advance scientific knowledge of structural competency, bias,
and patient-provider interaction while enhancing theories and methodological
approaches to improve medical curricula, policies, and practices. This study
employs a mixed-method approach across two phases to assess medical providers'
perceptions of structural competency pedagogy and their understanding of
structural racism in medical education. Phase 1 uses qualitative approaches to
examine medical students' and residents' training on racial bias and race-based
medicine, especially among those identified as Black, Indigenous, and People of
Color (BIPOC), women, and/or persons with disabilities. Phase 2 involves
implementing a randomized control trial (RCT), informed by data collected in
Phase 1, to assess structural factors that impact provider recommendations. We
will explore how medical students and faculty can reduce bias and race-based
learning across medical institutions using quantitative, computational, &amp;
mixed methodological (QCM) tools and use inferential statistics to test
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.