* 2105005
* D3SC: CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Machine Learning Modeling for the Reactivity of Organic Contaminants in Engineered and Natural Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Huichun Zhang, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 252,772.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the NSF
Division of Chemistry, Professors Huichun Zhang of Case Western Reserve
University and Dong Wang of University of Illinois Urbanaâ€”Champaign will develop
machine learning models to predict the reactivity of thousands of organic
contaminants (OCs) in engineered (water) and natural (soil and sediment)
environments. To assess and mitigate risks associated with this vast number of
OCs, accurate predictive models are needed to readily provide reasonable
estimates of their reactivity, both during important water treatment processes
and in the environment. However, existing models rely heavily on conventional
statistical methods. They have multiple limitations such as small numbers and
narrow scopes of OCs involved and lengthy calculations of molecular properties.
The project will employ advanced machine learning algorithms to predict
contaminant reactivities. The obtained machine learning models will help
identify OCs of concern and optimize the treatment processes. In addition,
environmental data science will be developed as a new educational track at the
pilot scale. Graduate, undergraduate and high school students with diverse
backgrounds will be engaged in interdisciplinary research, including modeling
and experimental work. The project also plans hands-on activities on OCs for
girls in grade 6-12 and underrepresented college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will systematically develop comprehensive and
accurate machine learning models for predicting the reactivity of thousands of
OCs in advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), adsorption onto engineered
adsorbents, sorption onto soils and sediments, and biodegradation. The
objectives of this research are to 1) mine the literature and available
databases to obtain the largest datasets of contaminant reactivity in AOPs,
(ad)sorption and biodegradation; 2) experimentally quantify the reactivity of
selected OCs in AOPs, (ad)sorption and biodegradation; 3) develop confidence-
aware machine learning models for the reactivity of OCs based on the data from
the above two objectives; and 4) interpret the obtained models to make them
trustable and define their applicability domains. OCs will be modeled by new
chemical representations including molecular fingerprints, molecular images, and
different combinations of them with molecular descriptors. Including (ad)sorbent
properties in the (ad)sorption models will be a major step to expand the model
applicability to diverse (ad)sorbent structures and properties. Properly
interpreting and modifying the obtained models and calculating model confidence
bounds will make the obtained models trustable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.