* 2105389
* Social Preferences Among Transgender, Gender Nonconforming, and Gender Typical Children
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Ashley Jordan, Jordan, Ashley Eliza
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Kristina
Olson at Princeton University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating how gender diverse youth and teens reason
about the social world. The TransYouth project at Princeton is a national,
longitudinal study of the largest sample of prepubescent transgender and gender
nonconforming youth and their siblings. This project addresses a longstanding
issue in the field of gender development research. Namely, that virtually all
theorizing and empirical approaches to date assume that the sex a child is
assigned at birth matches their lived gender identity. Although this is true for
many, in recent years transgender individuals—those who identify with the gender
opposite their natal sex—have gained more visibility. Thus, the time is ripe for
developmental researchers to broaden the scope of their theorizing to include
gender diverse youth. Self-disclosure of one’s identity is a precursor to many
benefits, such as receiving social affirmation and building community around
one’s identity. However, transgender youth must take into consideration the
potential for discrimination and bullying that may follow. How transgender youth
adjudicate between the option to disclose rather than conceal their identity is
important, but not well understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project, entitled "Social Preferences Among Transgender, Gender Nonconforming,
and Gender Typical Children" is twofold. First the project assesses how
transgender teenagers (13-18 years) evaluate those whom they have disclosed
their gender identity to (Aim 1). This aim employs a mixed-methods approach
using thematic analysis to identify themes associated with teens’ successful
disclosure experiences, as measured by the teens’ ratings of their chosen
confidants’ levels of support. Second, the project empirically assesses how
young children reason about disclosure decisions in a third-person context based
on the characteristics of potential confidants, including the composition of
their friend groups with respect to gender diversity (Aim 2a). Finally, this
work will examine whether transgender teens’ evaluations of their confidants is
consistent with younger transgender children’s reasoning about others’
disclosure decisions (Aim 2b). This project advances scientific knowledge that
has the potential to support better outcomes for gender diverse individuals.
Further, this work will provide an empirical basis for how to better support
gender diverse individuals by assessing how children across the gender identity
spectrum reason about the benefits and burdens of gender identity
disclosure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.