* 2105296
* Precise Block Copolymer Defects
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Edwin Thomas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2025
* USD 653,464.00

NON TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finding out how a particular processing path
either purposefully creates or minimizes various classes of defects is key to
further progress in exploiting soft matter crystals for their intriguing
material properties. Soft matter crystals such as those comprised of block
copolymer molecules form via self assembly of the component molecules into
periodic arrays. Recent advances made with new types of microscopy now enable 3D
visualization of the fine-scale features of organized block polymers. While the
structures are mostly regularly periodic, defects occur and the aim is to use
microscopy tools to see these local disruptions in the order, classify them by
their geometry, learn how they form during processing of the material and how
each type of defect influences material properties. The performance of periodic
materials depends to a great extent on having well ordered structures and when
desired, precisely positioned and aligned defects. The PI seeks to discover
valuable types of defects that can then be manipulated to enhance and even
create brand new technological applications of block copolymer materials. For
example, a defect that forms a type of "molecular mirror" inside a structure
without mirror symmetry may create new opportunities for manipulating the
propagation of light waves. Since defects are relatively rare events, the search
to discover and classify heretofore mostly unknown objects requires high
quality, large data sets and use of machine learning for statistically sound and
unbiased microstructural data analysis. Locating, analyzing and classifying all
the various types of defects created under a given set of processing conditions
will benefit materials researchers in fields well beyond polymeric materials.
Such processing – structure relations have been the goal of materials science
since its inception and while much has been learned about how different polymer
processing procedures influence microstructure, the level of information has
generally been limited to observations on polymer chain, domain and crystal
orientation, domain shapes and periodicities has but rarely been related to the
type, amount and distribution of the many types of defects throughout the
material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI's group will utilize the advances made with slice and view dual ion and
electron beam microscopy for reconstruction of very large volumes of 3D tubular
network microdomain block copolymer samples to identify and characterize the
defects and relate them to the processing route used to prepare the sample and
to their influence on properties such as charge, mass and wave transport. Since
defects are relatively rare events, the search to discover and classify
heretofore mostly unknown objects requires near distortion-free microscopy to
provide large data sets. The inherent complex topology and morphology of defects
in network phases requires the help of machine learning for morphological
analysis. Machine learning on these large data sets will afford statistically
sound and unbiased microstructural data analysis for location and
characterization of all the various defects with the ability to find the most
abundant and also distinctive patterns of defects.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
various types of defects are created under a given set of processing conditions
will benefit materials researchers in fields well beyond polymeric materials.
Development of improved processing protocols such as membrane homogenization of
microparticles to avoid anisotropic sample deformations and perhaps even growing
the first faceted true single crystals of block copolymers may demonstrate that
polymers can realize near-perfection as do other classes of soft matter. Such
processing – structure relations have been the goal of materials science since
its inception and while much has been learned about how different polymer
processing procedures influence microstructure, the level of information has
generally been limited to observations on polymer chain, domain and crystal
orientation, domain shapes and average periodicities has but rarely been related
to the type, amount and distribution of the many types of precise defects
throughout the material. Ultimately the research will discover valuable defects
that can be manipulated to enhance and create new technological applications of
block copolymers.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.