* 2105571
* CIF: Small: Statistically Optimal Subsampling for Big Data and Rare Events Data
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* HaiYing Wang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 399,502.00

The ever-increasing amounts of big data offer unprecedented opportunities for
advancing knowledge across scientific fields. However, traditional analyses of
big data involve high computational costs and often require supercomputers. This
project aims to develop computational tools that empower practitioners to
analyze big data without dependency on supercomputers. It produces optimal
algorithms that extract the maximum amount of information from massive data with
limited computing resources. Rare-events data are common in big data where the
numbers of interested events are relatively small although available full data
are massive. This project is identifying conditions when the majority data can
be discarded without any information loss, and developing methods for valid
analysis and appropriate decision-making with rare events data. Education is
another key component of the project, with a significant focus on classroom
integration and next-generation workforce training, aiming to attract and equip
a broader range of participants, especially underrepresented groups, to the
field of computational data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subsampling has
demonstrated a pervasive potential to enable better use of a fixed amount of
computing resources. However, existing investigations focus on calculations of
the collected data, and available results are not suitable for statistical
inference on the underlying model. This project develops and expands the
subsampling technique in the following directions: 1) It establishes a framework
to determine statistically optimal subsampling probabilities by examining
statistical distributional properties of subsample estimators; 2) it derives the
maximum subsampled conditional likelihood estimator that has the smallest
asymptotic variance among a large class of asymptotically unbiased estimators;
and 3) it obtains new theoretical insights on rare-events data and challenges a
long-standing view of underestimated probabilities for rare events. The research
is a significant addition to the field of big data subsampling and provides
tools that are widely applicable to facilitate practical inference and decision-
making. It also answers important questions that are essential for extracting
valid information from rare-events data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.