* 2105136
* Building a comprehensive theory of pragmatic language through large-scale experiments, computation, and neurodiversity
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Edward Gibson, Floyd, Samantha B
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Edward Gibson
and Dr. Evelina Fedorenko, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist examining how non-literal language is understood by humans and
machines. Much of human communication is not encoded directly in words: we may
say ‘It’s getting late’ to politely indicate that we would like to leave, or
call a ballerina a ‘swan’ to capture her grace. This kind of language is called
pragmatics and often thought to comprise everything from humor, to white lies,
metaphors, implicature, prosody, and more. Although there have been
investigations into each of these phenomena individually, it is unknown whether
they are supported by the same mechanisms, nor how they relate within the
individual, which has implications for neurodivergent individuals facing
challenges in communication. And, while current language models show impressive
results, little research has explored what kinds of computations might support
pragmatic language understanding, which is crucial for success in artificial
intelligence. Across both behavioral and computational approaches, the current
project will address these limitations by identifying clusters of related
pragmatic inferences in humans and exploring how they are computed in models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies new methods to shed light on a
unified framework for pragmatic language, with the goal of including
neurodivergent individuals as researchers in the process. Large-scale
individual-differences studies will develop a comprehensive battery of pragmatic
language and expose relationships between abilities (e.g., does understanding
white lies correlate best with understanding of irony?). Non-linguistic
cognitive assessments will identify which clusters relate to social reasoning,
literal language understanding, and executive abilities. By evaluating current
language models on non-literal language interpretation, the project with also
uncover the learnability, scope, and generalization of language models’
performance on pragmatic language, and will allow us to compare model activity
to the clusters found in the human studies. By testing pragmatic language in
humans and current computational models, this research will bring us closer to
understanding the necessary input and computations for pragmatic language
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.