* 2105053
* 2021 RNA Editing Gordon Research Seminar
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Peter Beal, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2023
* USD 12,235.00

The award will provide support for graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers to attend the 2021 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on RNA Editing
(July 31-Aug 1, 2021 in Ventura Beach, CA). The GRS will be held just prior to
the associated Gordon Research Conference (GRC; Aug 1-6, 2021). These two
meetings bring together young and established scientists from multiple
disciplines who are addressing a broad range of questions about nucleic acid
modifications, from mechanisms and functions to development of bioengineering
tools. The GRS in particular enables a diverse group of early career scientists
to discuss current research through seminars and poster sessions, exchange new
ideas, technologies and resources informally, and develop their professional
network. Hence this conference will facilitate training and professional
development of the next generation of scientists, including underrepresented
minorities, in the field of nucleotide editing. The GRS program includes a panel
discussion on career choices with accomplished scientists in different
professions. The GRS also serves as a career development experience for the co-
chairs and organizers who are PhD students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modifications
of nucleosides found in RNA and DNA have been known for many years; however, the
advent of novel and sensitive analytical techniques for their detection, and new
appreciation of their broad impact on fundamental biological processes, have led
to a renaissance in the field. The GRS and GRC serve as a vital link for
investigators around the world to share their latest, often unpublished
discoveries, discuss pioneering ideas and launch new collaborations. Topics at
the forefront of the field will be covered, including the evolution,
structure/dynamics and mechanisms of editing and modification systems, new tools
for identification of nucleic acid modifications, and engineering new nucleic
acid modification systems, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.