* 2105424
* Advancing archaeological synthesis through the digitization and interoperability of ceramic data
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Kostalena Michelaki, Torvinen, Andrea
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 139,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF’s Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Kostalena Michelaki-Schwartz at Arizona
State University and Dr. Andrea Berlin at Boston University, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist seeking to revolutionize the
publication and accessibility of ceramic data. This research will both advance
the theory and method of archaeology and create a common tool for the
dissemination and interoperability of data related to ceramic manufacture from
the advent of pottery through the Historic Period—the Pan-American
Archaeological Ceramic Database (PAACD). This open-access, digital repository
will provide the general public and archaeologists with a virtual resource of
curated reference materials. By eliminating the complications of gaining access
to physical collections and paywalled publications, or deciphering inconsistent
terminology across languages, this project will increase the breadth, depth, and
speed of research, and facilitate the inclusion of prehistoric material culture
in educational resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspiration for the PAACD
derives from the Fellow’s own research on the influence of social identification
and collective action on the growth and decline of Epiclassic (600-900 CE)
polities. Determining how closely these polities interacted and what forms their
interactions took is currently hampered by a lack of regional-scale datasets.
Therefore, building upon her previous research, the Fellow will complete an
integrated database of ceramic types and attributes that will allow for
synthetic research to be conducted. Thus, it offers an ideal foundation upon
which to construct the PAACD. This work involves: (1) review and verify the
existing attribute data on 238 types from 15 sites and one survey area and
collect data from seven new collections; (2) conduct a technological analysis of
a ceramic assemblage; and (3) integrate ceramic attribute data using the
software and ontological framework of the Digital Archaeological Record
(tDAR.org). The subsequent design and development of the PAACD will then involve
consultation with a network of experts in ceramic technology and compositional
methods that the Fellow has curated, as well as key stakeholders to ensure the
functionality of the PAACD for all potential users. Several workshops will be
organized to introduce the website to potential contributors and/or provide
opportunities for mass data uploads to the site. The digital infrastructure of
comparable and accessible data within the PAACD should be implemented in other
regions of the world and replicated across other social science
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.