* 2105847
* ATD: Global Terrorism Threat Detection by Nonstationary, Spatio-Temporal Hawkes Process Models
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mikyoung Jun, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,850.00

The threat of terrorism is a pressing global security concern, with thousands of
terror attacks producing tens of thousands of deaths annually. Analyzing
patterns of prior terror events is one of the primary ways researchers can learn
about terrorism and its determinants, thereby enabling governments to craft more
effective counter-terrorism policy in the future. Yet, most statistical models
used by researchers are ill-suited to capture the complex dynamics of global
terrorism. For example, it is known that acts of terrorism often produce
subsequent acts of terror. However, current understanding of the evolution of
terror campaigns remains limited and constrained by methods which either assume
independence across events or lack sufficiently flexible models of dependence.
In this project, the PIs plan to generalize these statistical approaches to make
them better suited for the analysis of global terrorism, and to help identify
more complex interactions within and across terror campaigns. The results of
this project will ultimately benefit policy makers and aid government efforts to
curb such violence. The PIs will author popular summaries of the project results
for general audiences, and integrate the proposed research with education
through training graduate students and developing courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project aims to develop spatio-
temporal Hawkes process models on a global scale with flexible nonstationary
spatio-temporal intensity functions. Current Hawkes process models found in the
literature are often univariate, defined only on the planar domain, and do not
permit spatio-temporal interactions. The PIs will develop Hawkes process models
defined on the surface of a sphere with a flexible spatio-temporal structure in
the triggering function. Specific developments will include spatio-temporal
nonstationarity, non-separability, and asymmetry. Multivariate extensions of the
proposed models will be pursued to simultaneously model varied attack types or
attacks by multiple terrorist groups. Statistical inference with numerical
computation of the likelihood for massive global data, and procedures for
hypothesis tests of spatio-temporal structures in point pattern data will be
studied. Proposed methods will be applied to the analysis of individual
terrorist groups in single countries, as well as global terrorism
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.