* 2105462
* Classical, Motivic and Equivariant Stable Homotopy Groups of Spheres.
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Zhouli Xu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 264,138.00

Topology is a subject of mathematics that studies the shapes of spaces and
interactions among them. A fundamental problem in topology is the classification
problem of topological spaces and maps among them. Among all spaces, the spheres
are of central importance, and we can classify them up to continuous deformation
by a single number - the dimension. A one dimensional sphere, which we usually
call a circle, is something that we can draw on a piece of paper, and can be
described by the solutions of the familiar equation for a circle. A two
dimensional sphere is something we can visualize in three dimensional space,
such as the surface of a basketball, and can be described by the solutions of a
similar equation. In topology, we also study higher dimensional spheres.
Although these spaces cannot be visualized in three dimensions, they do exist in
higher dimensions, and can also be studied. Somewhat surprisingly, maps between
spheres are much harder to classify, even up to continuous deformations. This
classification problem of maps between spheres is called the problem of
computations of homotopy groups of spheres. This problem has been a major and
active research problem since the 1950's. Much progress has been made on this
problem, through all kinds of methods that have close connections to many
subjects of mathematics. Recently, significant progress has been made using
techniques from motivic and equivariant homotopy theory. The goal of this
project is to further develop new techniques in motivic and equivariant homotopy
theory, and to study this classical problem of computations of homotopy groups
of spheres. Graduate students will be involved in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concentrates on computations of
stable homotopy groups of spheres, in the classical, motivic and equivariant
context. More specifically, the principal investigator and collaborators will
continue using techniques in motivic homotopy theory over the complex numbers to
push classical computations, towards the Kervaire invariant problem in dimension
126. The principal investigator and collaborators will extend the Chow
t-structure technique defined over the complex numbers to other base fields, and
study motivic stable homotopy groups of spheres over these base fields.
Moreover, the PI will study with collaborators the New Doomsday Conjecture in
Adams filtration 3, and use equivariant techniques to study homotopy groups of
Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel type spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.