* 2105342
* CRII: FET: Quantum Bayesian network simulation through efficient representation, transpilation, and uncertainty quantification
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Saideep Nannapaneni, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Advances in sensing, data collection, algorithms, and high-performance computing
have resulted in a new paradigm of scientific discovery called the data-driven
scientific discovery, where different types of data-driven models are trained
based on the available data for knowledge discovery and reasoning, forecasting,
and system-performance prediction. Due to the noisy and imprecise nature of
data, these analyses need to be performed in the presence of uncertainty.
Bayesian networks constitute one model that can be used to represent noisy and
imprecise data, and that has been employed in applications ranging from atomic-
level systems to cosmology, healthcare, and in various engineering domains such
as transportation, manufacturing, civil infrastructure, and aerospace systems.
In the last decade, there has also been tremendous interest in the field of
quantum computing due to its superior computational performance over
conventional computing paradigms in solving certain types of problems. This
project is investigating efficient representation and simulation of Bayesian
networks in the quantum-computing paradigm. The results from this project are
being incorporated into STEM courses. Multiple undergraduate and graduate
students are being trained as part of this project, and several short teaching
modules are being developed to train high-school students in quantum computing
through annual summer camps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
investigates the fundamental question of simulating a Quantum Bayesian Network
(QBN) on currently available Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices.
The proposed research is investigating a multi-pronged approach for efficient
QBN simulation. First, a novel QBN representation framework through rotation
angle decomposition, which has a lower analysis complexity without losing the
accuracy is being investigated. Second, a mixed optimization-reinforcement
learning approach for transpilation is being investigated for combined qubit
placement and routing problem to efficiently map any given QBN circuit on to
gate-based hardware architectures. Finally, a non-parametric statistical
approach is being investigated to obtain an empirical relationship between QBN
complexity and the number of quantum circuit runs required for a desired
accuracy in QBN state probabilities. The proposed methods are not limited to
quantum Bayesian networks but are generic and applicable to any quantum
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.