* 2105193
* An Integrated Computational and Experimental Approach to Reveal Design Principles for Responsive Nanomaterials from Lipidated Disordered Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Shikha Nangia, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2024
* USD 579,303.00

Non-Technical Summary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins modified with lipids are
an emerging class of biomaterials with diverse applications in materials science
and healthcare. However, to realize their promise, it is critical to develop a
comprehensive understanding of foundational principles governing the formation
and properties of these hybrid biomaterials under a range of solution
conditions. This collaborative project will integrate experiments and
simulations to create a blueprint for the design of nanoparticles with user-
defined properties by changing the composition of lipidated proteins and
temperature. Machine learning algorithms will be used to iteratively integrate
feedback from simulations and experiments and to derive predictive rules that
guide the design of nano-biomaterials for specific applications ranging from the
delivery of chemotherapeutics to the templated synthesis of nanomaterials. The
project leaders also will develop an integrated experimental and computational
cohort-based research experience program for students from diverse backgrounds,
including women and underrepresented minorities in STEM. Research training at
the interface of chemistry, biology, materials science, and physics will enable
these trainees to advance the frontiers of knowledge, accelerate materials
innovation, and contribute to U.S.’s leadership in the global
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite advancements in the past decade, the design of
hybrid materials comprising lipid and protein building blocks remains a largely
ad hoc process, impeding progress in the field. This limitation arises because
the sheer size of the design space of lipid-protein biomaterials prohibits
empirical elucidation of design rules. Thus, to efficiently reveal foundational
design principles, new approaches that integrate experiments, simulations, and
machine learning algorithms are needed. This collaborative project leverages the
research team’s complementary expertise in biosynthesis as well as computational
and experimental characterization of lipidated proteins. The project will
investigate lipid-modified intrinsically disordered protein polymers (Lipo-
IDPPs), which combine the hierarchical organization of lipids with temperature-
responsive behavior of IDPPs to form nano- and meso-assemblies with temperature-
dependent characteristics. Using this model, the team will develop predictive
design rules for programming the thermo-response and hierarchical assembly of
Lipo-IDPPs in their molecular syntax (the physicochemistry of their building
blocks, their primary sequence, topology, and amphiphilic architecture). Two
objectives will be pursued, each of which uses a closed-loop strategy of
modeling, synthesis, and the characterization of a series of Lipo-IDPPs with
precise genetically encoded syntax. Using an integrated approach that
judiciously combines iterative feedback from experiments, simulations, and
machine learning, the team will: (1) develop a predictive model of Lipo-IDPPs’
thermo-response based on their molecular syntax and (2) identify a
macromolecular blueprint for tailoring the structural hierarchy of their
assemblies as a function of physiologically relevant temperatures. The material
properties of a series of Lipo-IDPPs as a function of temperature will be
characterized using multiscale experimental (spectroscopy, scattering, and
microscopy) and computational (atomistic and coarse-grained simulations)
approaches. Machine learning methods will be used to combine experimental and
computational results into a model for mapping molecular attributes to observed
material properties. The optimized model will provide insights into the
biophysical contribution of different components of molecular syntax to the
programmable temperature-responsive assembly of this class of materials and can
be used to formulate rigorous and predictive rules for the inverse design of
Lipo-IDPPs with desired properties in biologically relevant milieus. Elucidating
the design principles governing the multiscale organization of Lipo-IDPPs will
enable the rational synthesis of responsive materials with genetically
programmable molecular syntax and properties. And the integration of iterative
feedback from in silico and experimental characterization techniques with data
analytics, which is applicable to other hybrid materials, will accelerate
biomaterials’ design and discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.