* 2105999
* Sustaining the operation of the Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Hippokratis Kiaris, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 487,134.00

Deer mice (Genus Peromyscus) are the most abundant rodents in North America and
are used extensively by investigators in the USA and all over the world for
research in disciplines ranging from ecology and evolution, to genetics,
physiology, public health and infectious diseases. Besides academic
investigators, Peromyscus users also include other federal agencies in the U.S.
as well as private entities. The Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center (PGSC) of the
University of South Carolina maintains and distributes for a small fee, to
interested investigators, animals of 5 different species of Peromyscus that are
maintained in its facilities for more than 40 years as closed colonies. In
addition to the animals, the PGSC also provides upon request pedigree data and
performs small scale experiments. In addition, it operates as a focal point for
the dissemination of information related to Peromyscus biology. Finally, it
actively trains investigators of all different levels, from students to senior
faculty, in Peromyscus-related biology. The current award assists in the
uninterrupted operation of the PGSC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the
Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center (PGSC) is to maintain colonies of various
species of outbred, genetically diverse deer mice (genus Peromyscus) and
distribute them to investigators in the US and all over the world. Currently the
PGSC maintains six different closed colonies, involving 5 Peromyscus species: P.
maniculatus (2 colonies), P. polionotus, P. eremicus, P. californicus, and P.
leucopus. For all animals generated in the PGSC, pedigree data since the
original establishment of the colonies are available to external users. In
addition, specific small- scale experimental tasks are being performed upon
request and are provided as “contract research” operations. The continuous and
uninterrupted operation of the PGSC satisfy a series of specific needs to the
community of Peromyscus-interested investigators. Those include but not limited
to: availability of animals of given quality and genetic make-up from
“reference”, wild type populations; availability of pedigree data that allow
tracing back each animal generated (and supplied to outside users) in the PGSC
to the original ancestors from when the colony was established; the existence of
a focal point for Peromyscus-associated research which accumulates and
disseminates information to the communities of interest. The PGSC also serves as
a training point which investigators visit and receive training on Peromyscus
handling and colony maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.