* 2105147
* The effects of adversity and stress on agency-modulated feedback learning
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Hayley Dorfman, Dorfman, Hayley M
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Elizabeth
Phelps at Harvard University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating how chronic and acute stress impacts
beliefs about control, or agency, and its influence on learning and decision-
making. Determining how stressors affect learning mechanisms will advance our
understanding of how individual differences in learning arise. Results from this
work have broad implications for mitigating stress exposure and improving stress
assessment and treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While high levels of stress are
known to contribute to a number of mental and physical health consequences, they
can also affect fundamental learning and decision-making processes. In
particular, stress has been shown to have an effect on how individuals learn
from rewards and punishments. However, stressors differ in their ability to
influence learning processes. Exposure to uncontrollable stressors can lead to
learned helplessness and learning impairments, but controllable stressors
enhance future feedback learning. While previous research has manipulated
stressor controllability, the mechanisms underlying beliefs about control, or
agency, are poorly understood. This proposal aims to determine how agency,
stress, and learning processes interact by conducting two studies that will look
at how early-life adversity impacts these learning and belief mechanisms and the
extent to which agency beliefs and learning are malleable in the face of acute
stressors. Specifically, the proposed studies will use a feedback learning task
and an accompanying Bayesian reinforcement learning model to measure the extent
to which adults learn from positive and negative outcomes when their beliefs
about agency are modulated. The influence of different types of stressors will
be examined by measuring early-life adversity (ELA) and manipulating acute
stress. Ultimately, this work will help explain the circumstances in which
individual differences in stress exposure does or does not give rise to biases
in learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.