* 2105364
* Determining Pathways for Improved Oxidation Resistance in Compositionally Complex Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Mark Weaver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 324,544.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal alloys are widely used as
structural materials in many high temperature applications such as power plants,
aircraft engines, and rocket motors. Conventional alloys are typically made of
one or two primary alloying elements with addition of other low-concentration
alloying elements to improve alloy properties. Recently, high entropy alloys,
also known as complex concentrated alloys, have received significant interest
due to their novel structures and properties. Unlike conventional alloys, high
entropy alloys consist of five or more principal alloying elements in nearly
equal concentrations. These concentrated alloys exhibit outstanding physical
properties compared to conventional alloys including high-temperature strength,
corrosion resistance, and radiation tolerance, though the reasons why are poorly
understood to date. This project investigates the fundamental mechanisms of high
temperature oxidation in high entropy alloys and establishes the roles of
chemistry and microstructure in controlling oxidation behavior. Through this
project a diverse group of students and scientists, including women and students
from Historically Black Colleges and Universities, will be trained to test,
characterize, model and predict the oxidation behavior of high entropy alloys
using computational and experimental tools. This project will advance our goals
towards developing materials with improved oxidation resistance which will
contribute towards more fuel efficient and longer lasting power plants, improved
jet and rocket engines, and safer nuclear power
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High entropy
alloys (HEAs) and the related complex concentrated alloys (CCAs) are garnering
increased attention from the researchers worldwide searching for alternatives to
conventional/legacy materials. Oxidation limits the application of many advanced
materials in high temperature environments and there have been very few
investigations of the oxidation behavior of high entropy alloys. Most of those
studies centered on as-fabricated (e.g., as-cast, as-sintered, etc.) alloys
without addressing the influences of microstructural parameters (i.e.,
grain/phase size, morphology, or distribution). This research will use a coupled
experimental and computational approach to establish how oxidation occurs in
AlCoCrFeNi HEAs/CCAs and will provide a framework that can be used to design and
fabricate HEAs/CCAs exhibiting enhanced oxidation resistance. This research will
use CALPHAD based thermodynamic modeling to predict phase equilibria and
oxidation products and will use TC-PRISMA complemented with DICTRA to simulate
phase precipitation due to oxidation. The simulated microstructures and phases
will be validated using cross-correlative analytical electron microscopy and
Atom Probe Tomography techniques to quantify solute segregation behavior and the
influences of phase distribution and grain boundary character on oxidation. This
research will contribute towards the development, improvement and validation of
high-quality thermodynamic and kinetic databases and will also provide necessary
technical insights to facilitate the development of oxidation resistant HEAs for
use in high temperature structural applications. The graduate student budgeted
for the project will employ the principles of metallurgical and ceramic
engineering, thin film science and materials processing, microstructural
characterization, and materials selection. They will benefit from this project
by being involved in advanced research on the fabrication, chemical and
microstructural characterization, and modeling of reacting materials using
state-of-the-art analytical and computational tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.