* 2105038
* Frame Phase-Retrievability and Applications to Quantum Information
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Deguang Han, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 230,000.00

Frames provide desirable mathematical representations for signals and
information, and consequently play an important role in developing approaches to
many challenging questions in science and in engineering applications. Frames
have natural connections with the mathematical theory of quantum communications.
For example, phase-retrievability of a frame is an important property that
allows the recovery of a signal from the magnitudes of its frame coefficient
measurements. This appears in many applications including speech recognition,
x-ray crystallography and electron microscopy. In quantum information theory,
this is a necessary property for a quantum system to have to distinguish pure
states from their quantum measurements. This project addresses several
fundamental issues in the area. The principal investigator (PI) will investigate
frame applications to problems involving quantum communication capability and
information transmission security. By bringing a new circle of ideas to attack
these practical problems, this investigation will advance scientific
understanding in quantum information theory as well as in applied
functional/harmonic analysis. Additionally, this project will promote teaching,
training, and learning as several graduate and undergraduate students will be
directly involved in this research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One direction
of this investigation is to establish quantified measurements of (mostly,
operator-valued) frame phase-retrievability, and then use them to tackle
problems of designing (or characterizing) quantum communication channels with
prescribed levels of zero-error communication capacity and information
transmission security. Special attention will be given to the structured
channels, which are usually induced by different kinds of representation frames.
Here, the interplay between operator-valued frames and projective group
representations will play a key role. A second direction of this project is in
the area of signal/state recovering (or channel detection) from a source of
unidentified channels. The PI will establish its theoretical connections with
the theory of disjoint frames and quantum channels. A key ingredient is to use
disjoint frames as building blocks to produce a large class of candidates, where
any subclass of this set can be used as a source of unidentified channels for a
target set of signals or states in the quantum setting. Such an approach
requires developing a disjoint frame theory (or multiplexing) for bounded linear
maps on von Neumann algebras. A third direction involves quantum measures.
Dilation problems for quantum measures are not only in the scope of
aforementioned areas of investigation but also in line with the PIâ€™s long-term
goal of establishing a general dilation theory for operator-valued measures in
both commutative and non-commutative settings. Such a general dilation theory
may lead to a possible classification theory for quantum measures as well as for
their associated quantum channels. The main objective is to establish a dilation
theory for quantum measures that can tell us which, when, and how certain
important information of a quantum measure can be preserved through
dilations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.