* 2105175
* Understanding Mechano-Fibrinolysis: Fiber-Scale Multiphysics Experiments and Models
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Manuel Rausch, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 563,013.00

Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding naturally occurring,
biological materials is a critical step toward designing new, better materials
that can overcome many of today’s scientific and health challenges. One such
biomaterial is fibrin, which is an important constituent of blood clot. To
successfully and securely seal wounds, fibrin has evolved to be a highly
stretchable and resilient material. At the same time, fibrin is easily removable
as the wound is progressively healing. These diametrical functions are made
possible by an intricate, mechanically-mediated interplay between fibrin’s
structure and its chemistry. In this project, different microscopy techniques
will be used in combination with computational models to better understand this
interplay. The knowledge from this project will also have direct applicability
to other prominent, fibrous biomaterials – such as collagen and elastin - and
their mechanically-mediated structure-function relationships. Beyond its
scientific scope, this project’s impact will be broadened as it contributes to
the training of future scientists by creating research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students. Through a collaboration with the non-profit
Science Mill it will also integrate lessons about the role of fibrin - and other
fibrous biomaterials - in human health and disease into the curriculum of the
non-profit’s summer camps. As a result of this work, Kindergarten through grade
9 students from all walks of life including students with minoritized
backgrounds will be better prepared for careers in health, science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fibrin is a semi-flexible biopolymer with remarkable
properties. For example, fibrin can undergo deformations of several hundred
percent strain without failure. Its deformability and many other physical feats
originate from its hierarchical architecture that spans many orders of
magnitude. As such, it is a prototypical biopolymer whose study will enable
fundamental understanding of other, nature-derived as well as synthetic
biomaterials that can solve many of society’s most pressing problems. However,
much remains unknown about fibrin. Among those unanswered questions about fibrin
- and therefore about other biomaterials - is how fibrin’s state of mechanical
deformation affects its rate of enzymatic digestion, i.e., its mechano-lysis.
This question is a critical one to answer as enzymatic digestion is important in
the regulation of many vital tissue functions such as tissue growth and
remodeling as well as in tissue dysfunction such as in cancer. In this study,
this question will be answered on the fiber scale, that is, on the 100s-of-
nanometer-scale that a single fiber spans. To this end, a regiment of atomic
force microscopy-based experiments was designed in which single fibrin fibers
will be deformed, while their digestion under enzymatic loading will be
microscopically quantified. These experiments will be combined with a detailed
modeling approach that is integrated into the experimental design. Through this
synergistic approach, it will be possible to delineate the effect of mechanical
deformation on the multiple physical phenomena – such as enzyme transport,
binding, and enzymatic activity – that determine fibrin’s response to enzymatic
digestion. To ensure that this study reveals mechanistic insight rather than
merely fitting observations, the computational model and understanding of
mechano-fibrinolysis will be validated on the fiber network scale in which the
degradation of an assembly of loaded fibers will be predicted and compared to
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.