* 2105317
* Youth Sports Coaches and their Community in Air Pollution Governance
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Kim Fortun, Hernandez, Fred Ariel
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 140,200.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Kim Fortun at
the University of California, Irvine, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist’s investigation of the effects of air
pollution on youth sports coaching practices and pedagogical development.
Exposure to air pollution during childhood has significant destructive effects
on health and well-being, both short and long-term. K–12 students in
marginalized communities often suffer disproportionally from exposure to
airborne hazards. School staff members, especially sports coaches, are well
positioned to mitigate children’s exposure to air pollution through their
decisions of when, where, and how to exercise. Yet most coaches are inadequately
prepared to address such environmental hazards. This project helps education
policymakers and curriculum development professionals dramatically improve their
accounting of situated environmental hazards in diverse school settings by
giving them access to real-time data. In particular, it focuses on providing
working class, minority, and immigrant communities with such data. For while
such communities are often the subject of pollution-related research, they are
seldom invited to give input during basic data collection—even though they are
particularly well positioned and stand to benefit the most. This project
develops a new line of research that theorizes coaches as air pollution actors
in their everyday activities. Such innovation is possible by using participatory
action research design elements and leading community-engaged, environmental
justice-oriented research approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project,
“Youth Sports Coaches and their Community in Air Pollution Governance,” will
study the daily decision making and pedagogical choices of school sports coaches
at a local public school, and its surrounding neighborhood, in the San Gabriel
Valley, California, a region with significant air pollution given its proximity
to numerous major highways. The project objectives are (1) to collect, organize,
and map empirical data on pollution research and governance; (2) to collect
interview data from stakeholders; (3) to collect air pollution data through
monitoring devices; (4) to develop a multi-scalar theoretical framework to
characterize pollution governance; (5) to develop a freeway and transportation
corridor archive. The study will employ emerging Urban Humanities methods,
ethnographic observations, interviews, archival research, and air quality
monitoring data to produce original data sets finely attuned to localized
experiences of school coaches. Stakeholder coaches will wear, and neighbors will
install, air pollution monitoring devices, and will learn how to access and
understand the generated data via smartphone applications. Outcomes include
developing maps and other visualizations of the daily activities of coaches on
school grounds, situating their pedagogic decisions vis-à-vis the pollution
governance infrastructures of school, city, and state. A broader impact of this
project is the development of guides for sports coaches and community
stakeholders to understand and communicate effectively about air pollution
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.