* 2105566
* Exploring ultra-wide bandgap ambipolar transparent conducting semiconductors for deep ultraviolet optoelectronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jianlin Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2024
* USD 390,000.00

Semiconductor laser diodes are an important component in a wide range of
consumer and industrial products. The basic structure of a laser diode contains
p- and n-type semiconductor thin film layers. Majority carriers in n- and p-type
semiconductors are electrons and holes, which can be regarded as negatively and
positively charged particles, respectively. Once the device is connected with an
energy source such as a battery, the electrons and holes meet in the junction
and recombine to emit light. Semiconductor lasers emitting light with a
wavelength in the visible and infrared ranges have been widely available. In
contrast, semiconductor lasers with shorter wavelength in the ultraviolet-B and
ultraviolet-C bands (specifically with wavelength less than 315 nanometers) are
severely underdeveloped. This is because the semiconductors commonly known as
ultra-wide bandgap semiconductors such as aluminum gallium nitride, which are
supposed to emit light in these spectral bands, have not been made with strong
p-type material reliably. The proposed research addresses this challenge by
developing a new ultra-wide bandgap semiconductor magnesium gallium oxide, which
will be doped into both n-type and p-type. The PI and students will grow,
fabricate and characterize light emitting devices and lasers based on these
novel materials with a goal of demonstrating deep ultraviolet semiconductor
laser devices with emission wavelengths between 200 and 270 nanometers. These
deep ultraviolet semiconductor lasers have important applications in deep space
communication, environmental monitoring, missile and flame detection,
information storage and recording, virus disinfection and water purification,
photodynamic medical diagnosis, therapy, and surgery, and so on. As a part of
the effort, this project will train graduate and undergraduate students and
involve these from underrepresented minorities to engineering. In addition,
learning sessions on the subject closely related to the project will be planned
for local high school students during their visit to the annual event “Discovery
Day” at the College of Engineering, UC Riverside, and summer research
opportunities will be provided to some high schoolers to prepare them for
science fairs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to demonstrate the first
ambipolar ultra-wide bandgap transparent conducting semiconductor with bandgap
of larger than 4.9 eV for deep-ultraviolet photonics. The research is planned
based on the PI group’s recent finding that ultra-wide bandgap magnesium gallium
oxide (MgGaO) is a strong p-type transparent conducting oxide semiconductor. The
project will comprehensively study ultra-wide bandgap MgGaO, controllable p- and
n-type doping of MgGaO, MgGaO/XGaO (X: Mg, Al) heterostructures, and their
optoelectronic devices. The project will synthesize these semiconductors using
molecular beam epitaxy and will elucidate their structural, electrical and
optical properties using various characterization techniques. The origin of the
p- and n-type doping of MgGaO will be revealed through detailed
characterizations including Hall effect, photoluminescence, x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, etc. Deep-ultraviolet semiconductor lasers, light emitting diodes
(LEDs) and photodetectors with wavelengths less than 270 nm will be fabricated
and characterized. The result will be an important step across the current
boundary for the emission wavelength of semiconductor waveguide lasers,
currently 375 nm in commercial use – an important advance that will enable
significant economic opportunities in many technology-based
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.