* 2105801
* SaTC: EDU: Developing Ready-to-Use Hands-on Labs with Portable Operating Environments for Digital Forensics Education
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jun Dai, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 391,012.00

The goal of this project is to develop an Instructional Forensics Education
Resource (INFER) in the form of multiple step-by-step hands-on labs with
accompanying instructional operating environments and study the labs’ impact on
student learning in digital forensics. The labs will be portable, comprehensive,
expandable, adjustable, and ready-to-use with the required lab environments and
materials. Quality digital forensics education emphasizes the importance of
gaining practical experience with forensics related platforms and tools.
Experiential learning has been well studied for STEM fields, few research works
have comprehensively studied the impact of experiential learning on student
outcomes in digital forensics education. The current digital forensics education
field lacks systematic and comprehensive hands-on labs that are readily
available and easy to adopt to conduct such research in depth. The most mature
hands-on training avenues for digital forensics are available to limited
audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed INFER lab suite will help improve
the digital forensics curriculum, increase student success, generate new
knowledge about the impact of experiential learning on digital forensics
education, and enhance faculty development through workshops. INFER will
distribute the content to other institutions including Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). This project broadens the participation of
misrepresented groups in digital forensics education and help develop a diverse
cybersecurity workforce. The project develops hands-on labs that cover forensics
related tools and platforms in various aspects of digital forensics. The labs
will contain: step-by-step lab instructions with corresponding screenshots;
instructional operating environments mainly in the form of Linux virtual
machines with equipped software and tools; lab materials, including artifacts,
files, and skeleton code; and an instructor manual. The project minimizes
instructors’ and students’ effort required for environment setup and allows them
to focus on the fundamentals of digital forensics. Based on these labs, the
project also studies the impact of experiential learning on digital forensics
student learning outcomes such as knowledge, skills, and attitudes, an important
contribution to a field where such comprehensive study is
lacking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address
cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.