* 2105631
* Collaborative Research: Negotiated Planning for Stochastic Control of Dynamical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Claus Danielson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 566,476.00

This project focuses on the development of new computational tools and new
knowledge that can be used to help ground operators of satellites manage the
complexity of next generation space missions. Ground operators of spacecraft
typically must balance multiple, conflicting goals, and as spacecraft missions
become more complex, so will the ground operator's task of satellite
coordination. However, existing tools make it difficult for operators to obtain
a complete understanding of possible trade-offs and rewards when designing paths
for the satellites to follow. Further, the use of autonomy to guide satellites
along desired paths can introduce further complexity, as well as uncertainty.
This project supports research that is motivated by the question: How can path
planning for autonomous systems operating in uncertain environments, be
responsive to the human, the dynamics, and appropriate levels of risk? Creation
of a mathematical and algorithmic framework to accomplish these objectives could
have broader impact on complex missions involving autonomous vehicles in other
domains beyond spacecraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the
development of algorithms and theoretical methods to enable the human operator
to seamlessly manipulate mission objectives, risks, and rewards in path planning
for controlled autonomous vehicles. The research approach is premised on the
notion that convex optimization provides a theoretical framework for not only
stochastic motion planning and control, but also for sensitivity analysis of the
risks, rewards, and constraints, to mission parameters, in large part due to its
ability to provide certificates in a run-time compatible manner. The PIs focus
on the development of systematic methods and tools for 1) specification of
mission objectives and constraints without the need for expert knowledge; 2)
negotiation of reward parameters, risk tolerances, and constraints, between the
user and the vehicle's autonomous control system; and 3) integration of these
capabilities into a receding horizon framework, to enable responsiveness to
unanticipated and dynamic changes to mission priorities and operator
preferences. The novelty of this research is in the inclusion of data driven
characterization of uncertainty into a stochastic optimal control framework; in
the use of duality theory for sensitivity analysis of objectives, risks, and
rewards; and in the run-time implementation of stochastic reachability and
optimization algorithms within a receding horizon framework, to enable real-time
operator support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.