* 2105564
* Collaborative Research: NGSDI: CarbonFirst: A Sustainable and Reliable Carbon-Centric Cloud-Edge Software Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Tian Guo, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 04/30/2024
* USD 209,963.00

Cloud computing platforms continue to grow exponentially, and are becoming the
foundation of our information-based economy. While the cloud’s energy demand
grew more slowly than expected over the past decade due to aggressive energy-
efficiency optimizations, there are few remaining optimization opportunities
using traditional methods. As a result, the cloud’s continued exponential growth
will translate into exponentially rising energy demand, which will position it
as one of the primary contributors to global carbon emissions. To address the
problem, this project elevates carbon to a first-class metric in designing a
sustainable and reliable cloud-edge software infrastructure that can enable
continued exponential growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's foundation is a
software-defined energy virtualization layer that provides applications
visibility into, and control of, their own energy and carbon usage. The project
will leverage this foundation to develop higher-level systems abstractions for
supporting carbon-efficient applications at different geographical scales
including: a cluster balloon technique, which automatically adjusts
applications’ energy usage to match a volatile clean energy supply at local edge
sites; edge hopping mechanisms, which exploit lower regional energy volatility
to balance energy across edge sites; and carbon capping policies, which track
applications’ global grid carbon emissions and restrict grid energy after
reaching the cap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential for
significant societal impact by enabling commercial cloud platforms to
sustainably continue their exponential growth. The project will conduct outreach
by incorporating topics from the proposal into summer programs for local middle
and high school students at the partner institutions. The project will also
impact the curriculum at these institutions by adopting elements of edge, cloud,
and sustainable computing into graduate and advanced undergraduate courses.
Finally, the project will recruit a diverse group of students by leveraging
institutional diversity efforts and will involve undergraduate students through
Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will make its software artifacts, datasets, and research results
available to the research community on the project website at
http://www.carbonfirst.org and via the UMass Trace Repository at
http://traces.cs.umass.edu. Artifacts derived from this project will be
maintained on the project website and the trace repository for a minimum of five
years after the project's conclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.