* 2105369
* Towards Subcritical Phase Transitions in Liquid Crystalline Elastomers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Timothy White, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystalline materials are
pervasive: they are the basis of devices in our homes, workspaces, automobiles,
and throughout society. An emerging area of materials research are stimuli-
responsive materials that are effectively equivalent to machines in that they
convert an input of energy into a mechanical output. This research project is
focused on enhancing the efficiency of stimuli-transduction of polymeric
materials that retain liquid crystallinity, which are called liquid crystalline
elastomers (LCEs). LCEs are increasingly considered as low material actuators
that could enable paradigm-shifting advances in robotics, therapies in health
sciences, and capabilities that benefit national security. Scientifically, this
effort seeks to understand the role of the interaction of the liquid crystalline
segments in polymer networks to the stimuli-response of these materials.
Notably, this research will isolate the temperature dependence of mesogen-
mesogen coupling by utilizing light-responsive molecules as a probe. Coupled to
this effort is an extensive outreach plan focused on broadening participation in
underserved populations in the state of Colorado, curriculum and outreach
relating to liquid crystals as a “Forgotten State of Matter”, and technology
development of broad relevance to societal interests and national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research activity is to realize
subcritical phase transitions in fully solid LCE compositions to sharpen and
amplify the mechanical response of these materials. The effort is scoped by
three objectives: i) investigate the contribution of intermolecular interaction
of mesogenic constituents in LCEs to the retention of paranematic order, ii)
assess the contribution of non-covalent, supramolecular bonds in LCE to phase
transitions in LCE, and iii) exploit photochromic moieties as an isothermal and
dynamic probe of critical phase behavior in LCEs. The research examination will
undertake a materials-centric approach via systematic design and synthesis of
both the molecular constituents and macromolecular composition coupled to robust
materials characterization (compositional, structural, and mechanical). The new
knowledge developed in this research will address existing gaps in the
correlation of composition and phase behavior in LCEs as well as inform future
design and optimization of the response of these materials. A detailed and
robust experimental plan is presented to develop composition-structure-property
relationships, correlated to the Landau-de Gennes theory of LCEs. Most recent
research examinations of LCE utilize diacrylate monomers based on the
1,4-Bis[4-(n-acryloyloxybutyloxy)benzoyloxy]-2-methylbenzene mesogenic core
(composed of three phenyl rings), which exhibit strain-temperature response in
the range of 0.1-1.0%/K. Phototropic manipulation of order will be used to
complement these insights as a differentiated approach to dynamically probe the
intermolecular interactions and the contribution of supramolecular bonds to the
retention (or elimination) of paranematic order. The technical effort is
integrated with a broader impact plan focused on outreach to underserved
populations in the state of Colorado, development of classroom demonstrations
showcasing the intercoupling of materials science and device engineering, a
YouTube channel to disseminate prior and current advances relating to LCEs,
graduate student training, and engagement with the Soft Robotics Toolkit to
facilitate necessary technological assessment of these materials and facilitate
integration in robotics. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.