* 2105267
* Using quantitative methods to understand the impact of input on development
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Lisa Pearl, Nguyen, Dung Hoang
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Lisa Pearl at
the University of California, Irvine, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating children’s development of
complex linguistic knowledge, while considering the impact of input variation
due to cultural factors. In particular, this project investigates what
constitutes “developmentally meaningful” input – that is, input that
qualitatively impacts language development. Specifically, it looks at how
English-learning children extract lexical information from their input in order
to comprehend sentences in the passive voice, and whether this process is
different across socio-economic status (SES) populations learning the same
language. The goal of the proposed project is to provide a precise and inclusive
theory of how typically-developing children learn the passive voice and how
changes in their linguistic environment may positively or negatively impact
learning. Reaching a full understanding of the behavioral outcomes of typically-
developing children based on their linguistic environment will provide crucial
insight into the source of linguistic deviations that we may observe in children
from clinical populations. Results from the proposed project will thereby help
inform efforts at closing language gaps in children through interventions
targeting the quality of children’s language input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
goal will be accomplished through a quantitative framework that incorporates
theoretical, computational, corpus, and behavioral approaches. The project will
first build a precise theory of how children can harness lexical information in
their input via computational modeling, predicting how linguistic input causes
linguistic knowledge to develop. These computational models will be fitted for a
theory of relevant lexical features and a baseline of the target adult knowledge
derived from behavioral studies conducted through online crowd-sourcing
platforms. To investigate what constitutes developmentally-meaningful input for
learning passives, a corpus of lexical information for child-directed speech
across SES populations will be built and analyzed. Predicted behavioral
differences by our computational models will allow us to assess the potential
efficacy of input-based interventions for mitigating (any) input-based
differences found in the development of the passive
voice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.