* 2105150
* Structure-Property Relationships of Protein-based Block Copolymer Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Guy Genin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 597,772.00

Non-technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project envisions a future in
which synthetic biology enables the production of tailored, biocompatible, and
environmentally friendly adhesives with properties beyond those currently
attainable by synthetic chemistry. This future is now possible thanks to recent
breakthroughs in the preparation of recombinant protein-based biomaterials and
cellulose nanocrystal reinforced nanocomposites. The team will develop these
technologies, and demonstrate them by finding adhesive solutions for the
surgical reattachment of tendon to bone, a problem of significant importance to
public health. For example, as many as 94% of rotator cuff repairs fail in some
populations. By assembling expertise in synthetic biology, biomaterial
engineering, material characterization, biomechanics, and interfaces and
adhesion, the team will design and synthesize these novel surgical adhesives,
with properties that no biocompatible material currently has. Beyond broad
dissemination through traditional avenues and training and education of graduate
and undergraduate researchers, this work will partner with Washington
University's Institute for School Partnership to translate knowledge and the
excitement of discovery in this emerging area through outreach via STEM
experiences and education for local K-12 teachers, students, and
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will demonstrate the transformative potential of a new class of
recombinant protein-based biomaterials for applications requiring a complex
combination of properties. The outcome of this will be sequence-structure
property relationships that determine the performance of protein-based block
copolymers (PBCPs) and their cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) nanocomposites. This
project will advance the science of designing nanocomposite hydrogels and more
generally the field of biomaterials by creating a generalizable platform
technology for harnessing DNA templates and bacteria to produce well-defined
block copolymers with desired properties from bioinspired protein motifs. In
addition, this work will advance the field of nanocomposite materials design by
developing (1) moieties capable of tunable interactions between nanofillers and
polymer matrix chains and (2) homogenization tools that account for nanofiller
surface energy and possible interactions and recrystallization of the polymer
matrix in the prediction of nanocomposite mechanical properties. Project aims
include the synthesis of PBCPs where each block has a well-defined monomer
sequence and structure to form (1) crystalline domains that are rigid and
provide enhanced strength, (2) amorphous domains that are flexible and provide
enhanced toughness, and (3) adhesive domains that allow for tunable
intermolecular interactions and adhesion to surfaces. Synthetic biology allows
for control of the length and sequence of each block in the copolymer. By
simultaneously tuning the chemistry of CNC surfaces and PBCP sequence, PBCP
properties and interactions between CNCs and PBCPs can be controlled, thus
transforming the synthesis of adhesives through the development of fully tunable
nanocomposite material properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.