* 2105654
* Collaborative Research:  Dynamics of Seasonal Forecast Uncertainty: Cross-Basin Ocean-Atmosphere Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Shang-Ping Xie, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 482,252.00

Every few years the Pacific ocean warms dramatically in a narrow strip along the
equator extending roughly from the South American coast to the dateline. This
warming is called an El Nino event, and El Ninos and their cold La Nina
opposites are referred to collectively as El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
events. While ENSO events are broadly similar there are important differences,
in particular they differ in whether the sea surface temperature (SST) change is
greatest in the eastern or central Pacific. They also differ in their magnitude,
and El Nino events are often stronger than La Nina events. The consequences of
ENSO are felt worldwide, from changes in the Indian monsoon to the severity of
winters in Canada, and these impacts vary according to the pattern and magnitude
of the event. The dynamical mechanisms that cause diversity in behavior among
ENSO events and their global impacts are thus an important practical problem as
well as a topic of scientific interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines the idea that much of the diversity of ENSO events occurs because of
interactions between the developing ENSO event and a variety of less prominent
climate variability modes occurring over the global oceans. For example the
Pacific meridional mode (PMM) is a variability pattern in which fluctuations of
the Aleutian Low over the North Pacific generate warm SSTs (or cold, in the
opposite phase) which propagate slowly toward the equatorial Pacific through
air-sea interactions. The overlap between the domains of the PMM and ENSO makes
the PMM a likely suspect in diversifying ENSO events. Likewise, the episodic
warming of the Indian Ocean in the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) mode affects the
trade winds in the western Pacific, with potential consequences for ENSO given
the central role of trade wind fluctuations in ENSO
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine the effect of secondary modes on ENSO
diversity the Principal Investigators (PIs) of this award take advantage of the
ensemble method used to predict ENSO events. Ensemble prediction means using a
climate model to predict ENSO based on observed initial conditions (the state of
the atmosphere and ocean at a given time) but performing several forecast
simulations instead of one, and starting each forecast simulation with slightly
different initial conditions. The resulting Perturbed Initial Condition Ensemble
(PICE) gives a best estimate of the evolution of ENSO and also estimates the
uncertainty in the prediction. The idea of this project is that the individual
forecast simulations in a PICE contain different secondary modes, and the
interactions between secondary modes and ENSO can be assessed by examining
differences in ENSO evolution among the simulations. An advantage of this method
is that a large database of PICE simulations has been created by the Earth
System Prediction (ESP) Working Group of the Communtiy Earth System Model
(CESM). The PICE dataset provides a much larger sample size than the
observational record, thus statistically robust results can be
obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal importance given its
direct connection to ENSO prediction. In addition to its examination of ENSO
evolution in prediction simulations the research uses the PICE simulations to
understand how differences among ENSO events lead to differences in the impacts
of ENSO in populous parts of the world. The project also supports two graduate
students and provides internship opportunities for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.