* 2105460
* Geometric Variational Problems and Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Matthew Gursky, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 284,276.00

The interaction of geometry and analysis continues to be an important and active
field of mathematical research. The classical subject of geometry grew out of
our desire to understand properties of the physical world such as angles and
distances. Differential geometry in turn was developed to use the tools of
calculus to understand curved spaces. For example, differential geometry can be
used to understand the curvature of space by matter as predicted by general
relativity. In the same way that plane geometry can be studied using algebra, so
differential geometry can be studied using techniques from analysis. The project
will investigate problems from geometry and mathematical physics that are united
by the role played by mathematical analysis. In addition to mathematical
investigations, the PI will continue to organize a summer residential STEM
program in cooperation with the Chicago Pre-College Science and Engineering
Program. This is a program for high school students from the Chicago Public
Schools, many of whom will be first-generation college students. The program
will run for two weeks, and will include mathematics instruction and project-
based learning &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main mathematical themes in
this project. Poincaré-Einstein manifolds are generalizations of the Poincaré
ball model of hyperbolic space. They are complete manifolds satisfying the
Einstein condition (with negative Einstein constant) which can be compactified
by conformally changing the metric that vanishes at an appropriate rate at
infinity. They arise in several areas of mathematics and theoretical physics;
for example, in in the Fefferman-Graham theory of conformal invariants and in
the AdS/CFT correspondence in quantum field theory. One area of investigation in
this project is the fundamental question of existence: given a manifold with
boundary and a conformal class of metrics on the boundary, can one construct a
Poincaré-Einstein metric whose compactification induces the given conformal
class on the boundary? In joint work with S.Y.A Chang, PI will be studying the
problem of using the geometry of the conformal boundary to solve a nonlinear PDE
in the interior, and showing how the existence of solutions allows us to use
Morse Theory to identify topological obstructions to existence. Another area of
research with connections to physics is the PI’s ongoing work with S. Perez-
Ayala on extremizing eigenvalues of conformally covariant operators. In the case
of surfaces, extremal eigenvalues of the Laplace-Beltrami operator have
connections to minimal surfaces and harmonic maps. In recent work with Perez-
Ayala PI showed that under certain natural conditions, one can extremize the low
eigenvalues of the conformal Laplacian in higher dimensions, and there are
examples of extremals that give rise to harmonic maps. In ongoing work PI will
study other operators and try to understand a kind of reverse construction;
i.e., when a harmonic map gives rise to a maximal
metric.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.