* 2105417
* Adiabatic Limits of Quantum Symplectic Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Christopher Woodward, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 484,158.00

Symplectic geometry is the mathematical foundation for particle motion in
classical physics. Recently, research in this area has centered on the study of
quantum invariants defined using geometric objects known as holomorphic curves.
These quantum invariants have appeared not only in fields of mathematics known
as geometric analysis and low-dimensional topology but also in certain models in
high-energy physics. The investigator will study the behavior of these quantum
invariants under adiabatic limits in which directions in space or time are re-
scaled. Applications will be of interest in topology and physics. The
investigator will also continue his mentoring and outreach activities in
mathematics education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will study three
types of adiabatic limits of quantum invariants in symplectic geometry. First,
he will study the limit of the Fukaya category of a symplectic manifold under
the multi-directional symplectic field theory limit, which is equivalent in many
cases to shrinking the fibers of a Lagrangian torus fibration. The investigator
will extend previous results to Lagrangians compatible with this tropical limit
and apply the results to examples arising in mirror symmetry, such as the
computation of disk potentials. Secondly, the investigator will study the
behavior of the Fukaya category and quantum cohomology under flips with non-
trivial centers, or equivalently, mean curvature flow in which a subset of the
symplectic manifold collapses over some non-trivial base, with the aim of
constructing generators for the Fukaya category. A related project in gauge
theory will study the behavior of higher rank monopole Floer homology under
variation of monopole parameter, and relate these invariants with instanton
homology and abelian monopole Floer homology. In a third project, the
investigator will study the limits of flow spaces arising from Fukaya-isomorphic
Lagrangians in cotangent bundles as the Lagrangians approach the zero section
via rescaling, and in particular higher-dimensional moduli spaces of Morse flow
trees that appear in the limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.