* 2105899
* I-Corps:  Lignin-derived antimicrobials to control bacterial contamination in fuel ethanol fermentation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Jian Shi, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a sustainable antibiotic replacement, produced from a known waste
stream (lignin), for use during fuel ethanol fermentation. In the fuel ethanol
industry, traditional antibiotics, such as virginiamycin or penicillin, are
introduced prophylactically into the fermentation process to reduce occurrences
of bacterial contamination. However, widespread use of such antibiotics has
increased the emergence of antibiotic-resistant microorganisms that pose an
ever-growing risk to human health and the environment. Additionally, these
antibiotics have been shown to persist in downstream coproducts such as
distillers’ grains, which is becoming a major concern for consumers of livestock
that are fed the byproduct. Therefore, the production of novel antimicrobial
agents with similar selective toxicity, better biodegradability, and
effectiveness against antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains would be highly
marketable and useful in industrial yeast fermentation environments. If
commercialized successfully, the proposed innovation may offer industrial
consumers a sustainably derived antibiotic product to combat contamination
during fermentation without the pitfalls of traditional antibiotics. In
addition, valorization of lignin waste streams for value-added products may
allow future lignocellulosic-based biorefineries to be more cost-
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an antibiotic replacement produced from lignin waste streams. Lignin is one
of the most abundant natural phenolic polymers on earth, plays an important role
in plants’ natural defense mechanisms, and is currently considered a major waste
product in the paper and pulp industries and lignocellulosic biorefineries.
Despite the widely reported antioxidant and antimicrobial properties, lignin-
derived antimicrobials have poor selectivity thus limiting their real-world
applications. The proposed technology offers a potential solution by converting
lignin into a cost-effective and biodegradable antimicrobial product that may
selectively inhibit bacterial contaminates and increase ethanol yields during
fuel ethanol fermentation. By oxidatively depolymerizing lignin into a liquid
product under mild reaction conditions, the resulting product has shown
selective antimicrobial properties against lactic acid bacteria, including
antibiotic resistant strains, without affecting yeast growth and hydrolase
activity. Proof of concept has been demonstrated at the lab scale, but further
development of the technology demands a better understanding of the potential
customer needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.