* 2105931
* STTR Phase I:  Printable electron transport layers (PrETLs) for organic electronics
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Thomas Schmedake, LIGHT AND CHARGE SOLUTIONS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the development of printable electron
transport layer (PrETL) materials to greatly simplify the production of organic
light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and significantly lower their manufacturing cost.
OLEDs are found in an increasingly broad range of commercial products, such as
televisions, portable devices, automotive lighting, flexible luminaries, and
displays. Current commercial OLED manufacturing technologies typically require
methods that are expensive, energy intensive, and slow. The biggest barrier
preventing the transition from thermal evaporation to printable technologies has
been a lack of commercially available printable electron transport layers. The
adoption of PrETL technology will allow manufacturers to eliminate the thermal
evaporation steps and enable fully-printed OLEDs at a fraction of the cost of
current devices. This development will spur further penetration of OLEDs
throughout the lighting and display market, providing the benefits of improved
energy-efficiency, reduced eye-strain, flexible forms, minimal heat production,
and lower cost device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the lack of efficient, long-lifetime,
printable electron transport layers (PrETLs) for organic light emitting diodes
(OLEDs). The objectives of this project are to demonstrate the feasibility of
PrETLs and PrETL-enabled, fully printed OLEDs. The innovative PrETLs developed
here rely on a solution processable hexacoordinate silicon-based scaffold, that
can be synthetically tuned to the electronic and material needs of the
manufacturer. The Phase I project will develop PrETL thin films for material and
electronic testing and for building prototype OLEDs enabled by PrETLs. The
ultimate anticipated outcome of the proposed Phase I research will be a fully
printed PrETL-enabled OLED with an external quantum efficiency greater than 10%
and a lifetime of 10,000 hours at 1,000 nit
brightness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.