* 2105837
* Spatial-temporal control over tipping-point operation defines fidelity of genome partition
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Jian Liu, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2025
* USD 541,387.00

Cells (especially bacteria) exist and thrive under a range of environmental
conditions and they must alter various functions to adapt to changing
conditions. This is challenging because many processes operate in a semi-stable
state. This means that many processes can go one way or another, depending upon
a tipping point (or operating point) which upon activation leads the cell down
the proper path. Thus, cellular processes must establish the right operating
point to robustly execute function and at the same time,¬ sensitively adapt this
point to changing environmental cues. The overarching goal of this project is to
elucidate how cells control the near-tipping-point operation to ensure the
fidelity of cellular processes. This project will examine genetic partitioning
in bacteria using a combined computational modeling and experimental approach to
reveal how cells segregate DNA under changing conditions. The project will shed
important light on how evolution shapes the operating point of this important
cellular process to ensure genetic material is partitioned with high fidelity.
The project will include training of undergraduate and graduate student
researchers, community outreach efforts promoting the academic representation of
underrepresented minorities, and creating a new course, “Mechanistic modeling of
cell biology”, which emphasizes how to meaningfully integrate modeling with
experiments. An annual workshop on the emerging topics will also be developed
and will challenge participants to begin developing reasonable models of
essential processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-copy plasmid partitioning in
bacteria provides a well-suited paradigm to distill the fundamental principles
underlying the fidelity of genome partitioning. Most low-copy plasmids are
actively segregated along the nucleoid by the conserved tripartite ParABS
system. Upon replication, the sister plasmids always segregate by about half of
the nucleoid length, ensuring high fidelity partitioning into the two daughter
cells. As plasmid partitioning is not coupled to cell cycle and the nucleoid
keeps elongating before cell division, the sister plasmids can be anywhere along
the nucleoid when the parental cells starts to divide. This precipitates the key
unanswered question of how the ParABS-mediated partition faithfully adapts the
plasmid segregation distance to half of the nucleoid length to ensure plasmid
partition fidelity. The project team established: 1) bacterial low-copy plasmid
partitions via a Brownian ratchet mechanism where the plasmid “self-drives” by
creating and following the ParA concentration gradient on nucleoid, and; 2) this
ratcheting in vivo operates near a tipping point in the parameter space. The
project will have two specific aims: 1) determine how ParA-mediated partition
sensitively adapts to the length of the elongating nucleoid, and 2) establish
how ParA-mediated partition ensures robustness of plasmid segregations. The
project will elucidate how the ParA spatial-temporal regulation controls this
near-tipping-point operation and ensures the fidelity of genome partition
against stochastic fluctuations (e.g., the variations in ParA level). The basic
principles distilled from this project would help address one fundamental
question in cell biology: How do cells faithfully measure cellular-scale
distance by using only molecular-scale interactions? This project is partially
supported by the Genetic Mechanisms cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.