* 2105548
* Subgroups in Artin Groups and Lattices in Products of Trees
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Katarzyna Jankiewicz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 12/31/2021
* USD 163,208.00

A group is an algebraic structure encoding symmetries of an object. It can be
defined abstractly, as a collection of strings of letters, where certain
equations describe which two strings correspond to the same symmetry. Such
letters are called generators, and the equations are called relations, and
together they form what is called a group presentation. Geometric group theory
studies the connection between the geometry of the object, and the properties of
the group of its symmetries. An example of a group is the set of integers, which
can be viewed as symmetries of a line, where a positive number moves points on
the line to the right, and a negative number to the left. A subgroup of a group
is a smaller collection of symmetries, closed under composition. In the group of
integers, an example of a subgroup is the collection of the symmetries moving by
an even distance. Understanding the subgroup structure is essential in studying
the whole group. This project will address questions about subgroups with
prescribed properties in two families of groups: Artin groups and lattices in
products of trees. Groups in both of those families can be described by simple
looking presentations, but many questions about them remain unanswered. The
project will also promote the participation of women in mathematics via
mentoring and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of this project is
to examine the actions of Artin groups on CAT(0) cube complexes. This project
will investigate for which Artin groups is every group element is separated by
some codimension-1 subgroup, and for which of them this leads to proper actions
on CAT(0) cube complexes. The theory of CAT(0) cube complexes, and special cube
complexes in particular, has been a fruitful tool in understanding groups.
Proving that Artin groups act properly on CAT(0) cube complexes would answer
many outstanding questions about Artin groups; for example, it could provide a
solution to the word problem. The PI will also continue her work on the residual
finiteness of Artin groups in this project. In the second project, the PI will
study cocompact lattices in products of trees and their subgroup structures. In
particular, the PI will determine if all such groups are incoherent. Showing
that all lattices in a product of trees are incoherent would be an indication
that coherence is a quasi-isometry invariant. The project will also determine if
any two infinite order elements in a lattice in a product of trees either
commute or generate a free subgroup, when raised to high powers. The project
also includes training and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students with
an emphasis on broadening participation of women in mathematics. The PI is also
planning a collaborative educational project with Jankiewicz Studio, a design
firm specializing in educational and cultural projects at the intersection of
design, art, science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.