* 2105126
* Investigation and control of 2D-3D interfacial states
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sidong Lei, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 304,864.00

Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to experimentally
investigate newly observed interfacial quantum states on heterojunctions of
layered materials (e.g., graphene) and bulk semiconductors (e.g., silicone).
These emerging states are independent of the intrinsic electronic structures of
either the layered or bulk materials, but a novel interfacial effect, which
enriches our current understanding of low-dimensional solid-state systems. This
study opens alternative pathways towards artificial quantum structures for novel
electronic, optoelectronic, and quantum technologies that are in line with the
National Quantum Initiative Act. The scientific outcomes are disseminated via
journals, conferences, and invited talks. More importantly, the research
institute of this project, Georgia State University, is a historically minority-
serving institution and top-ranked innovative teaching university. Many
undergraduate and graduate students, especially underrepresented minority groups
will be included in this cutting-edge research and prepare them for careers in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Undergraduate students
typically continue their study in STEM graduate programs. Graduate students
usually pursue their academic careers in universities, national laboratories,
and federal research institutions or become leaders in the industries of
semiconductors, information technology, etc. Furthermore, the project exposes
the Greater Atlanta Area to the frontier of modern quantum science and
technology via open houses, talks, summer internships so that the public and
K-12 students get access to the state-of-the-art technology and latest
scientific progress along with this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;Fabrication of layered material heterostructures
facilitates the construction of artificial quantum interactions, otherwise
intangible in intrinsic materials. Currently, most of these emerging structures
are interpreted by the well-established framework of in-plane electronic
interactions, whereas a resonant tunneling behavior of graphene-silicon
junctions recently discovered by the PI suggests the existence of out-of-plane
quantum states, which is originated from an abrupt dimensional change on the
interfaces. This new observation refreshes the understanding of reduced-
dimensional materials and empowers new designs of artificial quantum structures,
as such, necessitates a thorough investigation on the formation mechanism and
control methods of these states without delay. For this purpose, this study
primarily employs tunneling spectroscopy as the first experimental attempt to
identify the determinative factors of these states, including transverse
momentum mismatch, lattice orientations, and dielectric properties of the
junctions. Following that, temperature-dependent measurements and in-situ
atomic/molecular adsorption experiments also unveil the phonon-/defect-induced
scattering and inelastic tunneling processes to explore the relaxation of these
out-of-plane states. The investigation on these topics enables the construction
of novel quantum devices, including layered multiple-well resonant tunneling
transistors and resonant molecular detectors, to showcase the transformational
potentials of this project. These efforts enrich our comprehension of the
interfacial quantum interactions on reduced-dimensional heterostructures,
meanwhile envision a breadth of new strategies for the design of terahertz light
sources and detectors, cascade optoelectronics, and many other electronic,
optoelectronic, and quantum architectures. Furthermore, the project is
accompanied by extensive training and education for participating graduate,
undergraduate students, and interns to accelerate their career trajectories in
condensed matter physics and quantum science. It also promotes the public
education of modern quantum science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.