* 2105953
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Social Engagement &amp; Belonging in Academic Makerspaces
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Audrey Boklage, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2024
* USD 68,205.00

Academic makerspaces provide students with open access to resources that help
them develop their problem solving skills, provide opportunities for
collaboration, and encourage experimentation and discovery. However, recent
research has shown that many makerspace environments do not readily support
diverse populations, create tensions between different student groups, and can
sometimes lead to a work environment that feels exclusive and unwelcoming. It is
essential that our academic makerspaces are welcoming and that all students feel
a sense of belonging and acceptance in these spaces. This project will use the
flexible nature of an academic makerspace as the framework to provide students
with the opportunity to connect socially in ways that have been shown to
increase sense of belonging. This will be accomplished by integrating social
engagement activities into a university affiliated makerspace. The engagement
activities will be designed to support studentsâ€™ social and emotional
development, which is an essential component to creating culturally competent,
well-rounded engineers. Due to the flexible and informal nature of the
makerspace environment, it is an ideal place to build and create social
connections between students. Makerspaces provide a venue for informal learning
and student connection that inspires attributes associated with the professional
formation of engineers: creativity, discovery, lifelong learning, teamwork, and
critical thinking. This study will lay the foundation for future research that
will inform strategies to create an equitable and inclusive makerspace culture
with a focus on better supporting non-dominate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to increase student sense of
belonging in undergraduate engineering students through the integration of
social engagement activities into an academic makerspace. The objectives of this
project are to (1) strategically integrate social engagement activities that
have been shown to contribute to increased sense of belonging and student
persistence into an academic makerspace; (2) research the effects of the social
engagement activities on student sense of belonging; and (3) increase
engineering education research capacity at Western Washington University. The
outcomes of this work will lead to identification of best practices for
improving student sense of belonging in a makerspace environment. This research
will investigate the impact of carefully designed social engagement activities
on development of student sense of belonging. Within the recent context of the
COVID-19 pandemic, social support and positive sense of belonging have been
shown to counter the adverse social emotional effects of the experience.
Engagement activities will focus on supporting student social and emotional
development, providing peer support, and building awareness of the importance of
equity, inclusion, and diversity in engineering. The activities will be designed
so that any student can participate regardless of ability level, time
availability, or physical location. The research questions that will guide this
work are (1) To what extent do students participate in the engagement activities
within the makerspace and in which formats, and does this level of engagement
vary based on student demographics? and (2) To what extent does participation in
the engagement activities lead to an increased sense of belonging? These
research questions will be investigated through a communities of practice
theoretical framework using a two-year mixed methods research that includes
survey development, analysis, student reflections, and focus
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.