* 2105682
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: The Integrity of Mail Voting
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2022
* M Hood, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 11/30/2022
* USD 5,000.00

Given the increase use of vote by mail (VBM) due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
investigators focus on mail-in voters' experience with how they seek, obtain,
complete, return and have their mail ballots counted. They examine citizens'
perceptions about the integrity of elections using VBM by assessing concerns
about variation in the institutional structures of VBM, the secrecy of VBM the
process, and the coercion that VBM voters may face from their peer group. The
investigators use a state-centric survey design that includes an oversample in
10 states that have a mixture of VBM systems. The oversample is important and
gives additional statistical power and leverage about state election
administration and laws. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sample consist of only
registered voters who report voting by mail in the 2020 election. Surveys are
solicited online using Qualtrics software. E-mail addresses for registered
voters by state will be purchased from L2. The investigators completed 200
online surveys with mail voters in 40 states, and 1,000 with mail voters in 10
states, along with 100 in-person voters in each these states, for a total sample
of 23,000. This research provides a baseline for concerns about voter integrity
related to mail balloting. Furthermore, it establishes whether alternative mail
voting systems differ in terms of when, where, and with whom mail ballots are
completed and returned. This project should inform scholars and policy makers in
several areas of VBM policy administration. Findings from the study are also
valuable in increasing public confidence in VBM election procedures. The
research involves undergraduate researchers at all three campuses of the
collaborative study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.