* 2105488
* Conference: Plant Biology 2021 PUI Faculty Development Workshop and Conference Participation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Crispin Taylor, American Society of Plant Biologists
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/29/2024
* USD 39,704.00

Researchers at primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) play an important
role in educating undergraduates in the sciences. Although PUIs generally lack
the luster of cutting-edge research universities, they often make up for that
with their faculty’s dedication to pedagogy. Smaller class sizes, lab courses
taught by faculty, and course-based undergraduate research experiences are often
reasons why students choose to attend a PUI. Research at PUIs, while necessarily
proceeding at a slower pace than in research-intensive institutions, nonetheless
contributes to the overall research output of the United States and, maybe most
importantly, provides access to authentic research experiences for
undergraduates in their preparation for graduate school or a STEM career. Due to
the smaller department size, faculty at PUIs often lack access to colleagues
studying similar questions to their own. For these professors participating in
conferences is often the only way to network, exchange ideas, and stay current
in their fields. This grant provides awards to defray the cost of registration
and travel specifically to PUI faculty to participate in the Plant Biology 2021
conference. Aside from networking and conversing about their own and their
colleagues’ research, PUI faculty attending this meeting will also be able to
participate in a faculty development workshop on the topic of inclusivity in
undergraduate research. Conference participation is expected to have a direct
and lasting effect on the ability of attendees to provide rich research
experiences to a diverse group of students, including those historically
underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing and
maintaining a vigorous research program that includes opportunities for
undergraduate involvement is a rewarding but difficult task. Working actively to
increase diversity in undergraduate research is also a rewarding and important
task, but adds an additional layer of potentially time-consuming activities.
Although research program development and active work to broaden participation
in the sciences are challenges for faculty at any institution, several aspects
make this work particularly difficult for scientists at PUIs. Compared to
research-intensive institutions, a lower level of research infrastructure,
funding, and in most cases the absence of support from graduate students and
postdocs at PUIs pose challenges. Time constraints due to heavier teaching loads
are likely the most difficult aspect that PUI faculty members have to overcome
towards developing an inclusive and productive research program. Intentional
approaches to add diversity in scientific research at the PUI level require
time, ideas, money, and specific skills. Having a network of colleagues who are
working towards the same goals is important to increase productivity and
synergism. This project proposes to organize and offer a workshop for PUI
scientists and to provide travel/registration grants for Plant Biology 2021 for
PUI scientists. A 3.5-hour workshop is planned for the first morning of the
meeting with the goal of helping PUI faculty develop and maintain productive and
more diverse research labs. Additionally, a panel on obtaining a job at a PUI,
the PUI business meeting, and informal meet ups will foster networking and
opportunities to collaborate among colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
was co-funded by the Plant Genome Research Program and the Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.