* 2105492
* Determining How Plasma Spontaneously Develops a Localized Hot Spot That Radiates X-rays and Produces Related Dramatic Phenomena
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Paul Bellan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

This project will experimentally explore the eruptive behavior of a plasma, a
gas of electrically charged ions and electrons, under conditions similar to
those on the sun and in other astrophysical objects. This will be done by
creating plasma jets in a vacuum chamber and observing how they can erupt by
exhibiting sudden and dramatic dynamic behaviors mimicking the eruptive
behaviors associated with solar flares, astrophysical gamma ray bursts, and
X-rays from lightening. The research program will build and use new diagnostic
instruments that will measure the eruptive behavior and test the hypothesis that
eruption results when an instability tries to interrupt the electric current in
a plasma jet. The project will engage a local high school with a vast majority
of students from under-represented minority groups to have students build a
device that measures the concentration of atmospheric charged particles, thereby
motivating interest in science and encouraging them to pursue careers in plasma
physics or other science and engineering fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program will determine how a seemingly benign, cold, collisional plasma
can suddenly erupt and generate a burst of energetic particles, extreme ultra-
violet radiation, hard X-rays, and high-frequency waves. In doing so, it will
contribute to the goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-
Messenger Astrophysics" Big Idea. The knowledge and understanding to be gained
will apply to many astrophysical and laboratory plasmas, such as solar flares,
astrophysical gamma ray bursts, X-ray bursts from terrestrial lightning, and
dense plasma foci devices. The program will employ a well-diagnosed,
reproducible laboratory device in which an initially cold plasma spontaneously
erupts and generates these bursts. The details of the eruptive process have been
partly established via high-speed imaging of visible light and extreme
ultraviolet radiation, via X-ray measurements, and via whistler wave
measurements. New diagnostics will be constructed to measure previously
unquantified aspects of the eruptive process such as rapid density depletion,
rapid particle heating, and rapid development of strong localized electric and
magnetic fields. These diagnostics will image highly localized reductions of
density and increases of temperature associated with the eruption. These new
measurements will be modeled using advanced analytic and numerical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.