* 2105776
* Collaborative research: A better understanding of seismic hazard in Tehuantepec, Mexico, using amphibious MT studies
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Steven Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 453,000.00

The subduction zone offshore southwest Mexico is divided into two very different
geological regions by the Gulf of Tehuantepec. North of the gulf, the Cocos
tectonic plate is shallow as it subducts beneath the North American plate,
earthquakes are less frequent, and the ocean trench is close to shore. At
Tehuantepec the coastline bends to form the gulf, and south of the gulf the
plate is steeper, earthquakes are more frequent, and the trench is far offshore.
Located in between, the Gulf of Tehuantepec is considered a seismic gap, in that
there have been no recorded large earthquakes associated with the tectonic
plates slipping past each other. There are two possible reasons for this. The
first is that the rocks of the Tehuantepec Ridge, which is being subducted with
the Cocos plate, may be releasing water that lubricates the fault zone, allowing
the plates to slowly slide past each other without producing large earthquakes.
The second is that the topography of the ridge is mechanically locking the two
plates together, in which case a very large earthquake is inevitable when the
stress finally builds up to breaking point. In 2017 a large normal earthquake
broke across the down-going Cocos plate, a type of earthquake not normally seen
in subduction zones, and which could increase the stress and the chances of
another large earthquake. This study will make geophysical measurements both
onshore and offshore that are sensitive to the presence of water deep in the
subduction zone to understand why this earthquake occurred. This work will
advance the career of a postdoctoral investigator and strengthen ties between
the US and Mexican geophysical communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
an amphibious magnetotelluric (MT) sounding survey coupled with seismotectonic
analysis will: (1) Determine differences in coupling/slip regimes in and around
the Mexican Tehuantepec seismic gap; (2) Image the Tehuantepec Ridge within the
subducted plate to determine its role in the coupling and if it contributes to
the break between the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt arc system and the Chiapas
arc; (3) Image any evidence of fluid infiltration in the Tehuantepec fault. MT
soundings have already been successfully used in Mexico to identify changes
between stick slip and transient slip within the subduction zone and the
geometry of the lower plate. This new study will analyze the unusually large
Mw8.2 normal fault Tehuantepec earthquake which is downdip of a slab interface
that has no recorded earthquakes. The proposed reasons for why this earthquake
occurred are that it was due to slab pull below a strongly coupled interface or
that it was due to slab bending along a reactivated, possibly fluid-filled, and
poorly coupled, subducted outer rise fault. This work would represent the only
physical measurement to directly determine which is correct and determine the
link to possible future earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.