* 2105156
* Research: Evidencing Epidemic Change in Engineering Education: Shedding Light on Instructor Adaptability and Course Complexity for Sustained Change
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Heidi Diefes-Dux, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 419,039.00

Engineering education lags behind some other science, technology, and math
disciplines in the use of best teaching practices. University engineering
faculty's adoption of such practices is a national priority because the
expectation is that the use of best practices will result in more innovative and
creative designs, a more diverse workforce, and students that are better
prepared for their career. Use of a wide array of teaching practices and
strategies (WATPS) have been shown to improve student outcomes and increase
persistence in engineering, especially among underrepresented groups. Yet, many
university engineering faculty continue to use traditional teaching methods,
hindering the success of engineering students. This project is significant as
COVID-19 spurred an unprecedented change to the way university faculty deliver
their courses. Studying how faculty adapted their teaching practices under
unprecedented conditions that forced them to change and whether they retain
these changes and continue to grow as instructors is important for guiding the
design of resources to help faculty adopt a WATPS. This project will contribute
to the Research in the Formation of Engineers program by identifying the
supports that a range of faculty need to promote the development of a capable
and diverse engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project will be to investigate and document the effects of COVID-19 on
engineering faculty’s teaching practices and sustained use of a WATPS relative
to their adaptability and course complexity. This project is significant because
it is the first comprehensive study exploring the impacts of a crisis-induced
change and persistence of change to teaching practices through an adaptability
framework. The overarching research questions are: How does course complexity,
as indicated by the array of teaching practices and strategies and their
associated challenge to implement, change during migration to a new normal
following a forced change? What supports and barriers exist for instructors of
differing adaptability given the courses that they teach? These research
questions will be answered using a sequential mixed-methods approach that
includes a combination of surveys, interviews, and teaching artifacts. This
study will contribute fundamental knowledge on instructors’ adaptability and the
changing complexity of instructors’ teaching practices and strategies when faced
with the need to deliver courses differently. The proposed research will be
novel and original in its use of adaptability theory to understand how an
external motivator impacts faculty teaching at an R1 university. Outcomes from
this work include a typology of teaching complexity, knowledge of instructor
adaptability, and rich descriptions of course complexity trends. These outcomes
will help inform a Program of Tiered Commitments that engineering colleges,
departments, and faculty developers can use to support instructors’ adoption of
best teaching practices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.