* 2105798
* I-Corps:  Improving pedestrian visibility and safety through passive detection and direct illumination at crossings
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Kenneth Yocom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a more effective and less expensive pedestrian safety device that
will help reduce the thousands of pedestrian deaths and hundreds of thousands of
pedestrian collisions that occur in crosswalks each year. Previous research has
demonstrated that the underlying shortcomings of existing traffic measures in
ensuring pedestrian safety are geographically and culturally unique. An
understanding of the issues and constraints experienced by communities across a
wide variety of ecological and cultural climates is necessary in order to
develop and deploy traffic measures. Specifically the proposed crosswalk
innovation, that effectively works to reduce and eliminate pedestrian deaths.
The quality of city life depends under consideration is walkability, which in
turn relies on pedestrian safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a technology that improves pedestrian visibility and
safety through passive detection and direct illumination of pedestrians at
crossings. The passive pedestrian detection system will provide real-time
deterministic pedestrian traffic and pattern data. Such data will enhance urban
planners’ scientific understanding of the transportation environment. Crosswalk
networks interfaced with autonomous vehicles will enhance planners’
technological understanding of the scaffolding needed for smart city
infrastructure. As cities become more hectic and congested, the freedom,
adequacy, and accessibility of walkability becomes an important issue. Feeling
safe and being safe on a crosswalk is vital for the future transportation
health. Encouraging technology that makes pedestrians visible to the traffic
system may ultimately lead to viable, walkable
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.