* 2105092
* CRII: CIF: Machine Learning Based Equalization Towards Multitrack Synchronization and Detection in Two-Dimensional Magnetic Recording
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Elnaz Banan Sadeghian, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 175,000.00

This project concerns two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR), a novel
recording technology for hard disk drives that allows for a drastic increase in
data density, up to 10 terabits per square inch. Gains from TDMR come from two
directions, namely (i) the shingled writing mechanism whereby adjacent data
tracks are written with partial overlap, like roof shingles, in order to squeeze
many more tracks on the disk and increase data density, and (ii) powerful signal
processing algorithms that enable efficient data recovery from noisy readback
signals in the presence of high levels of interference both within and across
data tracks. Techniques from machine learning (ML) will be used in developing
such data recovery algorithms in the presence of two-dimensional interference,
and data-dependent and colored media noise. The proposed work aims to achieve
significant improvements in TDMR, eventually allowing exponentially increasing
volumes of data to be stored on fewer disk drives with higher capacities. This
award partially supports a PhD student to be trained in TDMR read channel
design, ultimately creating career opportunities for the student in the data
storage industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research objective is the
development of efficient ML based equalization algorithms that outperform
conventional communication-theoretic equalization for high density TDMR. The
TDMR channel being highly nonlinear, ML approaches are expected to better learn
its characteristics, potentially leading to higher bit-error rates when compared
to conventional linear communication-theoretic schemes. The desired neural
network equalization schemes seek to (i) incorporate the prediction and
cancellation of the media noise, and (ii) be compatible with a novel read
channel architecture, developed by the investigator, that extends the partial-
response paradigm to the case of multitrack detection of asynchronous tracks. To
realize this read channel, the developed equalizers will be followed by the
rotating-target (ROTAR) algorithm, a multitrack detector of asynchronous tracks,
also developed by the investigator. The resulting read channel is expected to
yield gains in areal density and throughput over the communication-theoretic and
single-track detection schemes currently used in the industry. The performance
of the developed algorithms will be compared against that of conventional
algorithms using realistic waveforms provided by international
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.