* 2105011
* CRII: RI: Robotic cable-based de-tumbling of demised spacecraft
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eleonora Botta, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

Technologies based on satellites are nowadays ubiquitous and essential to our
everyday life. However, they are continuously threatened by the possibility of
collisions between operational satellites and space debris, formed of all non-
functional objects in orbit around the Earth. Robotic missions to dispose of
large debris are currently being proposed to reduce the risk of such collisions.
The objective of this research is to develop knowledge to put in practice
autonomous cable-based de-tumbling of uncooperative space objects. Tether-net
systems will be considered, which are thrown toward debris, entangle it or close
around it, and provide a link to tug it to a disposal orbit. Focus of this
research will be the modeling, analysis, and control of the chaser-net-target
spacecraft system after capture, when the relative motion of the two satellites
is particularly dangerous. Cable-based robots provide innovative solutions not
only to applications such as debris capture and on-orbit servicing, but also
asteroid deflection and drone interception. The advancements brought about by
this research have the potential to positively impact national defense, increase
the economic competitiveness of spacecraft solutions, and advance national
prosperity. Activities to broaden participation in STEM will include research
experiences for undergraduates, integration of research results in the
curriculum, and outreach in underprivileged elementary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research will be attained by
(1) high-fidelity modeling and analysis of the interactions between the cable-
based robot and the target, and (2) control of the cable-based robot. In one
thrust of the proposed work, high fidelity models will be developed to represent
the dynamics of the cable-based robot as well as frictional interactions with
the target. Reduced order but dynamically equivalent models will be created to
provide an efficient but accurate alternative. A methodology to estimate the
inertial parameters of the unknown, uncooperative target will also be proposed.
The other research component aims to leverage the limited control authority of
the cable-based robot to synthesize reliable and robust control methods. Options
related to the winching of the main tether as well as to the thrusters of the
chaser will be considered. Feedback control will be employed to stabilize at the
same time the relative translational and attitude dynamics of the chaser and the
target spacecraft. The robustness of the control to uncertainties will also be
verified. These contributions are expected to enable important technological
advancements of autonomous cable-based systems for space applications, while
advancing the knowledge of nonlinear systems dynamics, model-based estimation,
and control of complex nonlinear systems with limited
authority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.