* 2105149
* RUI: Dynamic Guanidine-based Polymer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Michael Larsen, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 330,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric materials can
generally be divided into two categories: (a) thermoplastics, materials such as
plastic bottles, grocery bags, and nylon, that soften with heat and can be
remolded and recycled; and (b) thermosets, those such as tires, epoxy adhesives,
and resins, that have a permanent shape and are very difficult to reprocess.
Thermosets thus have limited potential for reuse, ultimately having a negative
impact on the environment through resource consumption and accumulation of large
amounts of waste material. At the molecular level, the difference between these
two classes of materials arises from the fact that thermoplastics consist of
discrete polymer chains that can move and flow when heated, whereas thermosets
are built from a crosslinked molecular network that is permanently bonded
together. To bridge the gap between these materials, recent efforts have focused
on making their fixed networks reversible -- that is, enabling them to de-
crosslink under certain conditions followed by reformation of the network,
allowing thermosets to be remolded and reprocessed. These systems represent a
new class of materials known as dynamic polymer networks. While dynamic polymer
networks have been the focus of considerable research during the last two
decades, many fundamental questions about them remain, detracting from their
practical utility and restricting their applications beyond the research lab.
This research will leverage the unique characteristics of a novel chemical
reaction aimed at de-crosslinking thermosets in order to gain generalized
insight into the fundamental principles of dynamic polymer networks. Successful
realization of the PI’s research goals will yield a wide variety of
reprocessable thermosets and link specific molecular-level characteristics with
macroscopic properties, helping to shape future designs and applications of
these advanced materials in areas as varied as sustainable manufacturing,
advanced medicine, and next-generation batteries. Students participating in this
research will be trained in an interdisciplinary manner involving synthetic
chemistry, polymer characterization, and a variety of techniques for property
determination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic polymer networks are covalently crosslinked
materials that combine the desirable properties of thermosets with the
reprocessability of thermoplastics. Their crosslinks undergo reversible exchange
reactions that are activated under specific conditions, continuously
reorganizing the network. Recently the PI demonstrated a new type of these
materials based on previously unknown exchange reactions of guanidines. This
proposal seeks to leverage the unique capabilities of dynamic guanidine-based
polymer networks to answer fundamental questions in the field of dynamic
materials and expand the window of achievable properties of these systems.
Specific objectives of this proposal are to: (1) use the versatility of the
guanidine functionality to both modify its reactivity and introduce noncovalent
bonding partners, establishing the link between fundamental molecular-scale
properties and macroscopic rheological behavior; and (2) incorporate guanidine
crosslinks into a variety of precisely altered polymer structures to elucidate
the role of specific characteristics of the “background” polymer in determining
the behavior of dynamic networks. These studies will be accomplished by student
researchers using a combination of synthetic techniques, polymer
characterization, rheological analysis, and dielectric
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.