* 2105321
* NSF-BSF: Designing semiconductor-based membranes for photoelectrochemical modulation of cardiac systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Bozhi Tian, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finding biomaterials to replace the
wires in heart pacemakers remains a challenge for society. Many biomaterial
approaches have been developed for pacing heart tissue without leads; the wires
that connect to the tissue. Existing alternative strategies have not been
successful in clinical settings. In this collaborative project between NSF and
the U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF), Drs. Tian and Dvir propose
to develop a new class of silicon (Si) and silicon carbide (SiC)-based
nanostructured membranes for optically controlled stimulation of cardiac
tissues. The semiconductor-based membranes are flexible and biocompatible, and
are capable of bypassing many of the current limitations faced by traditional
cardiac pacing tools. The team will use the pulsed light illumination of the Si
and SiC membranes to trigger the excitation of heart cells under physiological
conditions. This research will provide new data that are critical for
understanding and developing biomaterials-based tools to meet the needs of
future cardiac therapy. The educational goals include providing learning
opportunities for students in a highly interdisciplinary area. Dr. Tian will
build on existing model programs at the University of Chicago to increase
diversity in science and engineering by offering summer research opportunities
to high-school and undergraduate students. Other educational activities include
an international student exchange program to provide US students with
unforgettable awareness and lifelong appreciation of the science and engineering
research in Israel. The research and education results will be disseminated
broadly through peer-reviewed publications, seminars, conference presentations,
and websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
biomaterial approaches for leadless cardiac pacing capabilities, including those
based on infrared photothermal effect, electromagnetic induction, and
ultrasound-mediated energy transfer, have failed to translate clinically.
Therefore, new biomaterial tools and biointerfaces are still highly desired for
understanding the treatment of arrhythmias and conduction disorders. Drs. Tian
and Dvir propose to develop a new class of silicon (Si) and silicon carbide
(SiC)-based nanostructured membranes for optically controlled, non-genetic
modulation of cardiac tissues. The semiconductor-based membranes are flexible
and biocompatible, and are capable of bypassing many of the current limitations
faced by traditional modulatory devices. When activated by pulsed light
illumination, the Si and SiC nanostructures can trigger membrane depolarization
of cardiomyocytes under physiological conditions, causing the interfaced
cardiomyocytes to fire action potentials. This research will provide new data
that are critical for the fundamental understanding and development of
biomaterials-based tools to enable future leadless cardiac resynchronization
therapy. The research activities will provide learning opportunities for
students in a highly interdisciplinary area. The proposed study will also
provide a unique knowledge and skill set that can open new endeavors in the
semiconductor or detector industry. Dr. Tian will build on existing model
programs at the University of Chicago to increase diversity in science and
engineering by offering summer research opportunities to high-school and
undergraduate students. Through an international summer exchange program, the
team will provide the US students the experience to establish unforgettable
awareness and lifelong appreciation of the science and engineering research in
Israel. The research and education results will be disseminated broadly through
peer-reviewed publications, seminars, conference presentations, and
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.