* 2105016
* Poly-conjugated oligomers (p-COs) for noninvasive functional protein delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jin He, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 158,454.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein-based drugs have
shown great promise and high impact in managing and treating many diseases owing
to their higher safety profile than conventional small drugs. Unfortunately, the
current administration of those protein-based drugs is largely limited to
painful invasive injections to achieve therapeutic concentrations in the blood.
Such administration methods are painful to the patient and require specialized
personnel, which are an obvious burden for more widespread disease management
and treatments. This fundamental issue is due to the instability and large sizes
of proteins. This project will ultimately introduce novel protein delivery
materials that address the major biological hurdles that currently block more
patient-friendly uses of protein-based drugs. In this short project, the
feasibility of protein transporting efficiency of a biomaterial will be
established using a well-accepted cell model system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART
2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the high clinical success of
therapeutic biologics, the current administration of therapeutic proteins
heavily relies on invasive injections due to cell impermeability and instability
of biologics. Patient-friendly noninvasive oral, nasal, or inhalation routes are
largely limited by poor mucus diffusion and transepithelial transport. The
ultimate goal of this project is to develop a conceptually new conjugated
oligomer (CO)-based degradable polymer (p-CO) that can be used for the
noninvasive delivery of therapeutic proteins. The proposed biomaterials must
exhibit stable complexation with proteins, efficient mucus diffusion, and
efficient epithelium entry followed by transepithelial transport to the blood.
In this short project, the transepithelial transport efficiency of model
p-CO/fluorescent protein complexes will be assessed by monitoring the
fluorescent intensity of proteins in the basolateral compartment of the
transwell covered with a mucus expressing epithelium cell monolayer. The
successful completion of this project would strengthen the feasibility of using
p-COs for future noninvasive protein delivery. Ultimately, the proposed system
would have a high transformative potential and broader impact on noninvasive
(e.g., oral, nasal, or inhalation) delivery of biologics to treat or manage
various disease or vaccine development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.