* 2105393
* CRII: CNS: Cloud Cartography: Measurement Capabilities for the Modern Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Alexander Marder, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Public clouds are ubiquitous in modern life, and their importance necessitates
understanding the paths between cloud applications and users to better inform
public policy, network operations outside the cloud, and cloud application
developers. Cloud wide area networks (WANs) connect users to cloud resources,
such as applications, storage, and content, but function as a black box for
everyone but the clouds themselves. This project will enable a comprehensive
understanding of the paths between clouds and users outside the cloud, helping
to diagnose and locate problems between cloud applications and their users,
inform the deployment of applications and content into the clouds, and
facilitate comparison of connectivity in the United States to other regions.
Furthermore, the ability to accurately interpret paths from users to the cloud
offers the potential for developing tools to allow even non-technical users to
identify the responsible party for network performance degradations. The project
will also provide undergraduate students the opportunity for hands-on experience
with cloud computing and cloud network measurement, through a class designed to
engage and mentor women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes novel techniques to
accomplish two separate but related tasks to overcome important shortcomings of
current Internet cartography. The first task devises new traceroute probing and
interpretation techniques to accurately interpret the network operator for each
router on the paths that the public clouds use to reach users around the world,
paying special attention to the points of interconnection between cloud WANs and
other Internet networks. The results from Task 1 will provide an unprecedented
view of the interaction between public cloud providers and the public Internet,
and reveal the paths that cloud applications take to reach their users. Task 2
revisits the decades-old challenge of inferring network interconnections and
infrastructure ownership from individual observed paths, a persistent challenge
due to fundamental limitations of path measurement capabilities. The results
from Task 1 will help develop, implement, test, and validate a solution to this
problem for paths from users toward the cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.