* 2105825
* Shape Morphing Polymer Networks Based on Ion Gels
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Ryan Hayward, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2021
* USD 106,058.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymer-based materials that can undergo rapid programmed changes in three-
dimensional (3D) shape, surface texture, and properties have seen major progress
in recent years, offering promise for the development of soft robots, tactile
interfaces, and adaptive materials that respond to changes in their environment
or user needs. However, critical limitations exist on the performance of
current-generation materials, motivating the development of new paradigms for
responsive polymer networks, alongside efforts to improve our understanding of
these materials on both molecular and macroscopic scales. The current project
seeks to take advantage of the unique benefits offered by polymer networks based
on ionic liquids (ILs), which are salts with low melting points (often below
room temperature) that have useful properties including low volatility and good
electrical conductivity and stability. The proposed networks of polymers and ILs
could enable transformative advances in the design of shape-morphing materials
that can operate under a wide range of environmental conditions and in response
to low-voltage electrical control signals. The fundamental understanding
developed through the work will also hold relevance for IL-based polymer
materials in other contexts including soft, flexible, and responsive electronic
devices, or as membranes for batteries or fuel cells. The project will engage,
mentor, and train a diverse group of participants at a variety of levels ranging
from K-12 students and the general public, to graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows, with a particular emphasis on expanding a partnership with
high-school students in nearby Springfield, MA.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

While shape-morphing polymer networks have seen rapid recent advances, state-of-
the-art materials suffer from key limitations. For example, stimuli-responsive
polymer hydrogels typically rely on exchange of water with their surroundings,
limiting operation to aqueous environments, while dielectric elastomer actuators
require very high triggering voltages of ca. 10 kV to function. The current
effort seeks to take advantage of the special properties of ionic liquid
(IL)-based polymer materials, in particular their very low volatility, high
ionic conductivity, and good electrochemical stability, to enable new classes of
responsive and shape-morphing polymer networks. Motivated by these goals, the PI
will conduct fundamental studies of the thermodynamics, response kinetics,
mechanics, and electrical characteristics of IL-based polymers and networks, and
demonstrate new types of responsive materials that are capable of functioning in
non-hydrated environments and in response to low voltage electrical signals.
Alongside the new capabilities for the design of soft actuators and shape
morphing materials, the fundamental understanding gained will have broad
relevance for IL-based polymer networks in stimuli-responsive materials,
membranes, and iontronic devices.