* 2105191
* High field superconductivity in actinide quantum materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Nicholas Butch, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 431,040.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin-triplet superconductivity is
an exotic quantum phenomenon rarely identified in real materials, making it of
fundamental physical interest to understand how it works. Spin-triplet
superconductivity is also being pursued as a potential platform for future
quantum computing applications. This project is an experimental investigation of
the properties of spin-triplet superconductivity at high magnetic fields using
multiple measurement techniques. A research focus is the recently discovered
material, uranium ditelluride, that has numerous unusual physical properties,
the most outstanding of which is the presence of a new high-field
superconducting phase whose origins are not well understood. This research
advances fundamental physical understanding of electron correlations, emergent
properties in the presence of multiple competing interactions, and their role in
spin-triplet superconductivity. This research program trains a postdoctoral
researcher, contributes to the training of junior researchers in quantum
materials synthesis and measurement, and utilizes national scientific user
facilities to perform specialized experiments. The program contributes to public
outreach activities and educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics of spin-triplet superconductivity is of great
fundamental interest as examples of this phenomenon are rare in real materials.
Classification and realization of topological superconductivity is also of
applied interest, as researchers look for promising platforms on which to
develop fault-tolerant quantum computing. This project focuses on the high
magnetic field phases and properties of the spin triplet superconductor uranium
ditelluride and related materials. This leading candidate for intrinsic
topological superconductivity has a remarkably rich high-field phase diagram,
including the highest-field reentrant superconducting phase between
approximately 40 and 65 teslas, which is believed to be driven by reduced
electron dimensionality. The team performs targeted high magnetic field
measurements, including transport, magnetometry, and calorimetry, on uranium
ditelluride and related materials to identify and understand these new and
unusual forms of high-field electronic order. These measurements precisely
define the complicated high-field phase boundaries of uranium ditelluride and
related materials, give insight into what stabilizes these emergent phases and
their microscopic order parameters. The project advances understanding of
electron correlations, emergent properties in the presence of multiple competing
interactions, and unconventional superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.