* 2105806
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Differentiable Rendering for Computer Graphics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Tzu-Mao Li, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Creating realistic images in computer graphics has historically relied on
accurately computing the values at each point or pixel in the image based on
physically accurate simulation of lighting in the scene, but recently it has
become clear that simply computing image values is not adequate. One needs to
also be able to understand how these values change with changes in the
environment, for example as the sun moves across the sky, a door is opened
letting light into the scene, or the material properties of an object are
gradually changed from velvet to metallic. Mathematically, this involves
computing the derivatives of the image to determine how it changes with respect
to the input parameters. This research will create a class of differentiable
renderers that compute both images and their derivatives. Project outcomes will
have broad impact because the computation of derivatives is increasingly central
to many areas of computer graphics, computer vision, robotics and machine
learning, with potential benefit to applications as diverse as perception
control in self-driving cars and robots, optimization of indoor lighting for
architecture, fabrication of 3D objects with a desired appearance, statistics
and epidemiology. Additional impact will derive from the fact that the PIs are
educators committed to broadening participation in computing who participate in
early research scholars programs and will develop new online courses in
rendering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing the derivatives or gradients of
general light transport involves tackling fundamental challenges of differential
calculus, Monte Carlo integration, signal processing, automatic differentiation,
and metaprogramming systems. One challenge is in handling discontinuities of
various forms, which lead to Dirac delta terms that require careful and analytic
treatment that cannot be provided by traditional automatic differentiation. Even
for the smooth variation, computing gradients involves a large number of
intermediate variables that necessitate tradeoffs across bias, variance, compute
and memory. Moreover, full generality requires differentiable rendering in new
representations such as implicit surfaces and procedural materials, as well as
new problem domains such as transient rendering for non-line-of-sight imaging
and geometrical diffraction for acoustics. One also needs to effectively apply
the gradients for optimization in inverse problems. This project will develop a
broad transformative agenda, seeking to enable differentiable renderers to
efficiently reconstruct billions of varied primitives from millions of pixels
under general and diverse light transport situations. The research plan consists
of four interconnected components involving computational foundations and
efficient algorithms for solving visibility gradients including: analytic and
area sampling methods; a unified system for exploring computational and memory
tradeoffs in differentiable rendering algorithms; generalizations to new
physical phenomena such as transient rendering and geometrical diffraction; and
advances in inverse problems and deep learning including new approaches to
continuous optimization involving Euler-Lagrange
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.