* 2105400
* Collaborative Research: Engineering, imaging and control  of three-dimensional topological magnetic materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Benjamin McMorran, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 485,098.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whereas the vast majority of the
world’s digital information is processed using nanoscale devices to manipulate
the charge of electrons, most of this information is stored using the spins of
electrons in the form of nanoscale magnetic domains. Recent advancements in
magnetic materials and nano-characterization techniques have revealed nanoscale
magnetic knots formed by the spins of many electrons. Topology is a property to
describe the different types of magnetic knots, and could enable new types of
electronic devices for sensing, processing, and storing information. This
Collaborative Research project develops abilities to produce, manipulate, and
characterize these knotted magnetic features. The project engages a wide age
range of students on meaningful research, including training middle-school-aged
summer camp students to use an electron microscope to search for nanoscale
“magnetic bow ties”. The project promotes active exchange of students, faculty
and researchers between institutions, and both undergraduate and graduate
student researchers are educated in a broad range of materials challenges and
nanoscale measurement techniques using novel and sophisticated equipment. A key
component of the proposal is to foster collaborations between leading
international and industrial scientists to provide international research
experience for graduate students. This will not only strengthen the scientific
excellence and broaden the impact of the research, but it will also provide
important educational and post-graduate career opportunities for both graduate
and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New functionality in nanomagnetic devices requires
control of magnetic order at the nanometer spatial scale. Many spin-based
devices are still in their infancy and a thorough understanding of the
underlying materials and electronic properties and their effect on device
performance will be essential for future applications. This Collaborative
Research proposal builds on a strong existing collaboration between the PIs
Fullerton and McMorran, international and industrial partners, and Harvey Mudd
College to achieve a fundamental understanding of and ability to control the
topological spin order in nano-structured magnetic materials and devices. The
research is particularly interested in the design, manipulation and imaging of
thin-film materials that exhibit complex 3-D topological states and defects such
as chiral hybrid domain walls, chiral helixes, skyrmions, bi-skyrmions,
antiskyrmions and hopfions. The morphology of the domains and defects depends
sensitively on the underlying materials properties as well as on the application
of magnetic fields, field history, and temperature where domains can arrange in
metastable configurations including various topological defects. The team will
develop and apply several recent methods in advanced electron microscopy to
characterize the structure of these topological states, as well as their
behavior under the influence of ultrafast fields. Summer curriculum is developed
for the 7-12th grade and undergraduate levels to educate students on the use of
nanoscale tools, and engage them in meaningful supervised
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.