* 2105114
* GOALI: Spin-Orbit Torques From Magnetically Ordered Materials and Their Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Kent, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 397,877.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together leading
researchers from New York University and IBM with the aim of furthering the
understanding and application of nanometer scale magnetic devices and materials.
Magnetic nanostructures are widely used in technology with the most advanced
applications found in the semiconductor industry. This is associated with the
fact that there can be large reductions in energy usage when information is
stored and processed with magnetic materials; because data stored in magnetic
materials can be retained without power (or a battery in mobile devices).
Because of ever-increasing worldwide demands for data processing and storage,
advanced magnetic devices form the backbone of huge industries in the United
States. This project aims to uncover more efficient means of writing magnetic
information using magnetic materials themselves as the source of spin-orbit
torques. The project is integrated with the training of young scientists in this
forefront area of magnetism research. Graduate and undergraduate students
involved in this collaboration will gain by interactions between academia and
industry and will be enriched through exposure to a variety of perspectives,
expertise and techniques present in an industrial setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-GOALI project
brings together leading researchers in nanomagnetism from New York University
and IBM with the aim of furthering the understanding and application of
spintronics. An important and overarching goal of spintronics is to discover and
characterize more efficient means of generating spin currents and associated
spin torques on magnetization. Recently it has been established that spin-orbit
interactions enable very efficient charge-to-spin conversion and large torques
on magnetic layers. However, the spin polarization that acts on the
ferromagnetic layer is typically confined to the layer plane, and thus is very
effective at reversing the magnetization of in-plane magnetized layers but far
less effective in switching and exciting the magnetization of perpendicularly
magnetized elements. This project investigates spin currents associated with
spin-orbit coupling in ferromagnetic layers and their interfaces to nonmagnets,
which have the potential to generate spin currents polarized perpendicular to
the layer planes. The charge-to-spin conversion efficiency and the symmetry of
the response are studied for a variety of transition metal materials and
interfaces as a function of magnetization angle. Time-resolved and spatially
resolved probes of magnetization dynamics are employed to reveal magnetization
switching mechanisms in thin perpendicularly magnetized layers and patterned
nanostructures to further the understanding of the nonlinear magnetization
dynamics excited by spin-transfer torques. Graduate and undergraduate students
involved in this collaboration will gain by interactions between academia and
industry and through student exchanges between NYU and IBM. Their education will
be enriched through the variety of perspectives, expertise and techniques
present in an industrial setting. High school students will also be encouraged
to participate in this research project. As part of this project the PIs will
develop a new course at NYU on Physics and Technology with the goal of
introducing students to physics in the “real world” (outside of universities).
The course will highlight the skills needed to apply physics to commercialize
technologies and impact society more broadly in technological fields, including
in magnetism and quantum information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.