* 2105876
* HIGH TEMPERATURE MAGMATIC GAS: MINERAL DEPOSITION AND GAS/WALLROCK REACTION
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Hanna Nekvasil, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 405,230.00

The association of volcanic activity with ore deposits has been long recognized,
but exactly how volcanic activity leads to ore deposit formation remains
unknown. Since lavas and ash are generally metal-poor, volcanologists have
speculated that metal transport must occur by the gas given off during rise of
the magma towards the surface. Volcanic gas in eruptive plumes has been studied
extensively because it can be directly sampled. However, volcanic gas has
already lost much of its metal load to the volcanic subsurface structure through
precipitation of vapor-deposited minerals and by reaction with rock deep within
the volcanic edifice. Access to the natural gas before it has lost much of its
dissolved load is very limited because of the scarcity of high temperature
fumaroles and their extreme hazard. These problems have, thus far, made it
impossible to bridge the knowledge gap between volcanic activity and formation
of associated ore deposits. This project will utilize a new unique experimental
design to simulate this process of gas release from magma in the laboratory.
This technique will be used to characterize the chemical nature of magmatic gas
just as it is released from magma and to observe its chemical modification as it
produces vapor-deposited phases and reacts chemically with rock.
Characterization of the new minerals produced will take advantage of the
strength of synchrotron X-rays at Brookhaven National laboratory, that will
allow analysis of micron-sized particles and provide information of how the
metals are incorporated into the crystalline structures. The results of this
research will provide a basis for new understanding of barren vs. economically
important subvolcanic regions that will aid in future economic deposit
exploration on Earth and other planetary bodies. They will further our
understanding of vapor-deposited mineral stability and metal incorporation– a
subject applied heavily in the materials science industry. As part of outreach
to this industry, the geological community, and planetary science, a publically
accessible database will be developed to store electronic versions of synthesis
methods for a variety of minerals and materials found in nature. This project
also has an educational component geared to providing experimental experience to
undergraduate geology students as a first step in ensuring that the next
generation of geoscientists are prepared with an entire tool bag of approaches
with which to further our scientific understanding of natural
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work focuses on the compositional evolution
of high temperature F-Cl-S-bearing magmatic gases in the high-temperature
subvolcanic region (or just above shallowly emplaced plutons). In this regime,
magmatic gas begins its transformation to volcanic gas through loss of much of
its dissolved solute load by precipitation of minerals and reaction with
wallrock. Laboratory-scale experiments will be conducted in order to elucidate
(i) the nature of mineral phases produced during cooling of the magmatic gas,
(ii) the trace elements these minerals incorporate, and (iii) the
crystallographic controls on trace element incorporation into the vapor-
deposited minerals. These experiments will simulate the formation of natural
magmatic gas by decompression boiling of volatile-saturated rhyolite and
phonolite, and simulate the production of vapor-deposited phases by allowing
this gas to cool in a strong thermal gradient. Gas/rock reaction will be
investigated by reacting a synthetic basalt and rhyolite glass in the stream of
gas given off by the boiling magma. These reaction experiments will yield the
products of magmatic gas/wallrock reaction and indicate how magmatic
gas/wallrock reaction affects trace element mobilization. Analysis will combine
bulk chemistry, SEM, and Synchrotron X-ray microprobe techniques (hard and
tender-energy X-ray fluorescence microanalysis, microbeam X-ray absorption
spectroscopy, and microdiffraction) to characterize bulk chemical transport,
microscopic phase distribution in the vapor-deposited material and on reaction
surfaces, and localized chemical speciation in the vapor-deposited
minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.