* 2105028
* Collaborative Research: High-dimensional quantum states in two-dimensional material quantum dots
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Marc Bockrath, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project studies special
materials known as two-dimensional materials such as metal chalcogenides. Recent
predictions indicate that these materials have interesting properties. The
project aims to develop these properties using externally applied electric and
magnetic fields in order to gain knowledge that will promote development of
quantum information processing and quantum computing technologies. The project
is integrated with educational activities to train graduate students and involve
undergraduate and pre-college students in research. The project also enables the
PIs to continue their successful mentoring of members from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;A basic building
block of quantum circuits is the quantum bit or qubit. Recent recognition that
higher-dimensional quantum states known as qudits have many potential advantages
towards quantum information processing has generated much focus on this topic.
These pertain to areas such as quantum simulation, quantum communications,
fundamental tests of quantum mechanics, and improved quantum error correction.
This project uses two-dimensional metal chalcogenidesâ€™ unique band structures
comprising multiple valleys to realize high-dimensional quantum qudit states
based on multiple flavor degrees of freedom. These materials have a predicted
flavor SU(3) symmetry, of particular interest because of the analogy to the
quark model in particle physics, and this symmetry is extremely rare in
condensed matter systems. The project experimentally tests predictions for novel
tunable Kondo effects and Coulomb blockade behavior emerging from this symmetry.
The project also performs experiments aimed at manipulating these flavor states
to develop qudits towards quantum information processing based on flavortronics.
These research activities are coupled with a parallel theoretical effort that
informs the experimental one, leading to a synergistic effort aimed at the
development of high-dimensional quantum states based on beyond-graphene two-
dimensional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.