* 2105956
* Mathematics for Imaging with Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Gunther Uhlmann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,000.00

Inverse problems arise in all fields of science and technology when one seeks a
cause for an observed effect or wants to produce a desired effect. The increase
in computing power and the development of powerful algorithms have made it
possible to apply the techniques of inverse problems to real-world problems of
growing complexity. This research will focus on inverse problems with
applications that include a number of medical techniques as well as other
problems in imaging, such as locating oil and mineral deposits in the Earth's
substructure, creating of astrophysical images from telescope data, finding
cracks and interfaces within materials, shape optimization, and many others. The
familiar medical imaging technologies of computed tomography (CT) scans,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound are examples where inverse
problems have played a fundamental role and have helped to save
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop the mathematical theory
of several fundamental inverse problems. The first project deals with a
relatively new medical imaging technique called electrical impedance tomography.
In EIT, one attempts to determine an object's electrical properties by making
voltage and current measurements at the boundary of the object. One potential
application is in medical imaging, particularly in detecting pulmonary edema or
a cancerous tumor since such anomalies have very different electrical properties
in normal situations. The second project is travel time tomography. In this
imaging technique, the Principal Investigator (PI) will probe the object with
different types of waves, like electromagnetic waves or sound waves. By
measuring the travel times of the waves going through the medium, the PI will
attempt to determine the properties of the medium. The third project is an
inverse problem arising in nonlinear acoustics. It has applications in
ultrasound, particularly in a medical imaging technique called tissue harmonic
imaging (THI). THI is a routinely used component of diagnostic ultrasonography
(US), and higher-frequency harmonic waves produced by nonlinear fundamental US
wave propagation in the method generate images containing fewer
artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.