* 2105602
* Noble-Metal Nanocrystals in Metastable Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Younan Xia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular &amp; Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Younan Xia of the Georgia Institute of Technology
and Dr. Manos Mavrikakis of the University of Wisconsin-Madison will conduct
fundamental research toward controlling the spatial arrangement (i.e. the
crystal phase or structure) of atoms in nanocrystals. Such control could provide
a versatile means of tailoring the electronic structure and catalytic properties
of metal nanocrystals, opening the door to the development of advanced catalytic
materials key to energy conversion and key for the production of important
chemicals and pharmaceuticals. An important goal is to enable cost-effective and
sustainable use of precious metals, some of the scarcest elements in the earth’s
crust. The multi-disciplinary and collaborative nature of this project offers a
natural vehicle to enrich the education and training experiences of all
participants. The results from this project will be adapted to enhance classroom
teaching, including the development of demonstrations (animations and
experiments) related to key concepts in chemistry and chemical engineering. The
investigators will promote diversity in higher education by engaging women,
member of underserved groups in this research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Dr. Younan Xia and Dr. Manos Mavrikakis are
developing colloidal methods for the synthesis of metal (e.g., ruthenium)
nanocrystals in non-conventional, metastable crystal phases, together with well-
controlled shapes or surface structures. These nanocrystals may open up avenues
for observing new phenomena, enhancing existing processes, and enabling
innovative applications. Currently, there are only a very limited number of
reports on the synthesis of metal nanocrystals in metastable phases owing to the
lack of a mechanistic understanding. Through an integration of experimental
studies and computational modeling, the investigators seek to elucidate the
trends and mechanisms involved in the synthesis, striving to establish
experimental conditions for the reliable production of a specific crystal phase.
The ruthenium nanocrystals will be used as seeds to template the deposition of
other noble metals for the facile synthesis of core-shell nanocrystals featuring
new, metastable crystal structures. In the context of structure-property
relationships, the investigators will evaluate the catalytic activities of the
metastable nanocrystals toward the oxygen evolution and oxygen reduction
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.