* 2105169
* CRII: HCC: Temporal dynamics of team emotion and cognition in AI-supported decision-making
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Bei Yan, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 220,734.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) is becoming increasingly present and powerful in
systems that affect people’s lives, helping people make decisions in contexts
ranging from market decisions, military task support, and medical diagnosis. It
is thus essential to understand how adding AI aspects to the tools teams use
influences team collaboration, and its implications for organizational
practices. This project will address those questions through studying how
affective and cognitive processes in teams with AI support intertwine to shape
team decision-making performance over time. Insights produced by this research
will improve existing knowledge about how AI can be applied to facilitate human
collaboration. It will help organizations in various industries make informed
decisions about whether and when to adopt AI tools, and develop training and
interventions to improve AI-supported team decision-making. The research will
also help AI designers better understand AI’s impact on team decision-making and
to design more effective AI tools to support collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridging research perspectives and practices from human-
computer interaction (HCI) and team research, this project seeks to develop a
human-centered theory on how AI may shape team decision-making processes and
outcomes through a set of lab experiments. In the experiments, teams will
perform a series of decision-making tasks with AI assistance. The first
experiment will vary the communication features of an AI system that provides
information and ideas to a team decision-making task, examining how both the
presence and the communication style of the AI system affects team interaction
processes and decision-making outcomes. The second experiment will vary when AI
assistance is employed in different team collaboration stages – for example,
whether AI assistance was introduced at the beginning of the team task or in the
middle of the team task. The third experiment will investigate how team turnover
during a decision-making task interacts with the use of AI-based tools. Team
information sharing, affective status, learning, and performance during the
tasks will be observed and analyzed using computational methods. Understanding
these processes will contribute to theory on AI-supported team decision-making
and in particular, the emergence of team emotion, cognition, and their inter-
relations under different conditions of using AI-based tools. The analytical
approach can help develop unobtrusive measures of team emotion and cognition and
create new research paradigms, measures, and materials (such as task designs and
customized chatbots) that can be used by the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.