* 2105896
* The Effects of Driving Force, Morphology and Anion Separation  on Carrier Mobility in Doped Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Benjamin Schwartz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 605,000.00

Semiconductors are the basis for modern electronics such as computers, flat
screen displays, and mobile phones. Most semiconductors are inorganic, hard
materials such as silicon, and are expensive to process and manufacture. This
project explores the properties of plastic semiconductors that are lightweight,
flexible and potentially inexpensive to process. The electrical properties of
inorganic semiconductors are controlled through doping. Doping is the
intentional introduction of impurities into a semiconductor for the purpose of
changing its electrical or optical properties. A key challenge facing the
development of plastic semiconductors is they are not as easy to dope as
inorganic semiconductors. This collaborative project takes advantage of new
materials and processing methods to controllably dope plastic semiconductors.
New materials have tunable properties that will allow for a greater degree of
control over electrical conductivity. New processing methods allow dopant
molecules to be precisely added to the plastic semiconductors at desired
locations. High-quality doped polymer films will be studied by a suite of
techniques to fully understand them. They will also be incorporated into
thermoelectric devices that convert waste heat into electricity, a new source of
renewable energy. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in areas
of national need through this project. Outreach efforts will introduce high
school students in the Los Angeles area to related topics such as renewable
energy through demonstrations and experiments. This project is jointly funded by
the Electronic and Photonic Materials program of the Division of Materials
Research and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B program of the
Division of Chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conjugated polymers have numerous
potential uses because they combine the mechanical properties of plastics with
the electrical properties of semiconductors. When doped by strong oxidizing
agents, their conductivity can be tuned by orders of magnitude, but interactions
with the dopant counterion and dopant-induced changes in morphology can limit
the doped carrier mobility. This project takes advantage of sequential
processing, in which the polymer film is cast first and the dopant is
infiltrated in a second step from a solvent chosen to appropriately swell but
not dissolve the underlying polymer film. This method provides a degree of
control over the doped polymer morphology that enables large-area applications,
such as thermoelectric devices. The project also explores novel dopants,
including newly-synthesized dodecaborane clusters with tunable redox potentials.
These clusters have chemical structures that serve to shield the counterion
charge from the polarons on the polymer backbone, allowing for control over the
counterion-polaron interaction, and thus providing for improved carrier mobility
and Seebeck coefficient. The project also investigates counterion exchange,
where after reaction, the dopant counterion can be substituted for an inert ion
by mass action, providing yet another degree of control over the properties of
doped conjugated polymers. In all cases, the physical structure of the doped
polymer film, as determined by a combination of grazing incidence wide angle
X-ray scattering and neutron reflectometry, is correlated with the optical and
electrical properties to understand how the location of the counterion in the
film controls physical properties. Finally, the project uses ultrafast
spectroscopy to measure both the thermal conductivity (via time-domain thermal
reflectance) and electrical properties (via pump/probe transient absorption
experiments) of doped conjugated polymer films. The key aim of the project is to
determine detailed structure/function relationships to maximally exploit the use
of doped conjugated polymers in thermoelectric and other
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.