* 2105917
* Collaborative Research: BEE: Bridging the ecology and evolution of East African Acacias across time and space: genomics, ecosystem, and diversification.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Todd Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 08/31/2024
* USD 686,486.00

The physical attributes and behaviors of species are shaped by evolution. These
traits determine how individuals interact with their environment (ecology) which
then influences the course of evolution. Thus, ecology and evolution are
inextricably intertwined. Bridging the fields of evolution and ecology is
challenging because the processes involved can operate on similar, or very
different, time scales. African savanna acacia trees have evolved to survive and
reproduce under harsh conditions not tolerated by many other tree species.
Acacias can tolerate fires, droughts, herbivory by giraffes and elephants, and
competition from other plants. But how acacias have adapted to these conditions
in the past will influence their response to the current changing environment on
the African continent. The goal of this study is to develop a comprehensive
understanding of the evolutionary history and ecological distribution of African
acacias and to explore how species traits and distributions changed over time in
response to change in the savanna climate. Ultimately, this knowledge will
inform predictions about how acacia habitats will be affected by ongoing climate
change. This project not only has broader societal benefit but also it will
train undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
evolutionary biology, ecology, plant physiology, and molecular genomics. In
addition, the project will expand the content and reach of a successful
undergraduate teaching module of ecology and evolution featuring Serengeti
National Park and will begin a new bioinformatics training course in partnership
with universities in Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bridge
phylogenetic approaches to diversification with direct ecological field
measurement of trait responses and gene expression. The activities include: (1)
constructing new, detailed models of the phylogenetic history and ecological
distribution of species and traits in the African Acacia Clade, (2) using
phylogenomic analyses to study selection, introgression, and gene family
expansion in relation to the Savanna Syndrome, (3) measuring acacia trait
responses to Savanna Syndrome components (drought, fire, herbivory, grass
competition) in a common garden experiment in Arusha, Tanzania, and (4)
analyzing the molecular aspects of the phenotypic response through analysis of
acacia transcriptomic profiles collected both on site in Tanzania and in
controlled greenhouse experiments. Collectively, these linked lines of evidence
will provide crucial information about the past evolution of the savanna
community, the rapid rise of savannas across Africa that occurred in the
Miocene, and its likely response to present ecological
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.