* 2105208
* CRII: SHF: RUI: Exploring Human-in-the-loop Program Synthesis Through Live Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Mark Santolucito, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 04/30/2024
* USD 173,341.00

Program synthesis is a formal technique that promises to decrease software
development costs, decrease the risk of software bugs, and make programming
skills more accessible to a broader audience. Yet for all the development of
theory and techniques in this area, the adoption of program synthesis by users
has been limited. A key hurdle in expanding the impact of synthesis is that
fully automated software synthesis does not match the iterative software design
process that is used in practice. The majority of existing techniques strive to
be fully automated, acting as black-boxes for users: the user provides a
specification and the tool returns complete program code. The investigators
propose to overcome this hurdle through human-in-the-loop synthesis which allows
a user to incrementally refine specifications and code through interaction with
the synthesis engine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing
techniques and theories that increase the adoption of program synthesis in real-
world systems. They use a performative practice from the computer-music
community, called Live Coding, in which users write code that generates music
(or other media) in real-time. This project formalizes human-in-the-loop Program
Synthesis and its intersection with Live Coding, and develops new human-in-the-
loop program-synthesis techniques. The investigators explore the use of these
techniques in Live Coding and other settings. This project will also provide the
opportunity for female undergraduates to participate in computer-science
research - many for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.