* 2105001
* NSF-BSF: Spectroscopy of excitonic insulators with direct gap
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Girsh Blumberg, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 605,251.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between particles making up a
material can lead to surprising consequences, where the properties of the
material as a whole are distinct from the properties of its constituents. The
particles in question can be electrons, or electron holes, which are missing
electrons in the material's atomic lattice. Interactions between electrons and
holes in materials can lead to the emergence of such new properties â€“ a frontier
actively explored by condensed matter physics. An example of such interesting
material is the excitonic insulator, with excitons being new particle-like
entities in the material that appear due to the attractive interaction between
electrons and holes. Such excitons are expected to achieve a novel quantum
state, called "excitonic condensate" at sufficiently low temperatures.
Theoretical predictions of its existence have never been fully confirmed by
conclusive experimental evidence. This work aims at providing direct and
convincing evidence for the excitonic condensate. This project also provides
comprehensive training to postdocs and undergraduate students in low-temperature
high-resolution spectroscopies, who will benefit from experiences brought by
international collaborative efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The Rutgers-Technion NSF-BSF collaboration explores the
conditions leading to the elusive state of excitonic insulator in solids by
employing a combination of transport, angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) and
polarization-resolved light scattering (Raman) spectroscopies to concurrently
study the properties and the dynamics of this state. The objective is to to
derive the complete phase diagram for excitonic insulators that includes a
structural instability intertwined with a semimetal-to-insulator transition and
to establish plausible distinct regimes of the exciton condensation, identify
the underlying microscopic mechanisms, and test the relevant theories. The
lessons learned from this study will further promote broader understanding of
self-organization in other strongly interacting quantum
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.