* 2105434
* How experience shapes spatial thinking: Frames of reference across axes, ages, and cultures
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Benjamin Pitt, Pitt, Benjamin
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 148,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award was provided as part of NSF's Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF)
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Steven Piantadosi and Alison Gopnik at the
University of California - Berkeley, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports
an early career scientist studying the developmental origins of spatial
reasoning. Humans have extraordinary spatial abilities that allow them to
manipulate the natural environment, design and build new technologies,
coordinate our efforts within and across social groups, and reason about
abstract ideas like time, number, and emotion. Although spatial reasoning is
fundamental to human activity, it differs across groups, across contexts, and
across the lifespan. By clarifying how and why spatial reasoning varies, this
research will advance fundamental scientific knowledge in a broad range of
social, behavioral, and economic sciences, with numerous potential applications
in education and design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the physics of space may
be universal, the way people conceptualize space varies: What one person
conceptualizes as left-right another person may conceptualize as East-West or
upriver-downriver. These spatial frames of reference (FoRs) are known to vary
across cultures, between individuals, and over development, but the causes of
this cognitive diversity remain unresolved. This research tests the proposal
that FoR use varies as a function of spatial discriminability: When reasoning
about spatial relations, people use the spatial continuum that is easiest to
perceive or remember, whether that continuum is defined egocentrically (i.e.
with respect to the body) or allocentrically (i.e. with respect to salient
features of the environment). To test this proposal, a series of behavioral
experiments will measure FoR use and spatial discriminability across spatial
axes (i.e. left-right and front-back), age groups (i.e. children and adults),
and cultures. By manipulating the left-right symmetry of participants’
visuospatial experience, these experiments will clarify the mechanisms by which
such differences in spatial experience produce differences in spatial reasoning,
and evaluate the downstream consequences on higher-level cognitive abilities,
like those involved in reading and mathematical thinking. The results stand to
refine theories of spatial cognitive development and inform behavioral
interventions for enhancing spatial reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.