* 2105192
* CRII: HCC: Modeling computer-mediated task-oriented dialogues with multi-modality information theoretic approaches
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Yang Xu, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2024
* USD 166,937.00

Effective real-time remote communication is challenging because unlike face-to-
face conversations, information is exchanged indirectly through computer screens
and speakers. In these situations, rich non-verbal information such as body
poses, hand gestures, and facial expressions is often blocked or neglected. In
order to improve the quality of existing remote communication systems, this
project will develop an in-depth quantitative understanding of the kinds of
information non-verbal aspects of communication might add to the conversation.
The research team will address this issue by developing novel measures of non-
verbal communication content based on state-of-the-art machine learning and
computer vision techniques. The team will also develop software toolkits that
can support both behavioral scientists who study conversation and designers of
future computer-mediated communication systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team proposes a series of studies that use information theoretic models
to distill information from the non-verbal communication channels, including
facial expressions, upper-body gestures, and whole-body poses, and synthesize
them into the ultimate goal of predicting the success of computer-mediated
collaborative tasks. As part of the work the team will develop several novel
analysis methods. These include discretizing and symbolizing non-verbal
information through joint representation learning and aggregation, using neural
sequential models to estimate the amount of information in parallel discretized
series, and using the temporal-spectral patterns in all communication channels
to predict the task success. A multimodal information incorporated corpus of
task-oriented dialogues will also be collected as part of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.