* 2105998
* Coordinated Mechanistic Approaches to Desulfonation in Two-component FMN Monooxygenases
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Holly Ellis, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Holly Ellis and her research team at East Carolina
University will study the interesting chemistry carried out by some of the
enzymes involved in the acquisition of the element sulfur that bacteria need for
survival. A fascinating feature of these enzymes is their ability to change
their structures to facilitate the reactions they catalyze. Many of these
crucial structural changes and accompanying catalytic events are poorly
understood. The two-component enzyme systems selected for this study utilize
various structural changes to promote sulfur acquisition. Therefore, these
enzyme systems will be ideal to evaluate a multitude of different structural
strategies that would be essential for catalysis. The project will also be
integrated with the Brody RISE Pre-College Program to train high school students
from underrepresented groups in the sciences in different biochemical techniques
used to understand enzyme function. An undergraduate student fellowship will be
provided in the summer to mentor and encourage participation of underrepresented
students in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Two-component flavin
mononucleotide(FMN)-dependent monooxygenases are essential for sulfur
acquisition in bacteria when preferred sulfur sources are limiting. These
enzymes utilize an FMN reductase and monooxygenase to carry out their critical
functional roles; roles that require an elegant coordinated mechanistic strategy
for desulfonation. The described objectives will evaluate if the two-component
flavin-dependent systems involved in sulfur acquisition have evolved common
structural features and mechanistic steps to carry out their complex functional
role. Objective 1 is to identify the mechanistic strategies of two-component
FMN-dependent monooxygenases that promote desulfonation. Objective 2 is to
determine how the structural properties of two-component NAD(P)H:FMN reductases
dictate function. Both objectives utilize complementary spectroscopic, kinetic,
and biophysical approaches to provide evidence for the desulfonation mechanism
and identify oligomeric changes that contribute to flavin transfer in the
NAD(P)H:FMN reductases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.