* 2105171
* Mechanism of Light-activated Antiviral Activity of Conjugated Polyelectrolyte Polymers and Oligomers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Alison Kell, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The health and economic devastation
brought on by the Covid-19 pandemic underscores the urgent need to develop a
multifaceted pandemic planning and response to stop viral outbreaks. This
project takes a materials science and engineering approach to develop broad-
spectrum antiviral materials that work against many viruses without inducing
resistance. The research team has shown that a class of conjugated polymers and
oligomers exhibit remarkable near-UV/visible light-activated killing of
bacteriophages and the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus that causes the Covid-19 pandemic;
greater than 99.9999% viral inactivation is routinely achieved. This project
focuses on elucidating the antiviral mechanism of the conjugated compounds.
Propensity of the compounds to interact with and disrupt the structures and
functions of several viral targets, including spike and capsid proteins, viral
membrane, and RNA, will be studied using a suite of experimental techniques.
Combined with computational simulations, a fundamental understanding of the
interactions between the synthetic compounds with viral components that are
responsible for their antiviral activity will be gained. Such insights will
guide the rational design of new compounds with optimal antiviral properties to
slow the spread of infections. This project will also identify virus components
to target and degrade that will result in viral inactivation. Taken together,
this project will contribute towards the development of highly effective and
broad-spectrum antiviral materials for healthcare workers and for the public and
will transform our ability to prepare for and respond to current and future
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to gain a fundamental understanding of the intermolecular
interactions between novel synthetic conjugated polyelectrolyte polymers (CPEs)
and oligomers (OPEs) with various viral assemblies that give rise to their
remarkable light-activated broad-spectrum antiviral activity. CPEs and OPEs have
recently been shown to be highly efficient at inactivating the SARS-CoV-2 virus
that causes the Covid-19 pandemic. The proposed project focuses on elucidating
the antiviral mechanism of the compounds with the ultimate goal of guiding the
rational design of novel materials with optimal properties. The CPEs and OPEs
are charged and amphiphilic in nature, which provides them the ability to
interact with and potentially disrupt the structures, and thereby functions, of
multiple virial targets. Additionally, light-activated photosensitizing activity
of the compounds can further contribute to their antiviral efficacy.
Specifically, the propensity of CPEs and OPEs with varying backbones, chain
length, side and end groups, charge density and distribution to interact with
and disrupt the structures and functions of several viral macromolecular
assemblies, including protein assemblies, membranes, and nucleic acids. The
multidisciplinary team will use a suite of biophysical and materials
characterization methods to study the interactions between CPEs and OPEs and
viral targets, from molecular structural scale to macroscopic property levels,
combined synergistically with closely related simulations. Comparing our
findings with functional assays and antiviral activities will enable us to
elucidate the toxicity mechanism and structure-function relationship of these
novel synthetic antiviral materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.