* 2105857
* Pillararene Sulfates: Understanding and Using their Ultratight Binding
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Lyle Isaacs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 654,817.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Lyle Isaacs of the University of
Maryland-College Park will study the preparation and molecular recognition
properties of a class of molecular containers known as pillararene sulfates. In
everyday life, containers are used to store beverages and food, to ship items to
specific destinations, and to organize objects. Similarly, when a molecular
container encapsulates a smaller molecule, advantageous improvements in chemical
and biological properties can occur including better solubility, brighter
colors, and lower toxicity. The Isaacs group has found that pillararene sulfates
encapsulate smaller molecules exceptionally strongly in water and will perform
studies to understand the origins of this strong binding and use them in
prototypical applications such as chemical and biological sensing and
environmental remediation. The work has significant broader impacts in that
undergraduates and graduate students will be trained as interdisciplinary
scientists crucial for the US workforce. Furthermore, the data sets generated by
the Isaacs group will allow computational chemists to improve their
computational methods via SAMPL(statistical assessment of the modeling of
proteins and ligands) challenges. Dr. Isaacs will incorporate Virtual Reality
headsets into his (under)graduate courses to enhance the students ability to
visualize molecules in three dimensions. Finally, the pillararene sulfates to be
prepared by the Isaacs group are likely to be adapted by other researchers for
diverse applications including for the encapsulation of polymers, as well as for
drug delivery, and biological imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The water soluble
pillar[6]arene derivative WP6 bearing carboxylic acid groups has been well
studied over the past decade. Professor Isaacs and his students found that
pillar[6]arene sulfates bind up to 10,000-fold more tightly than the anionic,
water-soluble pillararene, WP6, toward cationic guests in aqueous solution.
Professor Isaacs' research group will systematically vary each structural
component of pillararene sulfates by synthetic organic chemistry and
subsequently investigate their molecular recognition capabilities toward panels
of hydrophobic cations by a combination of NMR spectroscopy, X-ray
crystallography, UV/vis and fluorescence spectroscopy, and isothermal titration
calorimetry to uncover the origins of their exceptionally strong binding
abilities. Pillararene sulfates that feature a single reactive functional group
will be prepared; this will allow them to be appended to more complex systems
such as polymers and solid phase supports. The abilities of the new pillararene
sulfates will be explored in chemically and biologically relevant contexts as
components of novel sensing, separation, and sequestration
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.