* 2105069
* CRII: HCC: Practical Steps Toward Integrating the Tools of Emergency Management with Crisis Informatics Techniques
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Nicolas LaLone, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,987.00

This project seeks to improve how emergency managers can make use of social
media posts and other information created by citizens experiencing natural
disasters and other crises. This information can help document unfolding crises
and reveal needs; used well, this could help emergency managers better assess
crisis situations and improve their decisions about where and how to respond.
However, despite recent advances in tools that use artificial intelligence
techniques to analyze citizen-created information, these tools have not been
effectively deployed in actual emergency response situations. This project’s
goal is to make effective deployment more feasible, through analyzing the
practices and training of emergency responders, identifying gaps between those
practices and the technical capabilities of existing information analysis tools,
and working to close the gaps through bringing emergency managers and tool
developers closer together in the design process. The project team plans to work
closely with emergency management organizations, a collaboration that has the
potential to save lives and property, reducing suffering and the impact of
crises in communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will proceed in two
main phases. First, the project team will survey and interview emergency
management practitioners about their everyday technological life. By evaluating
the skills of emergency management across its respective domains (including law
enforcement, fire science, homeland security, and emergency medical services),
the team will provide valuable context to other researchers about where they can
find stakeholders, collaborators, and space for development. The team will also
collect and analyze emergency management syllabi in order to understand how
emergency management students are taught to use technologies. In the second
phase, the project team will conduct participatory design exercises with
emergency managers that explore how tools that leverage machine learning and
information retrieval could fit into their practices, using methods that
simulate realistic levels of analysis accuracy in order to account for the
inevitable presence of error in these tools and its effect on people’s ability
to work in human-in-the-loop systems. In developing the participatory design
materials, the project team will evaluate techniques like TF-IDF, Topic
Modelling, Keyword-in-Context, and the underlying tools and datasets they depend
on, in terms of how well they can be installed, maintained, and applied to
contexts different than those they were trained on. Both phases will look at a
number of contexts, allowing the research team to evaluate consistency of
results across sources of information, populations, and disparate kinds of
disaster events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Human
Centered Computing and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.