* 2105625
* STTR Phase I: Novel Adsorbents for Selective Removal of Naturally Occurring Radionuclide Materials (NORM) from Fracking-Produced Water
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Urmila Diwekar, Stochastic Research Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2023
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to provide a novel and cost-effective
technology to remove NORM (Naturally Occurring Radioactive Materials) from the
wastewater produced by fracking. The proposed research is of fundamental and
practical significance to the area of produced water treatment. The proposed
approach seeks to remove 99% of NORM from produced waters effectively, an
important advance for environmental treatment. This approach also is expected to
reduce the cost of the treatment technology and the associated impact on cost
per barrel of gas and oil. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to verify the effectiveness of new adsorbents waste water clean-up
associated with fracking. The geologic formations containing oil and gas
deposits contain Naturally Occurring Radionuclide Materials, referred to as
NORM. Oil and gas fracking brings NORM to the surface in a concentrated form,
posing a radiation safety hazard. There is currently no commercial product on
the market to remove NORM from concentrated produced and flow back water
selectively. By developing theory and computational methods with the Group
Contribution method (GCM) and a novel optimization-based Computer-Aided
Molecular Design (CAMD) framework, the teams seeks to generate better clay-based
adsorbents than are currently commercially available for removal of produced
water impurities. The modeling results need to be verified experimentally by
synthesizing thenew adsorbents and comparing their adsorption behavior to the
theoretically-predicted isotherms before commercializing them. The research may
result in efficient and cost-effective adsorbents customized for the type of
water contamination encountered using the new CAMD frameworks and cutting-edge
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.