* 2105701
* Collaborative Research: IGE: Graduate Education in Cyber-Physical Systems Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Charles Thompson, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 362,835.00

The future engineering workforce calls for a skill set that requires
disciplinary knowledge and technology to be adapted and applied in solving
complex problems with experts from diverse fields. This need also opens
opportunities for women and students of color, traditionally underrepresented in
engineering, to explore a broader range of research and career pathways that
better identify with their interests and values. To support students in
acquiring these skills, graduate curricula can benefit from a framework and
process for designing educational modules that are accessible to students in
different disciplines, that identifies how they contribute to their field, and
integrates emerging business needs. This National Science Foundation Innovations
in Graduate Education (IGE) award to the University of Massachusetts Lowell
(UML) and the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth (UMD) will pilot a model for
co-creation of cross-disciplinary educational content by teams of graduate
students, research advisors, instructors, and practitioners from industry. The
educational model is prototyped using a case study of cyber-physical systems
applicable across a wide range of industries spanning the service,
manufacturing, health-care, transportation, automation, and smart-system based
environmental monitoring sectors. The project is innovative in its application
of evidence-based practices from education research on how the curriculum can be
inclusive in engaging and educating a diverse student body by involving graduate
students in co-creating technical content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves two phases. The first phase addresses how graduate students learn by
co-creating educational material with faculty and experts from industry. The
second phase integrates the modules developed in phase one into courses offered
at four different institutions (UML, UMD, University of the District of
Columbia, and North Carolina A&amp;T State University) and assesses how students
learn and acquire transferable skills from co-created material. Both phases
prioritize studentsâ€™ voices in an iterative design and evaluation process
through focus groups conducted in the framework of participatory action
research. Through the co-creation in phase one, graduate students learn about:
(a) Models and methods for integrating disciplinary approaches and avoiding
common pitfalls; (b) Social science concepts (viz. intersectionality,
microaggressions, and institutionalized racism) connected with
underrepresentation of females and minorities in STEM fields, and (c) ways to
address these issues through effective communication and practice. The
educational modules support experiential learning on a testbed that emulates the
stages of product life-cycle management (PLM) undertaken in industry and support
the development of skills for transferring of discipline-specific information to
stakeholders across the PLM stages ranging from ideation to product
verification, validation, and usage. A tool kit will provide the templates and
rubrics for participatory educational design and collection of common datasets
to assess the projected learning outcomes from implementations by a broader
graduate education community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals
of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate
education and to generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into
the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.