* 2105635
* FIRED UP: An immersive early field experience program to build community, support inclusivity, and foster large-scale research ideas
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Julian Resasco, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,997.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to the University of Colorado Boulder will test the efficacy of a first-year
graduate student program designed to promote the inclusion of students from
diverse identities as well as provide discipline-specific training in field
methods. Currently, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology graduate programs in the US
lag behind other biological disciplines in the representation of PEER students
(persons excluded due to ethnicity and race). This project aims to address this
issue by piloting a program that aims to increase PEER recruitment, create a
cohort community, improve the sense of belonging among students, increase early
access to expert field methods training, and expand training to address
ecological questions relevant to global environmental change. Challenging issues
related to environmental change, such as biodiversity loss and climate change,
require a diverse workforce of highly trained biologists who can collaborate
across disciplines and produce solution-oriented scientific approaches. While
our program is tailored to the disciplines of ecology and evolution, the basic
elements of the program could be adapted to many STEM disciplines and broaden
the impact of this approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs of this project will
work to increase PEER graduate student recruitment efforts through connection
with multiple conferences and networks that promote student diversity. The
design of the graduate education model draws on theories of human motivation and
personality (self-determination theory and sources of self-efficacy) to target
psychological needs that, when satisfied, foster well-being and success in
graduate school: autonomy, competence, and relatedness. By providing an early
immersive field experience for a cohort of students the summer before they begin
graduate school, our program will work to remove the barriers that fieldwork
poses to PEER students interested in ecology while providing critical early-
training and cohort building to increase retention and studentsâ€™ success. The
project will take advantage of the well-established Niwot Ridge Long-Term
Ecological Research (NWT LTER) program and the Mountain Research Station at CU
Boulder. Evaluation of the program will focus on understanding how programmatic
components support students in developing competence in the field and analytical
methods, autonomy and independence as researchers, and a sense of belonging
within the field. The project aims to publish and disseminate the approaches
used to be accessible for a variety of STEM fields in addition to the
discipline-specific results in ecological science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.