* 2105468
* Convexity and stochastic isoperimetry
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Peter Pivovarov, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 11/30/2024
* USD 193,884.00

This project focuses on two distinct but related fields of mathematics, namely,
Convex Geometry and Probability. Mathematical relationships known as
isoperimetric inequalities govern fundamental principles in geometry and
analysis; they determine the formation of structures, like soap bubbles,
honeycombs, and crystals, among many others. Recently, fundamental isoperimetric
inequalities, especially for convex shapes, have admitted stronger probabilistic
versions that apply to an object's typical random substructures. This
probabilistic shift coincides with a demand for new tools to quantify regularity
in high-dimensional random objects. This, in turn, is reshaping connections
between isoperimetric inequalities and motivating new principles that can be
applied outside of convex geometric analysis. This research aims to re-examine
fundamental relationships between convexity and isoperimetry from a stochastic,
that is random, viewpoint. Developments in Euclidean space provide a foundation
to see how far such principles extend - from sets to functions, beyond Euclidean
spaces, and to more abstract mathematical entities, such as functionals of
matrices and related more general notions of convexity. Progress in these
directions will have direct applications in high-dimensional probability,
including problems on the behavior of products of large random matrices. The
project includes topics tailored to undergraduate, graduate, as well as
postdoctoral research. The Principal Investigator will continue to mentor these
early career researchers. He will also develop a special graduate course and an
expository monograph on stochastic isoperimetry and its applications. The
results of the research will be disseminated through talks given at national and
international research meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convexity and randomness
provide a natural bridge between geometric notions and probabilistic behavior,
for example, diameters of random sets translate naturally to largest singular
values of random matrices. In this way, stochastic isoperimetric principles
become distributional inequalities for high-dimensional random objects. The
Principal Investigator will develop a comprehensive theory of stochastic
isoperimetric inequalities for random functions, especially related to centroid
bodies and duality. In large part, stochastic isoperimetry has relied on
Euclidean symmetrization methods in product spaces. Other forms of
symmetrization also lend themselves to the stochastic approach. Even for the
sphere, core isoperimetric principles remain at the stage of conjectures.
Starting with a stochastic point of view will provide a basis to develop
geometric, analytic and probabilistic aspects simultaneously. Moreover,
important functionals of random matrices follow the same set of principles. This
motivates isoperimetry for geometric functionals of random matrices, especially
non-spectral quantities and operators acting in spaces equipped with non-
Euclidean norms. The appeal of new links between geometric analysis, probability
and random matrix theory is a major driving force behind this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.