* 2105892
* RUI:Test and Measurement Strategies for the Development of Biological Nanovalves
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Daniel Burden, Wheaton College
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2024
* USD 352,070.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and co-funding from the Interfacial Engineering Program in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, Dr.
Daniel Burden, Dr. Lisa Keranen-Burden, and their group in the Chemistry
Department at Wheaton College are developing a new set of laser-based tools that
combine ultrasensitive microscopy with electrical measurements and protein
engineering to monitor the movement of charged species through nanopores wherein
protein toxins are used as nanovalves. Their studies seek answers to questions
such as what molecular sizes, shapes, and charge states are allowed to flow
through the nanoscale valve interior, and what chemical modifications to the
nanovalve are necessary to make it switchable on demand from the fully-on state
to the fully-off state. The insights gained will likely be useful for a broad
range of applications, including selective access to the interior of cells to
fight infections, nanoscale separations, and chemical sensors. The research team
is also working to enhance the size and diversity of the pool of qualified
candidates for advanced STEM degrees by investing in undergraduate research.
Elements of the research are integrated into the undergraduate curriculum,
summer research opportunities, and public outreach activities in the surrounding
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurement methods in ion-channel
electrophysiology have traditionally been used to monitor the movement of
charged species through nanopores. However, many translation events are
electrically silent and cannot be detected. Furthermore, an understanding of the
sizes, shapes, charge states, and flow rates of species that can be transported
(or blocked), as well as their relationship to nanovalve gating mechanisms, is
critically important for developing future applications within the field. The
Burden group is investigating whether the alpha-HL toxin protein can be
chemically modified to reversibly halt or permit molecular flow on demand. They
also hypothesize that the size and rate of transported molecules will shift
markedly upon triggered valve closure. They are developing measurement tools
based on wide-field fluorescence microscopy, single-molecule confocal
microscopy, and ion-channel electrophysiology to test a range of nanovalve
constructs, with the ultimate aim of monitoring molecular transport across lipid
membranes in a chip-based bilayer apparatus in real time. The PIs are working
with multiple undergraduate students, reaching out particularly to first-
generation college-bound African-American or Latino students from the Chicago
area. The PIs are also actively working with outreach publishers to improve
communicating research outcomes to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.