* 2105961
* RUI: New Ultrastable Crystalline Porous Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Xianhui Bu, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 392,017.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-organic frameworks are
molecular-scale sieves composed of metal centers coordinated to organic ligands,
which results in three-dimensional structures with uniform pore size. They can
enable or improve large-scale energy, health, and defense applications such as
gas storage and separation, water and other chemical decontamination, direct
water harvesting and carbon dioxide capture from air, and nuclear waste
treatment. However, currently few metal-organic framework materials have a
suitable combination of porosity and chemical stability to meet the demands of
these applications. Developing chemically stable and pore-size-tunable metal-
organic frameworks is among the most important scientific challenges and is the
objective of this project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research. The project aims to
impart high chemical stability by simultaneously creating highly connected
structural building blocks and rigid frameworks that are not easily broken down
by common molecules and molecular fragments, such as water and hydroxide ions.
The pore geometry of these new materials can be tuned using different
combinations structural building blocks and organic ligands. By developing these
new synthesis pathways new materials with the highest chemical stability among
metal-organic framework materials are created that can be used under harsh
chemical conditions commonly encountered in real-world applications. In
addition, this project enables a variety of research activities and provides
rich training opportunities for a diverse population of undergraduate and
graduate students at California State University – Long
Beach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, Prof. Xianhui
Bu and his research group develop synthetic pathways to create a family of new
ultrastable and ultratunable metal-organic framework materials. The structural
platform has an extraordinary flexibility in metal-ligand bond type (e.g.,
metal-carboxylate, metal-azolate, metal-pyridyl), which allows a high level of
control over porosity, functionality, and stability within the same isoreticular
series of materials. To expand the boundaries in acid-base stability of metal-
organic frameworks, the researchers synthesize chromium-trimer-based frameworks
with the high-connected (higher than 6) trimer building block. Only low-
connected chromium metal-organic frameworks (6 or less) were known prior to this
project, and the creation of high-connected framework materials in this project
with mixed Cr-O and Cr-N crosslinks further increases the kinetic inertness of
trivalent metal ions and also shields the metal nodes from chemical attacks by
coordinating species. The researchers also systematically explore key
experimental parameters such as reaction temperature, solvent type, and
modulators, all of which play a far greater role for nonlabile metal ions in
this project, compared to labile ions in most metal-organic frameworks. The
integrated compositional and structural features to be achieved in this project
increase acid-base stability simultaneously in both low- and high-pH directions.
The exceptional chemical stability of these materials can enable a broad range
of applications, especially those that operate under harsh chemical conditions
such as nuclear waste treatment. In addition, this project enables a variety of
research activities and provides rich training opportunities for a diverse
population of undergraduate and graduate students at California State University
– Long Beach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.