* 2105371
* Collaborative Research: Contribution of mafic magmatism to upper crustal batholiths: A case study of the Sierra Nevada batholith
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Claire Bucholz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 296,589.00

The dense crust beneath Earth’s oceans is regularly driven beneath the
continents in a tectonic process called subduction, which results in the
formation of magmas. Such magmas ascend and create long chains of volcanoes like
the Cascades of the northwest United States or the Andes in South America. Over
time, magmatism at subduction zones has helped build Earth’s continents. These
magmatic processes concentrate silica to create thick and buoyant continents
that stand higher than surrounding oceans and oceanic crust, which is a unique
feature of our planet. This continental crust is an important source for
resources essential to human existence, but the processes that concentrate
silica in magmas are not fully understood. This research will study magmatic
processes in the Sierra Nevada mountain range of California, which is the
ancient “plumbing system” from the insides of subduction zone volcanoes from
hundreds of millions of years ago, now exposed at earth’s surface. This work
will study the chemistry of mafic (more magnesium and iron-rich, lower silica)
rocks that represent an important compositional ingredient to create the high-
silica rocks that form the bulk of the continents. Extensive existing work on
the high-silica rocks at this location will provide context for new measurements
of the mafic end-member composition to understand the magmatic processes that
build continents. The research will support collaboration between Caltech and
Pomona College, including the mentoring of a female graduate student (Caltech)
and multiple undergraduate/post-baccalaureate students (Pomona), as well as
early career support for a female faculty member (Caltech). In addition, Earth
Science classroom lessons and field trips for middle and high school students
from the Big Pine Unified School District (BPUSD) in Owens Valley, located
within study area will be developed and conducted. BPUSD serves a student
population that is ~50% Native American and &gt;40% Latinx, two under-
represented groups in geosciences. The ultimate goal is to increase
participation and interest of under-represented students in geosciences through
place-based and culturally appropriate lessons that successfully aligned
Indigenous ways of knowing and scientific practices with Western science
models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of high-silica arc batholiths is an
enduring petrologic problem. During flux-melting of the mantle wedge at
subduction zones primitive basalts are produced. Upon ascent into the crust,
further differentiation of these basalts is required to form more silicic
derivative melts. Although field and experimental studies highlight the
importance of lower crustal (&gt;0.7 GPa) fractional crystallization of
primitive basalts in generating high-silica melts, this process in detail cannot
produce the composition of arc batholiths. In particular, deep crustal
fractional crystallization generates peraluminous intermediate and silicic
melts, compositions that are not widely observed in arc batholiths. To reconcile
these observations, this research will test the following hypothesis: Deep
crustal differentiation produces high-Al, low-Mg basalts, as well as, evolved
mildly peraluminous granitic melts. These melts represent endmembers that can
mix to form the compositional diversity of granitoids observed in arc batholith.
Testing this mixing-model hypothesis has been limited due to the relative lack
of studies focusing on the mafic endmember. Although volumetrically minor and
relatively less-studied compared to high-silica granodiorites to granites that
dominate batholiths, mafic plutons (non-primitive gabbros and diorites) are
widely present in the upper crust of accreted arc sections. Through a
collaboration between Caltech and Pomona College this research will investigate
the bulk-rock and mineral major/trace element chemistry, geochronology, and
oxygen &amp; strontium isotopic compositions mafic plutonic bodies across a
transect from a classic continental arc locality, the Sierra Nevada batholith.
This data will be placed in the context of both existing and new granitoid data,
as well as, quantitative geochemical and rheologic models to understand whether
these mafic plutonic bodies represent suitable mixing endmembers in the
production of batholithic granitoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.