* 2105828
* MSA: Evaluating the continuity of NEON and AmeriFlux data streams recorded at collocated sites from tundra to subtropics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Richardson, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,991.00

Understanding the impact of changes in climate, land use, and species
distribution on our natural world is a grand challenge for Macrosystems Biology.
Long-term observations are needed to detect ecological changes, and to
confidently make predictions about the future. Construction of the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), a 30-year project, was completed in 2019.
Most data sets are currently less than five years in length. This project will
evaluate the continuity between new measurements conducted at recently-
instrumented NEON sites across the United States, and longer-term measurements
already conducted at pre-existing, nearby, AmeriFlux sites. The analysis
leverages data from 11 sites across 8 NEON domains from Alaska to Florida. A key
emphasis is on data characterizing the rhythmic ‘breathing’ of these ecosystems
(i.e. how they exchange carbon dioxide and water vapor with the atmosphere) over
days, seasons, and years. The analysis serves as an independent and fundamental
cross-check of NEON data quality, thereby increasing the usefulness and value of
NEON data to user communities. Broader impacts will accrue through outreach
activities emphasizing formal and informal science education, and offering
hands-on training for the next generation of scientific leaders. The project
leverages Northern Arizona University’s geographic location to provide learning
opportunities for Native American communities traditionally underrepresented in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistency and continuity in long-term
ecological data sets are essential so that the fingerprints of global change can
be reliably detected. While NEON will run for 30 y, the environmental challenges
posed by global change are pressing enough that neither scientists nor society
can wait that long. Better understanding of the trajectory of ecosystem change
will be attainable sooner if new data sets from NEON can be integrated with pre-
existing long-term data sets from other observation networks. This project asks
“can existing AmeriFlux data be used to extend, back in time, NEON datasets that
did not begin until 2017?” The study will determine whether agreement in these
overlapping data sets is dependent on both the temporal scale being considered
and the spatial scales on which site heterogeneity occurs. The project adopts a
multi-scale approach that incorporates frequency-domain and geospatial analyses
across sites spanning a broad climatic gradient. For each site, a “continuity
scorecard” will provide diagnostic information needed to ensure valid inferences
can be derived from integrated time series. Demonstration of robust continuity
will enable scientists to leverage the power of longer observational records.
Outreach efforts will include workshops, guest lectures, classroom visits, and
community demonstrations highlighting the role of “big data” in understanding
the ecological impacts, at regional to continental scale, of global change. Two
community college students from underrepresented minority groups will be
recruited as research assistants on this project, providing valuable training as
they transition to Bachelor of Science programs at Northern Arizona
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.