* 2106828
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Revitalizing EDA from a Machine Learning Perspective
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Yiran Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 410,000.00

Despite its spectacular success in the past, design automation of electronic
circuits and systems remains limited in effectiveness and efficiency. This is
often due to unnecessarily excessive iterations of point software tools, where
early predictions on downstream design steps are overly pessimistic and
interoperations among different tools largely require manual handling. As such,
existing chip-design flows are not considered fully automated, and there still
exists a strong need for jointly exploring the considerable room between the
different steps in these flows. Moreover, existing design-verification
approaches usually involve unwanted redundancy and substantial manual effort,
contributing greatly to a well-known bottleneck of time-to-market. The recent
progress in machine-learning technology offers a great opportunity to revitalize
current Electronic Design Automation (EDA) flows from an alternative
perspective, i.e., extracting design and verification knowledge from existing
design data, and reusing it on new designs. The goal of this research is to
develop such knowledge extraction and reuse techniques with the aid of the
state-of-the-art machine learning technology. The outcome of this research is to
help mitigate the chip-design productivity crisis and cater to the increasing
demand for hardware-accelerated computing. This research is also training
students, including women and under-represented minorities, with
interdisciplinary skills and preparing tomorrowâ€™s high-tech workforce in the
U.S. for solving challenges in the electronic industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves systematic research on machine learning in the context of
electronic design automation with five integrated components: 1) development of
learning-based fast and high fidelity prediction techniques for knowledge
extraction in the structural and behavioral domains of circuit designs; 2) a
study on how to seamlessly integrate the design predictions with circuit
optimizations; 3) applying machine-learning prediction to accelerating
functional-verification coverage and facilitating automated debugging; 4)
developing autonomous learning on the interplay amongst tools and thereby
achieving automated synthesis space exploration; 5) automated machine-learning
architecture search and feature refinement in EDA
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.