* 2106411
* Catalyst Project: STEM-Business Focused Sustainable Financial Technology – Clean Technology (Sustainable FinTech-CleanTech) at the University of the District of Columbia
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amit Arora, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,997.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing the research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at the
University of the District of Columbia (UDC) includes support for the
development of a Financial Technology-Clean Technology certificate. The proposed
work has the potential to establish partnerships with other higher education
institutions and the local K12 system. It is expected that participating
students will contribute to increasing diversity in the FinTech-Cleantech
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the STEM-Business
Focused Sustainable Financial Technology – Clean Technology (Sustainable
FinTech-CleanTech) project at the UDC is to introduce and provide Business and
Engineering undergraduate students at UDC with an innovative and
interdisciplinary “Sustainable FinTech-CleanTech” certificate program available
to both Business as well as Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) majors. Specific objectives of the project are: (1) to develop an
innovative and interdisciplinary Sustainable FinTech-CleanTech certificate
program open to business and STEM undergraduates; (2) to enrich and enhance
undergraduate student and faculty research capacity in FinTech-CleanTech
curriculum; and (3) to engage UDC students in Sustainable FinTech-CleanTech
certificate program through outreach to local high schools and community
colleges. The project will utilize a mixed-method approach that emphasizes
student surveys, observations, focus groups, and interview protocols for
assessing the desired project outcomes. The potential contribution and impact of
the project include the development of a cutting-edge FinTech-CleanTech
certificate program for Engineering and Business undergraduates at UDC, an HBCU,
leading to the participation of underrepresented groups in this discipline;
enhancement of education and research in diverse focus areas by developing
instructional materials for enterprise applications (e.g., enterprise resource
planning software by SAP through SAP University Alliances Program) that can be
modeled at other institutions; research collaborations among students and
faculty from underrepresented groups; leveraging and building UDC’s partnerships
with academia, industry, and government; and dissemination of project results to
the broader community by presenting and publishing project outcomes in peer-
reviewed conferences and scholarly journals. The institution-wide FinTech-
CleanTech certificate program has the potential of benefitting engineering and
business students and providing a validated replicable model for other similar
institutions in the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.