* 2106963
* HCC: Medium: A Multi-disciplinary Computational Model of Worker, Task, and Context for Real-time Adaptive Procedural Systems (R-TAPS)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* S. Camille Peres, The Texas A&M University System HSC
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 800,000.00

This project will advance fundamental knowledge of how to consider
psychological, contextual, and technical issues in designing tools to help
workers in safety-critical systems follow work procedures and reduce human
errors. One of the most frequent causes of incidents in high-risk facilities is
when workers deviate from procedures. Even well-designed procedures and tools
for following them are not immune, because of a number of factors including
workers’ experience with the task, how often they perform it, and how well the
procedure design fits their cognitive style. Together, these findings indicate
that rather than single, fixed procedure formats, better safety is likely to
come when procedures adapt to the person and the context they are used by. To do
this, the project team will bring together expertise from psychology, human
factors, and engineering to develop models of the important factors that affect
people’s performance around procedures, and to design procedures based on sets
of behavioral “scripts” that can be activated in appropriate situations and
tuned to particular workers. The work will be done in the context of the oil and
gas industry, a domain that has both high societal value and high safety risks,
with the goal of improving worker safety in real deployments in this domain
along with general methods that can be applied to studying and designing safety
procedures in other safety-critical domains. The team will also provide career
development opportunities for several students, with a focus on increasing
participation of underrepresented groups in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To do
this work, the project team will leverage cognitive, linguistic, and systems
methods to identify worker, task, and context attributes relevant to procedure
performance. This project's specific research objective is to map these factors
onto a computationally tractable framework, the Multi-disciplinary Interactive
Behavior Triad, that will form the basis of a script-based Real-Time Adaptive
Procedure System (R-TAPS) that uses the model and data collected from work
context, matching a worker’s current context to known factors and design
features and automatically generating personalized procedural guides. Data for
both building and evaluating the models and the R-TAPS system will be collected
from workers recruited at Shell's Robert Training Facility (RTF) with a high-
fidelity simulation of offshore operations to test and evaluate the R-TAPS tool.
More generally, the research contributes to human-machine interaction by
creating a framework that allows for methods from multiple disciplines
associated with human behavior to be integrated and applied to an AI
methodology, where all the relevant constructs can be applied and translated to
the design of effective technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.