* 2106140
* I-Corps: Low-cost, handheld, manual cataract surgery device
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Joshua De Souza, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in its
potential to address the leading cause of avoidable blindness. A total of 253
million people suffer from blindness or visual impairment, and 89% live in low-
and middle-income countries (LMICs). Cataract surgery has been shown to improve
physical and mental health, income, productivity, and quality of life, but it
remains the leading cause of blindness globally. The limitations of
phacoemulsification have prevented broad implementation across emerging markets,
causing disadvantaged patients and those with mature cataracts to receive manual
small incision cataract surgery (MSICS). MSICS involves removal of the whole,
intact cataract through a large incision. This 6-7 mm incision leads to
increased recovery time and astigmatism. Issues with affordability and
acceptability of treatment delays care-seeking behavior, causing development of
mature cataracts, and sometimes leading to blindness and significant functional
limitations. By enabling non-ultrasonic fragmentation of even mature cataracts
through a 3 mm incision in a time- and cost-efficient manner, the proposed
technology has the potential to improve the acceptability and accessibility of
cataract surgery in LMICs, increase the surgical volume and capacity of eye care
systems, and provide improved visual and financial outcomes for the 21 million
patients receiving cataract surgery annually in LMICs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project represents a novel approach to address vision loss and blindness
due to cataracts. Globally, 12.6 million people are blind and 52.6 million have
moderate-to-severe visual impairment due to cataracts. Cataract surgery is a
simple, sight-restoring procedure where the clouded lens of the eye is removed
and replaced with a synthetic lens. Cataract-related visual impairment is
concentrated in low-and middle-income countries (LMICs), and is expected to grow
dramatically with the aging population. The current phacoemulsification
procedure involving ultrasonic cataract emulsification through a 3 mm incision
is not ideal for emerging markets due to the length, cost, significant capital
expense, recurring costs, and maintenance. Moreover, phacoemulsification is not
optimal for treating ultra-hard, late-stage cataracts found in LMICs which
require increased ultrasound power. The proposed technology consists of a low-
cost, handheld, manual cataract surgery device which addresses the limitations
of phacoemulsification and has the potential to achieve comparable or improved
safety and efficacy. The device is deployed through a 3 mm incision and can
capture and safely fragment all cataract sizes and hardnesses. It eliminates the
need for capital equipment, maintenance, and electricity. Importantly, the
device fits into the existing training and surgical workflow in emerging
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.