* 2106799
* Measuring Electronic Coherence at the Single-Molecule Level with Nonlinear Coherent Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Elad Harel, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 476,186.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Elad Harel and his research group at Michigan State
University are developing new methods to measure the quantum mechanical behavior
of single molecules. In quantum mechanics, the behavior of a molecule often
depends on a delicate relationship between the different states of the system.
This relationship, called coherence, is easily disrupted through interactions
with the surrounding environment, and often requires experimentalists to make
difficult measurements at low temperatures or in highly isolated environments in
order to probe the quantum mechanical properties of a complex system. However,
it is becoming increasingly clear that even under ambient conditions quantum
mechanics plays an important role in the behavior of molecular systems,
including photosynthetic proteins that convert sunlight into chemical energy.
While coherence has been measured for collections of molecules, knowing the
behavior of single molecules is important for understanding how molecular
structure affects the function of complex systems. Therefore, Professor Harel’s
team is developing tools to measure coherence at the single-molecule level by
employing extremely sensitive detection methods. The research project also
provides advanced technical training for students, as well as outreach
activities targeting a wide audience of young people from a range of economic
and social backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of nonlinear
spectroscopy methods at the single-molecule level holds the promise of revealing
important information that is not currently available from ensemble methods. In
this project, Dr. Harel and his group are developing new methods to enable
single-molecule nonlinear spectroscopy measurements at room temperature. The
approach uses two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy to probe electronic
coherences and electronic-vibrational coupling at the single-molecule level.
These measurements reveal important structure-function-dynamics relationships in
complex systems, including pigment-protein complexes and quantum-confined
nanocrystals under ambient conditions. Understanding the true electronic
coherence time and its physical origin free of inhomogeneous broadening are
critically important for comparing experimental measurements with theoretical
predictions, and for developing a deeper fundamental understanding of molecular
interactions. The new approach being developed by the research team has the
potential to impact understanding of molecular mechanisms that govern a wide
range of complex chemical systems. In addition to enabling important new
measurements of molecular systems, the research goals of the project are closely
integrated with student training at the graduate and undergraduate levels,
including a program in which graduate students develop five-week summer tutorial
courses based on their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.