* 2106071
* MRA: Continental scale controls on instream and catchment contributions to greenhouse gas fluxes from rivers
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Emily Bernhardt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 07/31/2026
* USD 699,498.00

The primary goal of this project is to derive a robust and defensible estimate
of the greenhouse gases emitted to the atmosphere from the rivers of the United
States and to build predictions of how these gas emissions are likely to change
in coming decades. The greenhouse gases emitted from rivers are both delivered
from their surrounding watersheds and produced by river organisms. River and
watershed characteristics such as river structure, groundwater exchange, algal
production, respiration, temperature, and contributing land types can affect the
rates at which rivers produce and release carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases. However, scaling these known factors to continuous, widespread
predictions of river greenhouse gas dynamics remains difficult because of
limited sampling times and locations across this expansive suite of variables.
This data limitation has now been overcome for river monitoring sites included
in the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). Using data collected from
26 NEON river sites across the United States, researchers will build models of
continuous gas emissions. We will take advantage of the wide variation in
watershed and channel characteristics across sites to build statistical models
that allow us to estimate riverine greenhouse gas fluxes across the entire
continent, and to identify those sites where gas emissions are most likely to
respond strongly to rising temperatures or altered hydrology. This project will
also train early-career scientists, including underrepresented groups, in field
ecology and the processing and interpretation of large data sets to make better
predictions of global change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to answer
three questions: (1) How do greenhouse gas (GHG) fluxes vary across streams and
rivers of the continental U.S.? (2) What channel and catchment properties are
associated with the highest riverine releases of carbon dioxide, methane, and
nitrous oxide from rivers? and (3) what channel characteristics are associated
with the highest instream contribution (e.g., primary production and
respiration) to riverine GHG emissions? Using the diverse portfolio of
hydrologic, biogeochemical, and geomorphic data collected by the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) at its 26 wadeable stream locations, we
will leverage level 0 data (including discrete estimates of GHG concentrations
and solute chemistry in the channel and in groundwater along with continuous
measures of hydrology, pH, conductivity, and dissolved oxygen from the channel)
to build robust estimates of annual GHG emissions from all 26 sites. We will
link these GHG fluxes with concurrent estimates of stream metabolism, rates of
groundwater inflow, and groundwater-surface water GHG exchange, and use
reaeration models to discriminate between instream and catchment derived GHG
contributions to riverine GHG fluxes. We will refine and test our data-derived
models with intensive field work at a subset of NEON sites and at a field site
in North Carolina where we conduct detailed empirical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.