* 2106370
* Collaborative Research: Interactions and Feedbacks between Storms and Bioaerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Elizabeth Stone, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 363,731.00

This project will examine the exchange of biological material between the
Earth’s surface and atmosphere, and how this material may impact clouds and
precipitation. Bioaerosols are airborne biological particles, such as pollen,
fungal spores, and soil bacteria. Winds and thunderstorm updrafts loft
biological material from the surface where they may serve as nuclei for the
development of cloud droplets and ice crystals. The materials are then deposited
back to the surface through precipitation, downdrafts, or gravitational
settling. Despite this big picture view, the magnitude of exchange and the
impact on cloud processes are still poorly understood. The research team will
perform two field experiments using drones, balloons, instrumented towers, and
surface instrumentation, combined with numerical modeling, to address a set of
research questions related to bioaerosols. The result will be an improvement in
weather and climate models and generation of new insight into the transport of
allergens for human health purposes. A large set of students and early career
researchers will be involved in the project, ensuring the training of the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will study the
fluxes of bioaerosols between the Earth’s surface and atmosphere and feedbacks
between bioaerosols and storm microphysics, dynamics, and precipitation. The
project objective is to quantitatively study the fluxes, concentrations, and
identities of bioaerosols, specifically targeting intact pollen, sub-pollen
particles, fungal spores and bacteria during convective storm updrafts, storm-
generated cold pools, and quiescent conditions. Two field campaigns are planned,
with flux tower measurements at National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON)
sites, ground lab instrumentation, and drone-based sampling. Measurements will
include fluorescent and total particle distributions, fluxes, particle
characterization, chemical analysis and DNA sequencing, among others. Numerical
modeling will make use of the Regional Atmospheric Modeling System (RAMS).
Projected outcomes from the research are: 1) a comprehensive data set of aerosol
data, including size distribution, flux and CCN/INP data for both total aerosol
and bioaerosol subcategories for identified species, 2) determination of the
vertical distribution of bacteria, fungi (spores and mycelia), and pollen in the
atmosphere under varying meteorological conditions, and 3) development and
implementation of a surface bioaerosol lofting parameterization in a widely-used
open-source research model, development of a bioaerosol INP parameterization
that can be readily implemented into wide range of numerical models, and an
assessment of feedbacks between bioaerosols and storms and their implications
for climate feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.