* 2106718
* IRES Track 1: Plant Science for Global Food Security: Undergraduate Research Experiences at the International Rice Research Institute (Los Baños, Philippines)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Diane Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,945.00

Producing sufficient food for a burgeoning world population while coping with
increased climatic variability and environmental degradation is a challenge for
humankind. Our global food supply chains are inter-connected, whereby problems
that arise in one region have repercussions in others. The next generation of
U.S. scientists and thought leaders must reach beyond national borders to find
and implement effective solutions to meet the challenge of feeding the world. To
help address this need, Plant Science for Global Food Security (PSGFS)
initiative prepares students for globally-oriented engagements in their future
careers. PSGFS is an IRES research and training program that aims to strengthen
the knowledge and abilities of students to conduct plant science research with
international partners that contributes to resolving global hunger. The program
recruits undergraduates from Purdue University and five partner universities, of
which four are minority-serving institutions. Over three years, 24 undergraduate
STEM students (8 per cohort) with academic interest in the plant sciences and
international engagement spend six weeks conducting research over the summer at
the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) based in Los Baños,
Philippines. During their research experience, students lead projects to
evaluate a shared set of publicly-available genetic materials, master lab- and
field-based techniques, and develop scientific communication skills under the
mentorship of top scientists. As IRRI is home to hundreds of long-term and
short-term researchers from all around the world, PSGFS participants have
exciting opportunities to interact with scholars of diverse cultural and
training backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-based agriculture of the 21st
century faces a multitude of challenges. Accordingly, crop breeders are faced
with developing new varieties within these dynamic constraints. While the gene
pools of wild and weedy relatives of the world’s major crop species are known to
harbor beneficial allelic variation, they are rarely tapped due to the weedy
characteristics that accompany crosses using wild parents. In PSGFS, students
evaluate a newly released genetic resource in rice: three populations of
Chromosome Segment Substitution Lines developed from crosses between three wild
relatives and IR64, a historically important cultivar. These lines have already
eliminated most of the undesirable wild traits through many generations of
backcrosses with IR64 and await systematic plant phenotyping for their potential
benefits. Working in a team setting, students are cross-trained in research
techniques of various STEM disciplines, such as plant genetics, pathology,
physiology and entomology. Together, the 24 students over three years will
assemble the first comprehensive and publicly-available dataset on these
valuable new genetic resources. Through participation in this program, students
(1) contribute towards scientific research for the genetic improvement of rice
through hands-on technical training in a structured research experience; (2)
understand the role plant science plays in the context of global food security
through interactions with international researchers; and (3) establish
relationships with scientists and other researchers at IRRI that extend into
participation and strengthening of plant science research networks. Students
will gain an appreciation of how international research is conducted, how
international research networks function and the kinds of global opportunities
they have before them. They will share their research experiences in their
respective university communities and instill their enthusiasm to a broad range
of people, thereby raising the curiosity of their peers and others in their
social and academic networks. PSGFS provides benefits to society by helping to
position the next generation of U.S. scientists as leaders in the global
research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
International Research Experiences for Students program (IRES) and the Division
of Biological Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.