* 2106797
* CNS Core: Medium: Slack-Aware Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Fahad Dogar, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Today's Internet is increasingly moving towards communication where data may not
be needed immediately: set-top-boxes or smart-phone applications pre-fetching
content, Internet of Things (IoT) devices uploading their data to the cloud, or
data centers doing geo-distributed replication. This research posits that such
communication may afford to have ``slack'' built into it, i.e., packets may not
be immediately required by the other endpoint and can tolerate additional delay
of few seconds to even minutes and hours. Slack allows the network to do
``slack-aware networking‚Äù -- the network can leverage slack information to
reduce the cost and energy requirements of the network, and to improve
performance, availability and cost for end-users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate the challenges and opportunities present in making
slack a first class concept of the future Internet. It will explore the design
of SAIN, a slack-aware Internet with explicit support for slack at the
application level as well as inside the network. SAIN will allow applications to
express their slack requirements to the network while the network will use
slack-aware optimizations at various levels of the system (transport, routing,
forwarding), providing benefits to the network and service providers, as well as
end-users. The potential benefits of SAIN will be evaluated on a wide range of
applications, including Video-on-Demand, IoT, and Geo-Distributed Replication.
Overall, this research will make key contributions in networking and systems
research as well as at the intersection of networking and human-computer-
interaction (HCI). Specifically, through user studies and application analysis,
the proposed research will provide insights about usage of popular applications
and the amount of slack they can tolerate. It will also introduce new
functionality at multiple layers of the network stack, including storage
abstractions to decouple the sender and receiver, slack-aware routing and
forwarding mechanisms, slack-aware end-to-end data services, and a new slack-
aware interface between the application and the network. The proposed research
will be tightly integrated with the courses offered by the PI at Tufts
University, and will engage undergraduate, women and URM students in integrative
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.