* 2106839
* Collaborative Research: The Merian Survey. Characterizing Dark Matter and Feedback in Star Forming Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexie Leauthaud, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 06/30/2024
* USD 496,989.00

While most of the mass in the universe is unseen, the smallest galaxies in the
universe (the so-called dwarf galaxies) pose significant challenges to this
“dark matter” model. In order to further test our best dark matter models, a
large observational survey of dwarf galaxies is needed. This project focuses on
the Meriam survey, which will observe 100,000 dwarf galaxies with known
distances. Furthermore, each of the dwarf galaxies in this survey has
constraints on their dark matter content from other methods. The new data will
provide their stellar structure and colors. These results can all be taken
together to test our ideas of dark matter in the universe. The team will place
priority on recruiting a diverse group of students who will carry out the data
mining that will be required in the era of the Vera Rubin Observatory.
Established programs at both Princeton and UC Santa Cruz recruit historically
underserved students for summer research and then continuing cohort support.
These students will be trained in "big-data'' and modern science analysis with
Merian. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive studies of dwarf galaxies have revealed
a considerable scatter in many of their fundamental properties. In particular,
galaxies with stellar mass of 108 - 109 Msun present a diversity of star
formation rates and rotation-curve shapes which are in tension with theoretical
models. Reliably characterizing the dark matter distribution and baryonic
processes in these galaxies, such as feedback, is key to in order to establish a
complete picture of dark matter on small scales. The Merian survey will obtain a
volume-limited census of dwarf galaxies in this mass range at z=0.058-0.1. Using
two custom made filters, Merian will provide redshifts to a complete sample of
100,000 star forming dwarf galaxies (two orders of magnitude larger than
SDSS+GAMA) over an area of 870 deg2. Combined with deep+high spatial resolution
imaging from the Hyper-Suprime Camera, this program will result in high S/N weak
lensing profile measurements for dwarf galaxies, probing their dark matter halos
out to their virial radii. Also, Hyper-Suprime Camera imaging will be used to
measure dwarf sizes and shapes. The next generation of scientists must be
trained to deal with the deluge of Vera Rubin Observatory data coming in the
next decade. Programs at both Princeton and UC Santa Cruz recruit historically
underserved students for summer research and then continuing cohort
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.