* 2106687
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Markov Chain Algorithms for Problems from  Computer Science, Statistical Physics and Self-Organizing Particle Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Dana Randall, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 700,000.00

Self-organization can be viewed as a phenomenon whereby unanticipated global
configurations and patterns of a collective emerge from fully distributed and
simplistic rules performed by each individual, without any global coordination
or external intervention. Self-organization and emergent behavior arise
naturally across many fields: distributed systems and swarm robotics in computer
science, interacting particle systems in physics, population dynamics and flock
coordination in biology, autonomous systems in robotics and control theory, and
smart materials, to name a few. Recently, the synergy between discrete
probability, algorithms and statistical physics has provided a new approach for
designing self-organizing particle systems by harnessing collective, emergent
behavior of physical systems. The laws of physics play an increasingly important
role in collective behavior at the nano- and micro-scales, especially since
individual agents are far less capable than their macroscopic counterparts. Yet,
while the principles of statistical physics have motivated many experimental
systems, little has been done to make the corresponding underlying distributed
algorithms rigorous. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how to
program collections of agents to perform tasks by modeling the dynamics as self-
organizing particle systems performing steps of Markov chains through local
interactions that can be rigorously analyzed. The limiting distributions of
these chains have distinct equilibrium characteristics that can be used to
program collective behavior. The principal investigators take a three-pronged
approach: First, they introduce and study generalizations of common statistical
physics models, such as the Potts, Ising and hard-core models, to better capture
the constraints imposed by micro-scale systems of interacting agents. Next, they
explore methods to better understand the nonequilibrium dynamics of these
systems long before convergence and possibly subject to forces that make the
Markov chains nonreversible. Finally, they explore how collective systems might
be programmed through deliberate placement of obstacles and features in the
environment, rather than programming the agents themselves, as many of these
tiny agents are incapable of any sophisticated (traditional) computation. As an
example of programming the environment, a new version of the Schelling
segregation model is being studied where people move with higher probabilities
if they are unhappy with the local demographics of their neighborhoods, but
these preferences can be somewhat mitigated by the placement of desirable urban
infrastructures that modify individuals' incentive structures and biases. The
project is having impact in promoting and advancing interdisciplinary research
across many fields; education, through advanced graduate courses and broad,
interdisciplinary talks; diversity at the graduate, undergraduate, and faculty
levels; outreach to the general public and for K-12 education; and municipal
planning, through coordination with regional planning faculty and the City of
Atlanta.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.