* 2106153
* On the nature and regulation of the plant-fungal biotrophic interface
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Richard Wilson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2025
* USD 700,000.00

During plant infection, many pathogenic fungi, including the devastating rice
and wheat blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae, can grow in intimate contact with
living host cells for extended periods of time. This parasitic (biotrophic)
growth stage involves the accretion of host plant membranes around fungal
invasive hyphae, forming interfacial zones across which effectors are deployed
and nutrients are acquired. Despite the intrinsic nature of the biotrophic
interface and associated compartments to host infection, the biological
underpinnings of interfacial membrane maintenance and construction are largely
unknown. This severely undermines efforts to understand the host-pathogen
interaction and likely obscures novel sources of host resistance and the
identification of new targets for limiting a broad range of plant diseases as
well as improving crop health. This project seeks to address these knowledge
gaps by characterizing mutant strains of M. oryzae that fail to properly
maintain biotrophic interfacial function or membrane integrity during growth in
host plant cells. This is expected to uncover novel cellular, biochemical, and
genetic mechanisms governing rice infection. Results may shed light on
fundamental concepts of plant host-microbe interactions that could be leveraged
to understand how beneficial plant-fungal interactions might be promoted while
those detrimental to crop health are diminished. We also expect that this work
will provide an invigorating environment for student learning that will inspire
underrepresented students to consider a STEM career and become the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on our recent discoveries,
our central hypothesis is that, despite comprising both plant and fungal
membranes, biotrophic interfaces are fungal constructs with properties and
dynamics dictated by the metabolic demands of the invading fungus. Here, we seek
to test our hypothesis by leveraging novel mutant strains to provide important
new information on biotrophic interfacial regulation, dynamics, and function. By
focusing on fungal processes required for maintaining biotrophic interfacial
integrity, and by examining some important aspects of the function of the
biotrophic interface, the stated objectives will use forward and reverse
genetics, multiomic approaches, and live-cell imaging to understand how fungal
metabolic processes dominate the plant-fungal interaction in living host cells.
This could lead to the development of novel crop protection strategies targeting
molecular pathways that are critical for the biotrophic growth of the fungus but
are not required for the normal function of the host cell, and could shed new
light on both the basic principles of cell growth, and on the nature and
regulation of host-microbe interfaces. The educational objective will inspire
undergraduates to excel in research, will allow graduate students to develop as
mentors and teachers, and will provide all students with the tools to excel in
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.