* 2106690
* HCC: Medium: Proactive Physical Assistance for Collaborative Human-Robot Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Brian Scassellati, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,199,999.00

It is essential that robots working side-by-side with people be able to offer
physical assistance. However, robots do not yet take the initiative to help.
Instead, they typically follow preset plans for collaboration, or respond only
when users explicitly ask for help. While useful in many situations, this
reactive approach is poorly suited for many collaborative applications. This
project focuses on enabling robots to proactively offer physical assistance that
is timely, task-appropriate, and wanted by their human partners. The goal is to
construct robots that can answer three key questions: (1) Does a teammate need
help? (2) Can I (or someone else) help? and (3) Should I help? By enabling these
capabilities, this project will make collaborative human-robot teams function
more fluently and efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop these
capabilities, three research thrusts that are naturally intertwined but that
capture important computational aspects of these tasks, will be advanced. First,
perceiving other agents through a Theory of Mind for robots. The research team
will develop computational models derived from our understanding of how humans
represent the knowledge, beliefs, and desires of others to maintain context-
sensitive models of the mental states of human and robotic teammates. Second,
planning for supportive actions. The team will construct a system that generates
possible supportive actions that the robot could take to help a teammate by
using a trained model of the robot's own capabilities along with a predictive
planning system that determines if these actions have value to the team. Third,
decision making within the dynamics of a group. The robot will monitor and
engage in social activities that support the overall dynamics of its partners
including both conventional conversational interfaces and more subtle social
mechanisms that facilitate collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.