* 2106862
* CNS Core: Medium: A User-centric Adaptation Framework for Edge-Native Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Roberta Klatzky, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,199,999.00

This proposal addresses a new class of applications called "edge-native
applications" that have enormous societal value in domains such as assisting
handicapped users, enforcing privacy in video streams, and enhancing the
productivity of just-in-time manufacturing. Edge-native applications are
simultaneously compute-intensive, bandwidth-hungry, and latency-sensitive. These
attributes pose a fundamental challenge to scalability. The goal of this
proposal is to develop new techniques for efficiently supporting large numbers
of users of such applications, without hurting their quality of experience
(QoE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is organized into four
thrusts. Thrust-1 investigates how on-device processing and adaptive sampling of
sensor data can reduce load on edge infrastructure, while minimally impacting
QoE. This thrust also creates an API between the operating system and
applications for adaptation. Thrust-2 explores how to efficiently and seamlessly
move work from overcommitted edge infrastructure to underutilized sites. It
investigates both an application-transparent approach that is based on virtual-
machine (VM) encapsulation, and an application-optimized approach that seeks to
be frugal in data transmission. Thrust-3 creates tools and mechanisms to study
QoE. Using machine learning on history-based data that is dynamically collected,
it builds models of user-specific and application-specific tradeoffs for mapping
application fidelity to QoE. It also creates tools for QoE debugging of edge-
native applications. Thrust-4 explores how multi-fidelity applications that
dynamically vary QoE can be evaluated without performing user studies. It
develops a new evaluation methodology that is based on the concept of synthetic
users, also known as "droids".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through close partnership
with industry and local government, this research will accelerate the emergence
of transformative edge-native applications. Through integration with education
and curriculum development, this research will provide unique learning
opportunities for students in Computer Science, Electrical and Computer
Engineering, and Human-Computer Interaction at the undergraduate and graduate
levels. Because of the central role of applications in this research, it offers
many research opportunities for a diverse group of individuals, including those
from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software developed in the
course of this research will be released open source via GitHub
(http://github.com). Benchmarks and experimental data will be released on an
institutional website (http://elijah.cs.cmu.edu). All results generated through
this research will be available and actively maintained for at least five years
after the conclusion of the project or after the publication of the data,
whichever is first.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.