* 2106030
* MSA: Integrating multi-scale remote sensing and mechanistic modeling to assess riparian ecosystem dynamics and feedbacks to hydroclimate variability
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Xiaonan Tai, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,600.00

Forested river and stream ecosystems provide critical services of water and
carbon, biological habitats, and recreational activities. These ecosystems are
temporally and spatially dynamic in response to changes in climate, streamflow,
water management, and biological invasions. Currently, our knowledge of how
riparian ecosystems respond to and in turn influence environmental change
remains considerably limited, although such knowledge is critical for effective
conservation and management. This project aims to study the changes in riparian
(i.e., streamside) vegetation over time and evaluate the role of various driving
factors underlying this change. This research will provide a new basis for
understanding how riparian vegetation has changed during recent decades, and for
predicting how it is likely to change in the future. Further, this project will
evaluate the contribution of riparian vegetation to large-scale fluxes of water
and carbon. The goal is to use cutting-edge techniques of mapping and modeling
to identify where riparian zones are likely to have greater impacts on ecosystem
function and stability. This information will be useful in developing
restoration priorities and facilitating decisions about intervention and
management under changing climate and altered streamflow conditions. The team,
composed of ecohydrological modeling and remote sensing experts, will publicly
disseminate research tools, datasets, and results to the research community and
general public. In the process, the team will conduct interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate training to prepare diverse, next-generation
scientists to tackle environmental and data science
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
mechanistically link riparian vegetation dynamics to hydroclimate variations in
order to assess the functional importance of riparian ecosystems to macrosystem
fluxes of carbon and water. Specifically, this project will leverage high-
resolution data from NEONâ€™s airborne observational platform surveys, long-term
records of satellite imagery, and deep learning techniques to characterize the
dynamics of riparian vegetation cover over the past several decades. This
information will be combined with process-based modeling to explore mechanisms
underlying changes in riparian vegetation and quantify the relative importance
of different hydroclimate factors. Finally, multiple data and modeling products
will be synthesized to assess the role of riparian vegetation in contributing to
and stabilizing macrosystem fluxes of water and carbon at regional watershed and
global model scales. This work will generate new datasets of riparian vegetation
dynamics across the continental U.S. during the past several decades, providing
a useful baseline for predicting how these systems are likely to change in the
future. Intensive data-model comparisons across NEON domains will enable the
evaluation of multiple hypotheses related to the spatial-temporal dynamics in
riparian ecosystem structure and function, while generating more predictive
macroscale understandings that can be broadly applied to a range of riparian
conditions. The research team will engage undergraduate and high school
researchers from local communities and underrepresented STEM groups in project
activities. The team will also reach public audiences through an annual lecture
series at local museums to increase the awareness of environmental change and
ecosystem sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.