* 2106221
* Transmission and evolution of a persistent pathogen: anthrax infection dynamics comparing two natural systems
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Wendy Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,741,487.00

Anthrax is a globally distributed disease of wildlife, livestock, and humans.
Successful prediction of and response to outbreaks of anthrax is limited by a
lack of understanding of the geographic differences in the ecology of the
pathogen as well as the pattern of disease outbreaks. This project will
investigate the roles of host, pathogen, and environment to understand how the
pathogen - host interaction evolves and contributes to the differences in
anthrax occurrence between two study areas. The two areas, both in southern
Africa, have very different anthrax outbreak dynamics, which are representative
of variation in anthrax systems world-wide. In Etosha National Park, Namibia,
there are smaller outbreaks, affecting grazing zebra, annually in wet seasons.
In contrast, in Kruger National Park, South Africa, larger outbreaks affecting
browsing kudu occur in dry seasons on roughly a decadal scale. The project
builds on detailed records of disease and population dynamics in each park as
well as archived pathogen samples and will involve new data collection and
analyses and mathematical modeling to understand these different dynamics.
Education, training, and scientific and public outreach are essential components
of this research. Postdoctoral researchers and undergraduate and graduate
students from diverse backgrounds will be trained in field, laboratory, and
quantitative techniques emphasizing cutting-edge genomics, and statistical and
dynamic modeling approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The causative agent of
anthrax (the bacterium Bacillus anthracis), is often invoked as a textbook
example for the evolution of high virulence and prolonged environmental
survival. This project will link within-host, between-host, and in-environment
processes, to understand how conflicting selective pressures impact pathogen
diversity, host resistance, disease incidence, and ultimately, how these
processes may drive host-pathogen co-evolution. This collaborative research team
will compare anthrax dynamics in two wildlife systems, integrating long-term
field studies, host and pathogen genomics, microbiology, and statistical and
dynamic modeling. The project addresses three related questions: (1) how does
pathogen diversity affect trade-offs between pathogen transmission and
virulence? (2) how does host diversity affect trade-offs between pathogen
transmission and virulence? and (3) how do landscape-scale patterns of
transmission and host movement affect virulence-transmission trade-offs and
host-pathogen population dynamics? Researchers will link variability in B.
anthracis genomes to phenotype (i.e., pathogen survival in the environment,
virulence to hosts, and transmission across host and geographic range).
Researchers will identify host genes under pathogen-mediated selection in two
primary host species, plains zebra (Equus quagga) and greater kudu (Tragelaphus
strepsiceros). Researchers will build landscape-level models of epidemiology and
population dynamics incorporating host movement, transmission routes, pathogen
virulence, and host resistance. Finally, researchers will build models
predicting anthrax transmission dynamics across ecosystems. In a broader sense,
this research will facilitate the development of predictive tools to better
manage public health and related policies for complex, multi-host zoonotic
diseases such as anthrax.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.