* 2106888
* III: Medium: Dataset Search and Ranking for Data Augmentation and Explanation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Juliana Freire, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,093,195.00

There has been an explosion in the volume of data that is being collected and
cataloged about the environment, society, and populace. Moreover, with the push
towards transparency and open data, scientists, governments, and organizations
are increasingly making these data available on the Web. Combined with advances
in analytics and machine learning, such growing access to data should in theory
allow for progress on many of the world’s most important scientific and societal
questions. However, this opportunity is often missed due to a central technical
barrier: it is currently nearly impossible for domain experts to weed through
the vast amount of publicly-available information to discover datasets that are
needed for their specific application. Data repository platforms, such as CKAN
and Dataverse, and dataset search engines, such as Google Dataset Search, aim to
make it easy to share and find datasets. But these systems only support simple,
keyword-based queries and metadata search, which are insufficient for users to
properly specify their information needs. The investigators envision a new kind
of dataset search engine that unlocks the untapped value in open data by
supporting a richer set of findability queries that cater to the needs of
analytics tasks, and aid in the construction and refinement of machine learning
models. By empowering scientists and practitioners with the ability to discover
relevant data, the project has great potential to stimulate data reuse both
within and across domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop methods
where the user’s existing data forms the basis of a query that retrieves
additional, related data from a large collection of datasets and attributes.
There are many technical hurdles to overcome to support such queries. One
primary challenge is computational efficiency: this project will develop novel
algorithms for rapidly computing and searching for dataset relationships. The
investigators will build on a rich variety of tools, including randomized
sketching and hashing algorithms, and contribute new theoretical analyses to
understand these methods. The algorithms contributed will address both highly-
structured data (e.g., spatio-temporal) as well as generic numerical or
categorical data. A second challenge is usability: the project will develop
novel methods for assessing the significance of discovered data relationships,
for pruning out coincidental or spurious relationships, and for ranking and
presenting datasets to the end-user. Finally, the project will contribute a
formalism to the dataset search problem that supports a wide range of
findability queries based on dataset relationships. Active plans for engagement
in STEM related activities for high-school students are
detailed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.