* 2106987
* Collaborative Research: CNS: Medium: Energy Centric Wireless Sensor Node System for Smart Farms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Dong Ha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 589,750.00

Animal agriculture has intensified over the past several decades, and animals
are managed increasingly as large groups. As animals are often located remotely
on large expanses of pasture, continuous monitoring of animal health and well-
being is labor-intensive and challenging. This project aims to develop a solar
sensor-based smart farm Internet-of-Things network, which is versatile,
reliable, and robust to cyberattacks for smart animal monitoring and to
demonstrate its operation and practicality on real farms. The solar sensor
network will leverage low-power, wide- area networking to enable animal care
personnel to monitor the behavior and health of cattle remotely through the
Internet. The proposed research will provide fundamental advances to building an
energy-efficient, scalable, communication-efficient animal farm system, while
ensuring high monitoring quality under uncertain, dynamic, and hostile smart
farm environments. The success of this project will contribute to a farm
management system by accurately observing, measuring and responding to
variabilities in animal agriculture systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will design an energy-centric solution that actively schedules
communication and computation to minimize energy waste in energy harvesting
contexts. The proposed sensor node will monitor biometrics, acceleration, and
location of animals and is powered by solar energy. The proposal further builds
a physical and medium-access communication layer that is actively aware of the
energy-mismatch between the low-energy sensors and the more capable LoRa (Long
Range) gateways. The adoption of wireless technologies introduces cybersecurity
vulnerabilities, and hence, cybersecurity is another major design objective of
the proposed system by leveraging belief models and deep learning techniques
while maintaining high quality monitoring services. The proposed sensor network
will be tested at Virginia Techâ€™s farm testbeds, which have been designed to
test and showcase such technologies for pastured livestock. The research will
also be beneficial to the fields of semiconductor devices, embedded systems,
Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices, wireless communications including 5G and
beyond, robust machine/deep learning, cybersecurity, statistical signal
detection, and agricultural production. The project will pioneer transformative
research to increase productivity of animal agriculture and allow for real-world
testing of advancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.