* 2106720
* IRES Track I: Engaging students in management oriented research to conserve rainforest primates in Uganda
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jessica Rothman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,439.00

To successfully conserve rainforest primates, the current challenges affecting
their survival in the wild need to be identified and addressed. This type of
research requires interaction among scientists and wildlife managers to solve
conservation problems. Through this IRES funded project, U.S. undergraduates and
first year graduate students from Hunter College of the City University of New
York will conduct integrative management-oriented research that is aimed towards
addressing primate conservation in Uganda. During 8-week summer experiences over
three years, eighteen students will conduct collaborative research with park
wardens of the Uganda Wildlife Authority in Kibale National Park, Uganda, a
tropical rainforest national park that hosts high densities of primates.
Students will tackle problems related to three pressing conservation themes: 1)
global change and primate nutrition; 2) ecotourism of wild apes; 3) invasive
plant species in primate habitats. By undertaking this research, students will
be involved in an immersive experience in Uganda where they will gain field
experience and learn about Ugandan culture at Makerere University’s Biological
Field Station. They will develop their scientific skills by writing a research
proposal that addresses primate conservation, constructing testable hypotheses
and conducting fieldwork. Students will then analyze, report and discuss their
results in several forums in Uganda and the USA. They will learn how to
communicate their results through the media in Uganda by working alongside
journalists and public relations professionals. Hunter College is a minority
serving institution and at least 50% of the students selected for this
experience will be underrepresented minorities in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global change has pressing outcomes for tropical forests
and their inhabitants even when they are protected in national parks. This is
particularly true for monkeys and apes, because they grow more slowly, have
longer lives and modest reproductive rates compared to most other mammals. To
successfully conserve primates, empirical research needs to be combined with
effective management. Twelve undergraduates and six master’s students will
conduct research for eight weeks in three summer cohorts in Kibale National
Park, Uganda, a tropical rainforest in western Uganda that hosts a high
diversity and density of primates. Students will investigate management-oriented
research questions that will promote primate conservation under the guidance of
Uganda Wildlife Authority professionals. They will engage in research foci under
three themes: (1) Students will investigate primate feeding ecology, nutritional
chemistry of tree leaves, food availability and food density, and compare
current patterns with long term datasets; (2) Students will examine different
parameters of ecotourism in relation to how it might affect chimpanzee ecology
and behavior; (3) Students will explore the ways that invasive and exotic shrubs
affects plant community diversity and the primate food supply. At least half of
all the student researchers will be underrepresented minority undergraduates and
graduate students in STEM. Students will participate in conservation efforts and
integrate their research into conservation plans. They will learn how to prepare
media briefs and communicate their research findings to the Ugandan public.
Students will also present their research within several forums in New York
City, at Hunter College and in Uganda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.