* 2106996
* IRES Track I: International Research Experience for Students on Assistive Technology for Aging and Disability
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Wenyao Xu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This IRES project will promote international multidisciplinary research
opportunities for U.S. students at the overlap of wearable computing, robotics,
machine learning and medical science with the aim of advancing assistive
technologies. Assistive technologies can help overcome impairments, cognitive
difficulties, and disabilities in the senior and disabled populations. Training
students in machine learning, wearable sensors, and data processing for
assistive technologies is unique and requires an integrative approach. IRES
participants will be immersed in producing and understanding human signal
analytics and creating algorithms and software to assist aging and disability
users. The IRES program will engage faculty researchers from the University at
Buffalo and from the University of Leeds the Institute for Robotics, Autonomous
Systems and Sensing (IRASS) in assistive technology research. Programs and
workshops will be established so that IRES participants are trained in machine
learning for assistive systems and present their research results in
international settings. Weekly presentations at the international site and
guidance by international mentors will enrich the cohort research experience.
Embedding students in the IRASS research labs funded by large United Kingdom
(UK) projects will provide knowledge on UK and international research practices,
healthcare standards, and policies. Students will spend ten summer weeks at the
University of Leeds IRASS to improve their research skills and elevate their
cultural competencies. This international research endeavor will energize
students to innovate and disseminate results globally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES collaborative project will produce important
research advances through joint development of intelligent hardware and machine
learning methodologies to address the grand challenges of sensors, human-robot
interaction, machine learning, healthcare informatics, cognitive modeling, and
usability study of next-generation assistive healthcare systems. This
collaborative IRES project between the University at Buffalo and the University
of Leeds will engage students in targeting fundamental issues in assistive
technologies that need to be addressed urgently, including 1) energy-efficient
wearable computing architectures; 2) cognitive robotics for mental health; 3)
explainable artificial intelligence models for healthcare. The experience and
lessons learned through this research can benefit the development of advanced
assistive technologies for healthcare and medicine applications and is expected
to enhance the professional development of participating U.S. students. Through
the success of the student training, mentoring, and research activities, this
IRES project will strengthen existing computer engineering research and
education programs, and eventually contribute to preparing young scientists and
engineers in the fast-growing area of assistive technology for the aging and
disabled populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.