* 2106259
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Secure, Reliable, and Efficient Long-Term Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Ethan Miller, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 232,939.00

The world produces more digital data annually that’s growing exponentially.
Storing data for decades is challenging and securing it for so long is even more
challenging. This project develops secure, efficient, long-term archival storage
systems for digital information that endures beyond a single human lifetime. The
project uses a long-term security model that is safe against faster computers
and even quantum computers and can protect against malicious "insiders" who
abuse their access to secretly steal data slowly over years. Lastly, the project
explores how to maintain long-term data securely and efficiently, even if
individual storage providers cease to exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops techniques to store archival data securely and reliably for a long-time
using information theoretic security and combinatorial security. The project
explores techniques to allow data to survive errors ranging from corruptions of
a few bytes to large-scale cloud failures. It then explores the trade-off
between additional storage requirements, data security and reliability, and
system performance. Empirical evaluation of a prototype system provides insights
into real-world issues in implementing these techniques over the project’s
lifespan, and a simulator embodying these techniques allows projection of the
techniques’ effectiveness over much longer time
frames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fosters collaborations across systems,
theory, and security researchers to develop practical techniques to both secure
data for many years and ensure that the data endures unchanged. Storage must
meet both criteria for a society based on digital data to rely on it. All source
code for a prototype system and simulator is maintained and released publicly.
Material from this project is integrated into graduate level courses and a new
“Secure Storage Systems” course. The project recruits and co-advises several
under/graduate students, with a focus on female and Hispanic students, both
traditionally underrepresented in computer systems
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's artifacts—software, source code,
data sets, secure archive simulator, traces, and results—are all embodied in a
system called "SecArch: Secure Archives". Results will be disseminated using
peer-reviewed publications and arxiv.org. All artifacts will be made public
through the project Website: https://www.filesystems.org/secarch. The project
plans to maintain the site for at least ten years following the end of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.