* 2106389
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Submodular Information Functions with Applications to Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Bilmes, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

A growing number of machine learning applications involve selecting subsets of
data. Examples include selecting smaller subsets from a much larger dataset to
label (to save labeling costs) and to train (to reduce computational costs), or
selecting a summary of a video or a photo collection to ease viewing by a
person. Submodularity is a natural way to address these problems because it
naturally models many aspects like diversity, representation, and coverage. In
this project, the PIs will study a rich class of submodular information measures
that model not only diversity, representation, coverage but also constructs such
as relevance and irrelevance to certain target concepts. One application of this
is selecting a data summary with certain user specifications -- e.g., a summary
relevant to a given query or under a privacy constraint (a photo summary
relevant to a specific person or one which avoids certain personal information).
Another application is to interactively select data samples to label in the
presence of rare classes or while avoiding outliers (e.g., cancerous images as
rare classes for medical imaging tasks). Advances in this field can have
implications in many areas including data summarization, reducing labeling
efforts (in tasks like medical imaging), and reducing the carbon footprint for
training deep learning models on massive datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
underlying mathematical model proposed in this project is a rich class of
functions called ``submodular information measures``, which includes submodular
mutual information, submodular conditional gain, submodular multi-set mutual
information, directed submodular mutual information, and combinatorial
independence. Specifically, the PIs will investigate and develop: (1) rich
theoretical properties and instantiations of these submodular information
measures; (2) optimization algorithms, approximation bounds, and hardness
results of the associated optimization problems; (3) applications of the
submodular information measures in data summarization, data subset selection,
active learning, clustering, and diversified partitioning. While pursuing these
activities, the PIs will involve undergraduate and under-represented high-school
students in this research to inspire them to pursue careers in AI/ML and other
STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.