* 2106150
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: miVirtualSeat: Semantics-aware Content Distribution for Immersive Meeting Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jacob Chakareski, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has greatly reinforced the need for virtual meetings in
both work-related and social settings. It has also highlighted the dire lack of
video conferencing tools that can simulate the rich immersive experience of in-
person meetings since the current tools often leading to fatigue caused by
having to interact over a non-ideal communication medium. This collaborative
project brings together investigators from University of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, and New Jersey Institute of
Technology to research, build, and evaluate a distributed system, called
miVirtualSeat, that more closely simulates the immersive experience of in-person
meetings, including physical and virtual participants in a physical meeting
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on key research challenges in
providing an immersive meeting experience where physical and virtual
participants interact with each other in a physical meeting room. Some
participants are virtually present in the physical meeting room, but physically
located in remote sites with only limited compute and network resources. The
challenges are (a) detecting, tracking, and localizing distributed physical and
virtual 360-degree avatars and objects in the joint immersive scene in real-
time, (b) reducing the bandwidth and latency of delivering integrated and
synchronized 360-degree, volumetric, and 2D/3D video, and ambisonics audio, and
(c) ensuring good quality-of-experience in the form of natural interaction
between physical and virtual participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses an immediate and important need for a post-pandemic society to enable
immersive hybrid meetings that arise in the context of classrooms, conferences,
office meetings, and social gatherings. miVirtualSeat will enable these meetings
with a physical meeting room and remote sites situated at each of the
investigatorsâ€™ institutions. The outcome of the project will be new
undergraduate and graduate courses in the emerging field of advanced mixed
reality immersive environments. Through outreach activities, the project members
will showcase miVirtualSeat and expose the broader public to the capabilities of
distributed AR/VR systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information and results from
this project will be maintained on the project website that is available to the
public at https://monet.cs.illinois.edu/miVirtualSeat/. These will include
publications, links to software repositories, media releases, and links to
system data repositories derived from the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.