* 2106068
* Collaborative Research: MSA: The influence of temperature and resource supply on community size spectra in streams
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* James Junker, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 06/30/2024
* USD 39,585.00

Humans rely on properly functioning freshwater ecosystems (e.g., streams, lakes,
wetlands) for food, recreation, and drinking water. A major challenge in ecology
is to understand how freshwater ecosystems will change in response to
environmental disruptions. However, past efforts at measuring this change across
large spatial scales are complicated by at least two challenges: 1) different
places have different species, which makes it hard to compare across species
when it comes to ecosystem function, and 2) collecting ecological information is
extremely labor intensive, which makes it difficult to study ecological
communities over space and time. This project solves those problems using
cutting-edge ecological approaches. First, to overcome the limitations of
species turnover, this project will measure ecosystem structure and function
using animal body size distributions known as size-spectra (e.g., the relative
abundance of large to small organisms), which are thought to be conserved across
ecosystems regardless of species composition. Size spectra are an indicator of
how efficiently energy is transferred from one organism to another in a food
chain. Second, this project overcomes logistical limitations by using data
already collected and curated from the National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON). Using NEON data, the researchers will analyze a large collection of
size-spectra in streams over a wide range of environmental conditions to
determine how stream temperature and nutrients influence freshwater ecosystems.
This project is in the national interest because it provides a critical test of
how freshwater ecosystems might respond to future temperature scenarios at
macroecological scales. The researchers will also develop software that makes
analysis of body size distributions freely available to the public and easier
for ecologists to study in the future.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over 50 years of
research reveals a common pattern across ecosystems in which abundance (N)
declines with increasing body mass (M). The shape of this relationship is
described by a power law, N ~ M(exp b), known as the abundance size-spectrum,
and the exponent b varies in relation to changes in energy flow through the food
web. The value of b is almost always negative, suggesting a remarkably
consistent ecological pattern. However, climate change is expected to alter
size-spectra, based in part on shifts in body size with temperature. Despite a
seemingly simple relationship of body size and temperature, experimental and
field studies demonstrate disparate results for size spectra-temperature
relationships, finding positive, negative, and neutral shifts in size-spectra
across temperature regimes. These studies largely consist of limited samples
across relatively small spatial scales, making it difficult to predict how size-
spectra varies with temperature at larger scales such as continents. In
addition, deviations from theoretical predictions of the b-temperature
relationship may be resolved by accounting for variation in resource supply, but
the effect of resource supply at large scales is also unknown. This project uses
statistical modeling to determine the influence of stream temperature and
resource supply on stream size spectra exponents across a broad environmental
gradient represented by a national monitoring network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.