* 2106378
* Catalyst Project: Recognizing Applications of Visualization and Evaluation (RAVE) program
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Mohammad Hossain, Clinton College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,208.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution.
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The project at
Clinton College has been designed to develop a Recognition Applications of
Visualization and Evaluation (RAVE) program that will assess and develop
mathematics skills of freshmen at the institution. Clinton Collegeâ€™s
implementation of its the RAVE program will support ongoing work that explores
the elements of effective programming in mathematics-based summer bridge
programs that corresponds to increased enrollment, retention, and graduation of
students that major in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RAVE program will consist of four different
activities. The activities include: (1) the establishment of a summer bridge
program that utilizes the emporium model-student engagement with technology via
computer-based learning modules and focus on visualization of mathematical
concepts and data; (2) the revision of curricula for entry-level gateway math
courses (College Math I and II) to incorporate the emporium model; (3) the
synthesis of revised, module-based mathematics instruction, goal-setting and
planning skill-building instruction, and co-curricular activities to introduce
students to the infrastructure of support systems on campus; and (4) the
development of faculty and peer-mentoring programs. The activities will allow
student participants to assess and bolster their skills in mathematics and
computer program literacy while operating within a cohort construct, and with
the advantage of early access to, and corresponding familiarity with, the campus
and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.