* 2106297
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track 1: Empowering students to bridge the gap between hydrologic science and community resilience: A case study in post-glacial Perú
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexander Gates, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 06/30/2024
* USD 102,894.00

Solutions to water resources management and water security require not only
fundamentally sound science, but also a diverse coalition of trained scientists
that recognizes and is aware of the needs and knowledge of local communities.
Through our IRES award, we will train three cohorts of ten U.S. students from
the Hispanic Serving Institutions of Humboldt State University (HSU) and Rutgers
University, Newark (RUN) in applied, interdisciplinary and community-based water
development. Each cohort will participate in a yearlong program consisting of
three components: (1) a spring preparatory course which will link students from
HSU and RUN via videoconferencing to their Peruvian peers; (2) a five-week
hydrogeophysical field campaign centered in two communities in the Cusco region
of Perú and led by an interdisciplinary team of U.S. and Peruvian scholars; and
(3) a fall semester of independent research. The experience will empower a
diverse cohort of students to be interdisciplinary and community-minded
scientists as well as train members of the local communities to collect
hydrologic data in order to guide best practices in water management and
increase local water security and resiliency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The puna
biome, a seasonally dry grass and shrub ecosystem at the altitudinal limits of
plant growth in the central Andes, provides the primary source of water to many
small agrarian communities and large cities, such as Cusco. Despite its
importance for water resources, however, the hydrology of the puna is poorly
understood, especially with regard to storage capacity and seasonal runoff
dynamics. Communities relying on puna derived water sources are thus potentially
vulnerable to changes in water supply and uninformed water management decisions.
We will guide students in a hydrologic, geologic and geophysical investigation
to quantify water resources and flow pathways in two small (~ 2.2 km2) ‘end-
member’ puna catchments. In one catchment, slow drainage from peat forming
wetlands, known locally as bofedales, sustains perennial streamflow which
supports community agriculture. In the other catchment, devoid of bofedales,
stream flow is ephemeral, however the community harvests fracture flow for
agricultural and municipal water use via a 140 m long tunnel. Our results will
quantify water resources in puna landscapes with and without the influence of
bofedales, inform model predictions of future changes in water resources, and
guide community-based best practices in land and water
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.