* 2106013
* IRES Track II: Complexity advanced studies institute - Germany, Austria, Italy, Netherlands (Complexity-GAINs)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Dunne, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,994.00

Many challenges in the world today – disease dynamics, collective and artificial
intelligence, belief propagation, financial risk, national security, and
ecological sustainability – exceed traditional academic disciplinary boundaries
and demand a rigorous understanding of complexity. Complexity science, as
pioneered at the Santa Fe Institute (SFI) and elsewhere, aims to quantitatively
describe and understand the adaptive, evolvable and thus hard-to-predict
behaviors of complex systems. One of the greatest lessons of 2020 is how
critical this kind of understanding is to our society. We require a scientific
workforce capable of integrating theory from biology, social sciences, physics
and computer science with mathematical and computational modeling. Despite the
centrality of complex systems and the importance of diverse perspectives and
international collaboration in addressing the challenges facing our world,
purposeful opportunities for PhD student training in these areas are sparse.
SFI’s 14-day Complexity Advanced Studies Institutes (ASIs)—based centrally in
the EU research network—fills this gap by introducing 18 US PhD students and
their EU counterparts to the theory and practice of complex systems modeling in
an internationally collaborative setting. After completing Complexity ASIs,
participants serve as catalysts in the US scientific workforce, advancing the
use of complex systems science to solve imminent problems facing our society and
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complexity ASIs leverage the transdisciplinary
ideas, expert faculty, proven training capacity and international reach of SFI,
in collaboration with four leading complex systems research institutions in
Germany, Austria, Italy and the Netherlands (GAINs) and located centrally in
Vienna, Austria. The Complexity-GAINs partnership expands the faculty’s
expertise and perspective, gives students access to influential international
research partners, and strengthens collaboration among institutions. Students
gain foundational knowledge and practice in modeling complex systems of interest
through a combination of lectures, discussions, skills tutorials, peer-group
problem-solving and hands-on mentored research. The annual program, operating
over three years, focuses on different systems each year—intelligent systems,
social-behavioral systems, ecosystems—and provides students with broadly
applicable tools to recognize and define the universal properties of all complex
systems. Following participation in Complexity-GAINs ASIs, PhD students are
equipped to (1) describe and better predict the behavior of a complex system
through mathematical or computational modeling; and (2) leverage
interdisciplinary, international partnerships to achieve shared research and
applied goals. The international nature of the program is essential to both
goals and will ensure that early-career US researchers are prepared to address
complex systems beyond disciplinary and geographic boundaries. An associated
outcome of the program is the establishment of a complex systems curriculum and
accompanying instructional content for broad
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.