* 2106454
* IRES Track I: Integrating freshwater science and sustainability: Training opportunities in a rapidly changing Yucatan Peninsula ecological corridor.
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Richard MacKenzie, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,772.00

It has been suggested that the ultimate challenge of the 21st century is to
reconcile the inherent conflict between human activity and environmental
sustainability. Nowhere is this challenge greater than in dealing with
increasing pressure on freshwater resources. Using a theme: “A River Runs
Through It: Building a future from the flow of history and hydrology in an
ecological corridor”, this IRES program will expose ~21 U.S. students in 3
cohorts over 3 years to a 7-week field experience. Each year will focus on the
approaches, methods, and challenges inherent in resolving such conflicts in the
Bacalar Ecological Corridor in the Yucatan, Mexico. This region, which has been
extensively inhabited by humans for well over 3000 years dating back to the
Mayans, is under consideration as a Ramsar Convention of Wetlands of
International Importance site. Along with the local community, this region finds
itself at the leading edge of experiencing the economic benefits of eco-tourism,
and the challenge of maintaining the pristine environment which is driving a
growing economy and a rapidly increasing level of use and occupation. Immersing
students in an environment where the complexity of maintaining sustainable
economic growth is front and center, the importance of water is obvious and
compelling, and the role of science is recognized, both for fundamental
understanding and for societal relevance, is the overarching goal of this
project. The program seeks three major broad impacts: 1) interdisciplinary
training in freshwater studies, 2) integrated, collaborative research that can
ultimately inform management and policy, and 3) new cultural and personal
experiences, exchange, and appreciation. All three will take advantage of
traditional ecological knowledge, social context, and cultural awareness, and
provide students the opportunity to experience the challenges of natural
resource conservation and economic growth as adjudicated through policy and its
underlying societal pressures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of flow is a
unifying principle, not only in water science, but in the course of human
events. Like freshwater ecosystems everywhere, three major forces come together
in this system and understanding their interactions is essential for viable,
sustained environments and economies whose benefits accrue both today and into
the future: 1) Surficial and subterranean hydrologic system dynamics, 2)
Ecological complexity, and 3) Human use, the built environment, and engagement.
These forces are a common feature of every freshwater system. Bacalar serves as
a laboratory in which these forces are playing out in real time and the “flows”
are changing rapidly. Opportunities for undergraduate and graduate student
research exist across related areas giving the program latitude in matching
student interests to a variety of fields including hydrogeology, aquatic
biogeochemistry, mangrove and wetland ecology, carbon cycling, stromatolite
ecology, climate dynamics, GIS mapping, remote sensing, community engagement,
resource management and decision making. The program will take advantage of
collaborations with the El Colegio de la Frontera Sur (ECOSUR) a federally
supported research lab and college in Chetumal, the Centro Regional de Educación
Normal. Lic. Javier Rojo Gómez (Bacalar Normal College), and the Bacalar Public
High School system (COBACH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.