* 2106145
* IRES Track II: Multidisciplinary Training on Wildlife and Natural Resource Conservation  From an Indigenous Perspective
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Aaron Thomas, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 04/30/2023
* USD 281,266.00

Current breakthroughs in conservations sciences highlight the critical
importance of integrating indigenous ways of knowing with western science in
order to address the complex challenges of biodiversity conservation. There is a
need to continually blend Indigenous ways of knowing with western scientific
approaches to biodiversity conservation; however, Indigenous populations are
severely underrepresented in scientific fields. This project fills that need by
providing opportunities for Native American students to use their backgrounds
while gaining scientific expertise and global experience from other knowledge
systems by participating in two, 13-day Advanced Study Institutes (ASI’s) in
India that focus on providing hands-on and field-based research and learning
opportunities in wildlife management and natural resource conservation sciences.
Each ASI will have 10 U.S. graduate student participants and the same number of
participants from India per year. U.S. participants are limited to those who
identify as Native American; to be chosen through a competitive process. The
objective of the ASI’s is to provide Native American graduate students a global
perspective and opportunities for professional growth through significant
international collaborative research training, mentoring and networking in the
fields of wildlife and natural resource conservation sciences. The significance
of this project is that it brings together Native American students, Indian
students, and faculty from the US and India to provide a multi-cultural, dynamic
learning experience designed to build the competencies of Native American
students in social and biophysical sciences. This project also offers an
opportunity for a traditionally underrepresented student population to work with
fellow Indigenous students in building community and global awareness where
their unique perspective is needed to help solve complex problems not only in
the U.S. and in India, but worldwide. The ASI’s will train students to conduct
multidisciplinary research in an international context, building young
professionals who will be at the forefront of world conservation and wildlife
management sciences. These students will then be equipped to apply their
scientific background to advance the health and welfare of Native American lands
and people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research themes for the ASI’s are founded
in social-ecological systems thinking and include social and biophysical
sciences. The ASI’s will cover technical aspects, biophysical aspects and human
dimensions. These include indigenous and participatory perspectives on
conservation, conservation biology, landscape ecology, ecological restoration,
and wildlife management. The project provides the integration of science and
technologies to consider both ecological principles and environmental conditions
with the aim of balancing the needs of wildlife with the needs of the people.
Students will study each of these themes first in the classroom and then through
field experiences by leveraging the unique research facilities and field sites
available through our partner institution, the Wildlife Institute of India
(WII), a global leader in applied research in wildlife management and natural
resource conservation sciences. Students will participate in a virtual
conference and workshop before traveling to India. While in India, participants
will be encouraged to participate in cultural experiences that will expose them
to the history and culture of India, providing context to their work. A web-
based virtual learning platform will be built for the ASIs and used for
recruitment, participant networking, virtual conferences and workshops, and
provide a summary of the activities and outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.