* 2106392
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Inclusive Data Science Tools to Overcome Statistics Anxiety
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Andreas Stefik, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 628,976.00

The objective of this collaborative project is to design, create, and evaluate
the Relatable Online Accessible Data Science (ROADS) platform. ROADS is designed
to make online data science easier to understand by undergraduate and graduate
students, with a focus on overcoming statistics anxiety. Reasons for statistical
anxiety include limited math and computing background, self-esteem, gender,
ethnicity, and disability, in addition to the design of statistics platforms.
Data science literacy is integral for success in post-secondary science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields, as well as for developing
critical, industry-relevant, computational thinking skills. In collaboration
with partner organizations, which span higher education, accessibility, and data
science, the project will evaluate ROADS to lower barriers for successful
participation. ROADS will be iteratively and inclusively designed, using both
formative and summative empirical evaluations, at all stages of development, to
inform the end user experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate a new platform that uses relatable data science language, is readily
available online through the web, and is accessible through visual, auditory,
and touch feedback to students with disabilities. It brings together
investigators in Computer Science, Mechanical Engineering, Education, and
Cognitive Neuroscience to investigate three critical areas: (1) clarity and
human comprehension of data science representations; (2) anxiety reduction; and
(3) accessibility to people with disabilities. For evaluation, a series of
studies is planned, involving 180 undergraduate students without disabilities
and 120 with disabilities. Further, the researchers plan to study the outputs of
data science tools, in conjunction with anxiety, involving approximately 1,000
undergraduate or graduate students, with and without disabilities. The project
will incorporate regular feedback from an engaged advisory board, including a
data science governance group (ACM Data Science Task Force), the Association on
Higher Education and Disability, and disabilities services offices at four
institutions. Project outcomes will include the development of design
implications for inclusive design of data science tools and pedagogy at the
undergraduate and graduate level, with a specific focus on reducing anxiety
associated with data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.