* 2106141
* I-Corps:  Electronic Patient Visit Assessment Tool
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Janet Van Cleave, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to better
understand the use of a novel mobile health (mHealth) technology to capture
patient-reported symptom measures to improve the quality of life and increase
the survival of patients with cancer. The connections between mHealth technology
for patient-reported symptom measures and improved outcomes for patients with
cancer include preventing adverse events during cancer treatment, efficient
work-flows that support improved patient-provider communication, and enhanced
patient engagement. Also, the novel use of mHealth technology can bridge the
digital divide to close cancer care disparities. More broadly, the novel use of
mHealth technology for patient-reported measures may apply to all illnesses,
including remote monitoring of patients quarantined because of exposure to
infectious diseases such as COVID-19. This I-Corps project aims to evaluate
whether such use of novel mHealth technology for patient-reported measures can
lead to new business opportunities within the healthcare industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to use rigorous customer
discovery to better understand the value of a novel mHealth technology for
patient-reported symptom measures in oncology care. Patients with cancer
sometimes undergo intense multimodal treatment causing nausea/vomiting, severe
oral mucositis, difficulty swallowing, and impaired communication. These
symptoms and functional limitations result in hospitalizations, premature
cessation of cancer treatment, and even death. After treatment, some patients
experience long-term symptoms and disability (e.g., pain, immobility), resulting
in social isolation and possibly suicide. Current methods to uncover patients'
symptoms (e.g., email, telephones, additional oncology visits) are inefficient.
Consequently, the patient's symptoms may go undetected and left untreated. The
novel mHealth technology for patient-reported symptom metrics consists of a
digital platform and touch screen technology for patients to complete at home or
while waiting for oncology visits. Patient data are immediately available to
providers for real-time interventions to prevent adverse events during cancer
treatment or long-term disabilities. Proof of concept testing supports the
reliability and validity of the novel mHealth technology. This I-Corps project
aims to discover the most valuable elements of the novel mHealth technology to
ready the product for introduction into the healthcare
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.