* 2106913
* III: Medium: Knowledge-Guided Meta Learning for Multi-Omics Survival Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Aidong Zhang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Cancers are among the world's most deadly malignant diseases. Survival analysis,
which predicts the time to an event (i.e., death in the case of cancer), is of
crucial importance for cancer biology research and disease treatment.
Stratifying patients according to disease stage or severity using molecular
information from the tumor is critical for tailoring treatments for each
patient. Identifying molecular features that drive the prediction of poor
survival outcomes could provide insights into mechanistic studies of cancer and
lead to discoveries of new therapeutic targets. Recent advances in high-
throughput genomics technologies have led to a massive amount of high-
dimensional omics data being available which makes it possible to apply machine
learning approaches to build predictive models that predict tumor stage or
severity as well as identifying the key molecular factors driving tumorigenesis
and metastasis which could lead to new therapeutic targets. While deep learning
has been applied to cancer survival analysis, it does not work very well on
biological data with a relatively small number of samples with high-dimensional
features in each cohort (i.e., the well-known big p, small n problem). The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) is such an example, which characterizes multi-level
high-dimensional clinical and molecular profiles spanning many cancer types. To
make machine learning effectively work on a small amount of training data such
as each cancer type in TCGA, we propose a set of advanced machine learning
approaches to tackle the well-known big p, small n problem for cancer survival
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new knowledge-guided
meta-learning framework which innovatively integrates biological knowledge with
meta-learning for multi-omics survival analysis. This framework tackles a series
of technical challenges posed by the scenario of many domains (e.g., cancer) but
small numbers of samples in each domain and utilizes the principle of few-shot
learning to implement a fast adaptation process to new cancer samples by
training of a set of different cancers. The proposed knowledge-guided embedding-
learning framework formulates a new fundamental structure that enables the
integration of biological knowledge into the construction of a latent patient
representation, which exploits the rich information present in human-curated
knowledge bases such as gene ontology and regulatory networks that can be shared
across different cancers. The proposed meta-learning for survival analysis
approach enables the prediction of survival probability for patients from unseen
cancers. To further enhance meta-learning for survival predictions, a meta-
learning framework called Context-Aware Learning with Meta-Knowledge is
developed, which explicitly incorporates curated domain knowledge into the meta-
learning framework, and is aware of the prediction context, including the
prediction difficulty and heterogeneity of the input patient samples. The
proposed paradigm of knowledge-guided meta-learning is significantly more
powerful than traditional transfer learning in adapting to new tasks or domains.
The project will lead to a novel, advanced approach to analyzing a variety of
cancer datasets with each cancer having a small sample size. Thus, this project
has significant potential to advance the theory and practice of few-shot
learning, with strong social implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.