* 2106978
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Towards Understanding and Handling Problems Due to Coexistence of Multiple IoT Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Xiaojiang Du, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 12/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

There are over one hundred Internet-of-Things (IoT) platforms. Each has its own
strengths and limitations. To get the best of each, a smart environment may use
multiple IoT platforms. However, when multiple IoT platforms coexist in the same
physical space, many unique problems arise, which are referred to as Multi-
Platform Coexistence (MPC) problems. The objectives of the project are
systematically to describe, categorize and measure MPC problems and design and
build effective solutions to address them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple
platforms for a smart environment do not necessarily share consistent
observations about IoT device states. As a result, automation applications
installed on these platforms may issue incorrect and even conflicting commands.
In addition, the assumption made by existing work that a single platform has a
complete view and control of all IoT devices does not hold true. Thus, the
project is to uncover, measure, and formalize unique problems due to coexistence
and interaction of multiple IoT platforms in the same physical space, and
propose novel designs, techniques, algorithms and build systems to resolve them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project can benefit numerous smart-environment users
and related industries by revealing and handling MPC problems and supporting
harmonious coexistence of IoT platforms. The proposed research will be
integrated into curriculum development. These efforts will meet the growing
national need for professionals in IoT. The project will promote the
participation of students from underrepresented groups in IoT research.
Furthermore, it will involve collaboration with professionals from IoT
industries for assessment of the systems and technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data, code, system designs, documentations, and
experiment results will be released through a publicly accessible GitHub
repository: https://quz105.github.io/MPC/. The repository will be maintained for
at least five years after the project ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.