* 2106784
* Implementation Project:  SURE (Scaffolding Undergraduate Research Experiences)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Kathryn White, St. Philip's College
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 624,998.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) provide support to design, implement, study, and
assess comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students
and the quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation
project at Alamo Community College District – St. Philip’s College provides a
scaffolded approach to broaden opportunities for community college, first
generation, and HBCU students to succeed in STEM majors. The project has a
strong focus on professional development of faculty (including adjunct faculty)
to strengthen teaching and mentoring of students engaged in research experiences
and preparing undergraduate students for graduate school or the workforce,
focusing on the critical transition from community college to Bachelor of
Science programs. The project is guided and informed by an on-going evaluation,
as well as by internal and external advisory
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to enrich STEM
education quality, increase STEM student research and internship experiences and
facilitate community college student transfer to universities to earn Bachelor
of Science degrees. The four objectives are: (1) increase STEM faculty use of
evidence-based pedagogy instruction in lecture and lab classes, leading to (2)
improved STEM student retention and (3) a substantial increase in the number of
STEM students who participate in experiential learning opportunities, thereby
increasing student retention in the critical transition years and (4) increasing
the number of STEM students who transfer and earn BS degrees from universities.
The project aims to advance knowledge and understanding in STEM education by
outlining how faculty use of evidence-based pedagogy impacts underrepresented
STEM majors’ academic outcomes, how quality education and mentoring/advising
impacts access to research/internship opportunities and how two-year colleges
can collaborate with four-year STEM programs to create transfer pipelines and
support for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.