* 2106286
* Research Initiation: Understanding Impacts of Soft Robotics Curricula on Female Students Engineering Identity
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Karin Jensen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2024
* USD 214,999.00

Participation in K12 educational robotics is a common precursor to enrollment in
engineering majors, however the gender gap in traditional pre-college robotics
prevents equal access to these disciplines. We believe soft robotics may create
a new pathway for students from underrepresented groups to enter engineering
majors. Soft robots are those devices made from soft materials and flexible
electronics enabling robots to more safely interface with humans and other
living organisms. Soft robotics presents an opportunity to introduce traditional
engineering principles through a human-centered perspective with the potential
to diversify engineering. This project will address two aims. First, this
project aims to understand changes in the engineering identity of middle and
high school-aged female students after having engaged in soft robotics projects
in their science classes. Second, this project aims to introduce the Principal
Investigator to engineering education research, catalyzing a new research
enterprise focused on access to engineering and educational robotics. The
research team will utilize existing relationships with local schools to deliver
a previously piloted soft robotics curriculum and study student experiences.
Implementation will include a one-week, hands-on robotics short course for about
200 middle and high school students local to the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the lack of representation of women in
mechanical and electrical engineering is well-documented. However, successful
pathways for women to these majors are understudied. Agency beliefs have been a
useful lens for understanding how women do enter some engineering majors, such
as bioengineering. The mentor-mentee research team will leverage a mixed methods
approach to explore soft robotics as a new pathway to engineering Critical
Engineering Agency will be a framework through which to understand the student
experience. The research team will use surveys and interview instruments to help
answer the overall research question: How can a soft robotics implementation
impact high school students’ attitudes and self-beliefs, and therefore serve as
a strategy to recruit female students to traditionally male-dominated
engineering majors? Prior to the activity, students will be surveyed using
engineering identity and agency belief measures. After implementation, students
will complete a post-survey and the research team will interview select students
to understand how the activities impacted their engineering identity. The result
of this collaborative research project will be an analysis of the elements of
pre-college soft robotics curriculum that may lead to diverse recruitment in
engineering. Education of local stakeholders in standards-based soft robotics
curriculum opens the door for further engagement in our local community.
Dissemination of research results will enable broad adoption. Findings from this
study will pave the way for increased representation of women and
underrepresented minorities in engineering at the college level and in the
engineering workforce, contributing to a diversity of solutions to society’s
critical challenges. Soft robotics curricula have the potential to prepare a
diverse generation of engineers and reduce the barrier to entry not only for
girls, but other students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.