* 2106065
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Elucidating Plant and Mycorrhizal Fungal Relationships and Consequences across Space and Time
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stephanie Kivlin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 531,657.00

Many plants are dependent on belowground fungi to help them obtain nutrients and
respond to environmental stress. Revealing the patterns and drivers of these
interactions is important for understanding forest ecology and improving
management practices. Plant-fungal associations in the soil can dramatically
influence plant growth and terrestrial ecosystem function. This research will
take the advantage of several existing datasets, including those collected by
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and the U.S. Forest Service
(USFS), to understand: 1) nation-wide patterns of plant-fungal associations; 2)
key factors that influence these associations; and 3) how plant-fungal
interactions influence key ecosystem functions such as carbon cycling. This
research project will contribute to the fields of microbial ecology, ecosystem
science, and global change biology by formulating and testing new theories about
plant-fungal associations. Results of the project will inform forest managers,
policymakers, and other stakeholders on how to improve ecosystem management of
plant and fungal biodiversity to promote sustainable ecosystems. The project
will contribute to the professional development of diverse students at several
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
patterns, drivers, and consequences of the linkages between plant and
mycorrhizal fungal diversity across spatial and temporal scales. This
information will enable better predictive understanding of essential ecosystem
functions which they control. The project will use a holistic, scale-dependent
framework that forecasts the strength and direction of arbuscular mycorrhizal
(AM) and ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungal-plant associations, and provides greater
insight about the consequences for ecosystem functioning across space and over
time. Specific objectives of the project include: 1) elucidation of patterns of
plant and mycorrhizal fungal diversity across scales by extensive DNA sequencing
and analysis; 2) determination of key abiotic and biotic drivers of observed co-
occurence patterns; and (3) forecasting the effects of plant-mycorrhizal fungal
couplings on tree productivity and soil C storage, two key forest ecosystem
functions. By linking multiple facets of both above- and belowground diversity
in a scale-dependent context, the project will produce robust continental-wide
distribution maps of AM and EM fungi for the first time. Leveraging data-rich
sampling of putative biotic and abiotic drivers of plant and fungal diversity by
NEON and the USFS, the project will also provide broad-scale understanding of
when and where these drivers serve to couple or decouple plant and mycorrhizal
fungal diversity. Finally, by linking plant and mycorrhizal fungal diversity to
the consequences they have for plant productivity and soil C storage and
stability, the project will improve understanding of ecosystem resilience to
environmental stress. The project will train diverse undergraduate and graduate
students, postdoctoral scholars, and will enhance the development of three
early=career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.