* 2106043
* Switching Control with Minimal Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Daniel Liberzon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2024
* USD 392,408.00

This grant will allow breaking new ground in our understanding of the minimal
amount of data required for solving control problems. For a given control
objective, a modern control designer is faced not just with the task of
developing a control algorithm, but also with deciding whether the objective is
achievable with the available data, or with the question of what is the smallest
amount of data with which the task is achievable by proper control design. By
employing modern system-theoretic tools, centered around the notion of entropy
for dynamical systems as well as methods for characterizing robustness of system
response to perturbations, the project will develop systematic approaches to
control design in the presence of data-rate constraints. The results are
expected to have significant impact on several application domains, including
population dynamics, control of mechanical systems, and synchronization of
networks of electrical or mechanical systems. The project also includes
components for integrating the research with personnel training and educational
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to gain
insight into the challenge of characterizing the minimal data with which a
control task is achievable, and to translate this insight into synergistic
methods for designing communication and control schemes. In advanced control
problems of interest in modern theory and applications, one frequently
encounters switching behavior in either the process dynamics, or in the
controller dynamics, or in the control task itself. Switching dynamics present
significant challenges, which the project plans to overcome by deploying novel
generalizations and combinations of topological entropy and input-to-state
robustness concepts. The project will initially focus on three benchmark classes
of control problems: 1) control of switched systems; 2) control of nonholonomic
mechanical systems; and 3) robust leader--follower synchronization. Building
from specific case studies within each of these problem classes, the project
aims to achieve a general methodology for designing switching controllers for
complex systems which utilize available data in optimal or near-optimal
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.