* 2106188
* Proton coupled electron transfer and the mechanism of MAO catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Daniel Slade, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 438,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors James M. Tanko and Pablo Sobrado of Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University are studying the mechanism of action
for monoamine oxidase-A and -B (MAO-A and MAO-B). These are important enzymes
present in mammals, which play a key role in the metabolism of neurotransmitters
such as dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine and serotonin. For these natural
(biogenic) amines, the mechanism of this oxidation appears to be well
understood. MAOs have also been linked to central nervous system disorders such
as depression and Parkinsonâ€™s disease, and considerable effort has gone into the
development of MAO inhibitors. However, some of these MAO inhibitors such as
L-deprenyl or pargyline cannot react by the same mechanism as the biogenic
amines. Other compounds, which possess similar structural features have proven
to be potent neurotoxins. Professors Tanko and Sobrado will test and further
develop a new hypothesis that with certain amines, specific structural features
are present that activate an alternative mechanism of oxidation (proton coupled
electron transfer or PCET) that is fundamentally different from the mechanism
typically followed by the enzyme with most natural substrates. This
collaborative project, linking biological, organic, physical, and quantum
chemistry, is expected to lead to a better understanding of how these processes
work (or break down) and, in the case of disease, inform strategies for
treatment based upon fundamental chemical principles. Radicals and radical ions
are important chemical species in chemistry and biology and their study will be
a focus here. As part of the education/outreach component of this proposal, a
series of videos entitled "Organic Chemistry: The Missing Chapters" will be
developed to address the limited discussion of these species in many
introductory organic chemistry textbooks. Topics to be covered include radicals
and radical ions in the context of biological chemistry (enzyme catalyzed
processes, autoxidation, etc.) and organic chemistry (mechanisms and
synthesis).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MAO catalytic pathway couples the initial
net two-electron oxidation of the substrate to its iminyl metabolite with a two-
electron reduction of the oxidized flavin cofactor. The core hypothesis of this
work is that electron transfer between the substrate and flavin cofactor is
always present as an unfavorable equilibrium, but only becomes important when
the resulting radical cation is extremely acidic; in essence, this unfavorable
electron transfer occurs because it is coupled to an extremely favorable proton
transfer. The structural features that cause the radical cation to be acidic are
present in many common MAO inhibitors, and in a compound known as MPTP-a potent
neurotoxin that leads to symptoms of Parkinson's disease in humans. These
experiments will involve a biomimetic approach, using flavin-based chemical
model compounds that mimic the chemistry of the enzyme, to develop the
fundamental understanding of the reaction mechanism. The insight gained from
these experiments will then inform experiments conducted under biologically
relevant conditions, using recombinant MAO-A and
MAO-B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.