* 2106137
* Collaborative Research: MSA: Upscaling soil organic carbon measurements at the continental scale: Evaluating emergent ecosystem properties using multivariate quantitative methods
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Debjani Sihi, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 252,610.00

Increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) is a major cause of global climate
change. One of the most effective nature-based solutions to this challenge lies
right under our feet - the soil. Globally, soil contains more carbon than in the
Earth's atmosphere and vegetation combined. National and international
initiatives are in place to increase soil organic carbon (SOC) content and
storage capacity to combat climate change. The multifaceted benefits of SOC
storage can also ensure food and nutritional security for the Earth's human
population and help meet many of the United Nations Sustainable Development
goals. However, it is not clear how long soil can provide these ecosystem
services to our global community. This is partly because SOC data available from
various sources and predictions based on computer models donâ€™t agree with each
other. This project aims to provide a robust estimate of SOC for the
conterminous United States (CONUS), which can help identify potential reasons
for inconsistency across different models and ultimately facilitate policy-
makers in making informed decisions about climate change. It will also offer
research training opportunities for students as well as workshops and training
courses for teachers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For the U.S., there is a unique
opportunity to use spatial clustering approaches to reduce uncertainties in SOC
dynamics and constrain models at the continental scale by upscaling site-based
measurements across the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). Emergent
ecosystem properties will be evaluated by using multivariate quantitative
methods to extrapolate or interpolate point-scale SOC measurements from a
spatial constellation of NEON terrestrial sites to CONUS. Data collected across
NEON terrestrial sites will be coupled with an array of multivariate geographic
clustering algorithms (k-means clustering, ensemble clustering) and machine-
learning (convolutional neural network, artificial neural network) approaches.
These quantitative analyses will also enable uncertainty quantification of
spatial representativeness of SOC and help identify potential future relocatable
(or mobile) sites for additional ground-truth measurements of variables related
to terrestrial C cycle processes. Existing NEON biogeochemistry, microbial,
hydrology, sensor, and remote sensing data products will be leveraged to produce
quantitative SOC regional maps for CONUS using similar combinations of climatic,
ecological, environmental, geochemical, and microbial variables. The algorithms
developed with NEON data will be validated with other point-scale data like
SoDaH (SOils DAta Harmonization database) and ISNC (International Soil Carbon
Network). The spatial mismatch of derived representativeness-based SOC regional
maps for CONUS will be evaluated with existing gridded databases: SoilGrids,
Harmonized World Soil Database (HWSD), Northern Circumpolar Soil Carbon Database
(NCSCD), and gridded U.S. Soil Survey Geographic Database (gSSURGO).EON-based
SOC regional maps for CONUS will also be integrated with downscaled historical
SOC predictions from participating models of the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project Phase 6 (CMIP6). The robust (and scalable) estimate of SOC for CONUS
will enable the diagnosis of terrestrial C cycle processes using historical
CMIP6 model runs. Broader impacts will involve training opportunities at the
undergraduate and graduate levels, and workhops and training courses to teach
data analysis workflow methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.