* 2106901
* IRES: Track 1: International Research Experiences in Design of Next Generation VR Simulation based Training Approaches for Orthopedic Surgery
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,759.00

The overall goal of this international project is to provide meaningful research
experiences to a new generation of U.S. engineers and scientists in the design
of Virtual Reality (VR) and haptic (touch) based environments to train medical
residents in orthopedic surgery. Useful research experiences provided to our
undergraduate and graduate students will prepare them to contribute to this
important emerging area involving medicine/healthcare as well as provide them
opportunities to become leaders in this growing field. The uniqueness of the
research methods to be explored involves creating 3D computer based approaches
and tools, which will enable medical residents to be better trained while
reducing the need for them to be trained using small animals or on cadavers. The
technology outcomes of this project will be 3D cyber tools which will prepare
our residents and budding surgeons to be better trained in surgery; this in turn
will enable them to serve the healthcare needs of our public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international project deals with cutting edge
research issues with many engineering challenges and hold significant potential
to impact health and medical applications. As breakthroughs in IT continue to
revolutionize information centric practices, there is an ever increasing need
for engineering and computer science students to be engaged in interdisciplinary
research activities to create cyber intensive ‘smart health’ methods and tools
to support medical training and related health care contexts. The research
activities will include designing advanced 3D Virtual Reality environments
(incorporating algorithm based surgical planning methods) which will allow
residents to train immersively in complex orthopedic surgical procedures such as
condylar plating, which is used to treat fractures of the femur. Another thrust
is designing a haptic based approach to allow the residents to obtain a natural
feel for drilling bones and related tasks virtually as part of a simulation
based training process within this orthopedic surgical procedure. Such training
approaches will enable these residents to be better trained without using
cadavers and small animals. The adoption of such smart health approaches has the
potential to bring down medical education costs as well as improve the level of
surgical skills. As these cyber-intensive approaches become more commonplace,
there will be a greater need to encourage more students to pursue such
interdisciplinary careers that overlap medicine, engineering and computing.
Through this project, our students will be exposed to leading research
environments (in a technological advanced country such as Germany). Such
experiences will enable our undergraduate and graduate students to become global
leaders in smart health and related areas. This in turn will help our nation
continue its leadership in cyber and smart health industries, which in turn will
have a positive impact on our nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.