* 2106467
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: An Information-Theoretic Foundation for Adaptive Bidding in First-Price Auctions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Tsachy Weissman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the advent and increasing consolidation of e-commerce, digital advertising
has very recently replaced traditional advertising as the main marketing force
in the economy. In the past two years, a particularly important development in
the digital advertising industry is the shift from second-price auctions to
first-price auctions for online display ads. This shift immediately motivated
the intellectually challenging question of how to bid in first-price auctions,
because unlike in second-price auctions, bidding one's private value truthfully
is no longer optimal. Furthermore, this shift has two unique modern
characteristics: 1) the auctions are occurring repeatedly at a very high
frequency and the bidding decisions must be made on that (milliseconds)
timescale; second, there is exchange-dependent feedback information that one can
and should leverage to inform one's sequential bidding decisions. These two
characteristics expose drawbacks in the existing game-theoretical approaches and
call for novel and principled developments in sequential bidding. The
methodological and algorithmic innovation established in this project could also
potentially help various organizations with advertising needs to navigate in the
new and challenging landscape of display ads bidding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broad goal of this project is to develop a methodological framework that
intelligently and adaptively leverages past information to construct bidding
strategies that are both computationally and statistically efficient. This
requires developing information-theoretic tools to understand the fundamental
learning limits for bidding in first-price auctions, where the reward function
is neither convex nor continuous but has a special structure of its own that
needs to be exploited. Further, it requires developing computationally efficient
bidding and private value estimation algorithms for repeated first-price
auctions that could meet the demanding nature of real-time bidding and large-
scale historical bidding dataset, as well as learning-theoretical tools that
enable the analysis and rigorous characterization of the algorithms'
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.