* 2106251
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:Examination of Multiple Chronologies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Adam Smith, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 25,117.00

Absolute time, or chronology, is fundamental to interpret the past. However, the
disregard for how past societies actually experienced time results in a
discrepancy between generalized models of socio-cultural change and the diverse
experience of life’s rhythms, thus perpetuating the creation of dehumanized
histories. How people organize around life’s rhythms, whether as members of a
generation or as a society responding to broader environmental or socio-cultural
challenges, profoundly impacts the decisions made in the present, thus shaping
the course of actions in the long-term. Archaeology is well positioned to solve
this tension between absolute and lived time by offering a long-term perspective
on the unfolding of human experience. This project will undertake research that
uses radiocarbon dating to investigate people’s lived experience of time in past
communities.The project also speaks to a wider anthropological conversation
regarding the understanding of time as a social construct and the artificial
separation between society and “clock time”. The research includes broad
scientific collaboration and encourages training in archaeological science among
students and scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate how to
identify different dimensions of lived time from material remains, which will
offer a new approach for archaeologists studying socio-cultural changes in the
unwritten past. This archaeological study, covering a remarkable duration,
offers an ideal opportunity to analyze how alternative lived rhythms contribute
to socio-cultural stability in the long-term. Contrary to previous approaches,
this work will interpret the radiocarbon-based chronology of sites by referring
to real lifespans, such as those derived from age at death and generational
distance observed in collective burials, thus humanizing the history of single
sites. This humanization of chronology will also consider alterations in
climatic stability, as demonstrated by previous studies, and the interruption of
daily life as documented by layers of abandonment in site stratigraphies.
Relevant samples suitable for high-resolution radiocarbon analysis will be
collected from museum collections and ongoing excavations. In addition to
producing a robust radiocarbon dataset, the project will ultimately enhance the
possibilities of archaeological chronology and help close the gap between short-
term and long-term perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.