* 2106261
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Understanding of Engineering Core Concepts Contextualized in Domain-Specific Settings Through Active Exploration
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Diana Bairaktarova, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 38,902.00

The long history of experiential learning in engineering education shows the
significant potential of cognitive development through direct experience and
reflection on what works in practice. However, active exploration in a real-life
situation may not be always feasible. Recent advances in computer science help
educators develop virtual environments and game platforms that allow students to
explore various scenarios and learn from their experiences. This project will
explore students’ learning of two engineering core concepts: design of a system
and optimization contextualized in domain-specific settings. Further, it will
examine students’ ability to discover systematic solutions for fundamental
engineering problems through active exploration in a digital game environment.
An online game-based platform will be developed and used to empirically examine
the effectiveness of active learning pedagogy. The game will expose users to the
two engineering core concepts in the context of construction planning and
scheduling through scenario-based problems. The game will be used in a graduate
level construction engineering course and the final version of the game will be
available for free to download and to play to anyone in the world through a
dedicated website and app stores. The outcomes of the project and the game-based
platform can be used in outreach programs to engage and inspire underrepresented
and K-12 students in pursuing STEM education. In addition, this project will
prepare and train the PI to take a leadership role in social science research on
the professional formation of engineers through a mentored, collaborative
research project which will expand the community of engineering education
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed gamified pedagogical approach
will be designed based on constructivism learning theory. This research project
will answer three questions: 1) Does guided active exploration in a digital game
environment improve students’ understanding of two engineering core-concepts
(i.e., design of a system and optimization) contextualized in domain-specific
settings? 2) Does guided active exploration in a digital game environment
improve students’ ability to discover systematic strategies to solve fundamental
engineering problems? and 3) How do students perceive an interactive digital
gamification platform that lets them explore scenario-based engineering problems
as a formal learning tool? Addressing these questions will provide insights into
how providing students with opportunities to explore the impact of manipulating
various elements of an engineering problem can contribute to a better
understanding of the engineering core concepts and discovery of systematic
solutions for domain-specific engineering problems. To address the research
questions, qualitative and quantitative analyses will be performed, including 1)
pre- and post-assessments (e.g., prior knowledge surveys, benchmark exams, game-
based assignments, and semi-structured interviews) and 2) game data, including
log files and electronic records of students’ inputs in the debriefing and
articulation features. This research project will create and examine an
innovative engineering education method that can be adapted to other engineering
fields and education levels, including undergraduate and high school programs.
Although the research uses construction engineering as a study setting, its
outcomes will contribute to other engineering fields and it will add to the
cutting-edge state of practice in learning at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.