* 2106346
* Research Initiation: Understanding the Relationships Between Gender, Self-Efficacy, and Extracurricular Activities in the Professional Formation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Schrlau, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,776.00

This project aims to expand the knowledge of practices and organizational
attributes that could be leveraged to change the ways in which informal
education opportunities impact the professional formation of engineers.
Extracurricular experiential activities during college are critical in the
professional formation of engineers for both the development of engineering
students and the preparation of early career engineering professionals. These
informal experiential activities play a significant role in shaping engineering
students' self-efficacy, or perceived level of competence, a cognitive
determinant that has been linked to learning and performance outcomes for
individuals. The goal of this project is to elucidate how gender composition of
activity participants affects the development of self-efficacy in males and
females and to identify the activity attributes that can be leveraged to reduce
inequalities while improving career outcomes for underrepresented populations.
The study will engage current team members and alumni from two distinct,
automotive-based competition teams at the Rochester Institute of Technology
(RIT). Both teams have similar performance goals, but the gender composition,
attributes, and practices of the teams are very distinct. Understanding how
women and other underrepresented populations develop as engineers is essential
for building an innovative and inclusive engineering workforce for the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses research questions related
to the self-efficacy and professional development of engineering college
students, specifically: How do extracurricular activities shape students’ self-
efficacy in pursuit of an engineering career? What elements, such as contextual
supports, are considered critical for development of undergraduate students’
efficacy? What are the practices and attributes of each team environment that
promotes engineering and career self-efficacy among team members? How do
extracurricular team activities and self-efficacy influence students’
assimilation into the engineering workplace? Self-efficacy is an established
component in the professional formation of engineers, thus results from the
proposed study could help refine gender specific theories about how engineers
develop. A mixed-methods approach, involving current members and alumni from
each team, will be employed to address the study goals and research questions
that includes the following tasks: (1) Administration of quantitative surveys;
(2) Interviews with team leaders; (3) Interviews and focus groups with team
members; and (4) Synthesis of the qualitative and quantitative research
findings. Our findings will analyze, by gender and age, how self-efficacy
develops differently for males and females in informal settings, such as
experiential extracurricular activities. The study will also generate
information about how the practices and attributes of groups in informal
settings contribute to improved self-efficacy. The findings could be used to
make recommendations about best practices that could be leveraged to retain a
more diverse population in the field of engineering. Ongoing formative
assessment will include input from the project’s external advisory board.
Expected outcomes will likely identify attributes and practices associated with
extracurricular experiential activities that contribute to improved self-
efficacy among women in engineering disciplines. Findings from the study will
also be used to develop interactive workshop activities for K-12 students with a
focus on self-efficacy. Project results will be disseminated through project and
affiliate web sites, conferences, and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.