* 2106196
* Modeling Macroions – Filling the Gap Between Ions and Colloids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mesfin Tsige, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 324,299.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Mesfin Tsige of the University of Akron is
using computer simulation to model the self-assembly of very large molecules
with multiple charges, called macro-ions. When placed in solution, coulombic
forces between charge sites cause macro-ions to self-assemble into large complex
structures. Dr. Tsige and his students will study the assembly process using
computer models that track the motion of hundreds of thousands to millions of
atoms. Their discoveries help interpret experimental observations and could also
impact our understanding of the self-assembly of other important macro-ions,
such as proteins and DNA. The project will help to train the next generation of
scientists by providing research opportunities for graduate students, as well as
undergraduate students through the NSF-REU center at the School of Polymer
Science and Polymer Engineering, and high school students from the local St.
Vincent-St. Mary School. In addition, Dr. Tsige and his group visit local
schools that serve large numbers of minorities, introducing their students to
scientific concepts and encouraging them to pursue careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Computer simulation of macro-ion self-assembly is challenging due to
the large numbers of atoms involved and long-range nature of coulombic forces. A
typical simulation tracks the self-assembly of 25-50 macro-ions, which are
surrounded by thousands of counterions and millions of solvent molecules, into
large 'blackberry-like' structures. Dr. Tsige uses molecular dynamics
simulations with a versatile coarse-grained model in which groups of atoms are
combined and represented by beads. Their approach reduces the size of the
system, making the simulation of large assemblies possible, while retaining
molecular-level detail. They will observe the initial stages of assembly
formation to develop a fundamental understanding of how self-assembly is
affected by macro-ion size, charge density, and solvent polarity, as well as the
presence of counter ions and co-ions. The project will complement experimental
studies of macro-ion assembly by providing insights that are difficult or
sometimes impossible to get from laboratory
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.