* 2106566
* Spiral Waves and Target Patterns
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bjorn Sandstede, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Many biological, chemical, and physical processes exhibit spiral waves and
target patterns. Spiral waves occur, for instance, in autocatalytic chemical
reactions, during cellular signaling of amoebae, and in cardiac tissue where
they are often the cause of cardiac arrhythmias and the precursor to ventricular
fibrillation and cardiac arrest. Similarly, target patterns appear prominently
in autocatalytic reactions and are also often found in systems with small
spatial inhomogeneities. This project focuses on understanding when spiral waves
and target patterns arise, under which conditions they can be observed, and what
mechanisms cause them to change their shape or disappear. The investigator will
develop analytical, computational, and geometric tools to answer these questions
and apply the findings to models of autocatalytic chemical reactions and wave
propagation in cardiac tissue. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
engaged in these research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on understanding existence, multiplicity, stability, and bifurcations of spiral
waves and target patterns through the development of spatial-dynamics
methodologies that can be applied to a broad range of reaction-diffusion
systems. The investigator will establish multiplicity results for one-
dimensional spiral waves and target patterns in reaction-diffusion systems using
spatial dynamics and apply these results to the Brusselator model. The second
project centers on transverse instabilities of spiral waves and target patterns.
Transverse instabilities do not contribute to the spectra of planar structures,
though they do cause linear instabilities. The aim is to investigate how these
instabilities manifest themselves on large bounded disks. The third project
focuses on making the numerical computation of spiral spectra more robust by
developing preconditioners that rely on appropriate exponential weights to
reduce the norm of the resolvent independently of the size of the domain. In the
last project, singular perturbation methods will be developed to understand the
limits of profiles and spectra of planar spiral waves and target patterns when
some of the diffusion coefficients in the model approach
zero.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.