* 2106845
* Collaborative Resaerch: SHF: Medium: Ensuring Safety and Liveness of Modern Systems through Dynamic Temporal Analysiss
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Timoleon Antonopoulos, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,997.00

Reactive/interactive systems such as web applications and servers, real-time
video streaming software, and IoT platforms are deeply embedded into all aspects
of the modern world. Many program-analysis techniques and tools have been
created to analyze important temporal properties of these systems that span both
safety ("nothing bad will happen") and liveness ("something good eventually
happens"). Unfortunately, modern static analyses are still limited in handling
complex program semantics that often appear in many real-world applications:
they support only simple properties, produce false positives, or do not scale to
large programs. Recent dynamic or "data-driven" approaches address several
shortcomings of static analyses to analyze more complex program properties more
efficiently, yet sometimes yield incorrect results. The project's novelties are
the theoretical and practical integration of static and dynamic approaches to
analyze, localize, and repair temporal aspects of reactive/interactive systems.
The project's impacts are the development of new theories and algorithms, giving
rise to advanced methods for ensuring the safety/liveness of today's
reactive/interactive software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's software involves
complex non-linear behavior, heap manipulations, and higher-order features. The
project's use of dynamic analysis enables inference of expressive properties of
these programs, while the use of static verification allows for validation of
those inferred properties. Furthermore, static verification and dynamic learning
mutually inform and bolster the power of each other, allowing for
safety/liveness analyses, and even for the localization of faults and synthesis
of repairs for temporal defects. The methods being developed are embodied in a
growing collection of automated tools to be released publicly. The results of
the research are used to develop new courses, senior design projects, and an
interactive Jupyter book in programming languages and software engineering. The
project broadens participation through several initiatives, aimed at middle/high
school students and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in the
investigators' local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.