* 2106635
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium:HardLambda: A new FaaS Abstraction for Cross-Stack Resource Management in Disaggregated Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* M Mustafa Rafique, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Datacenters use computer servers that are no longer able to address the
performance and scaling demands of emerging applications such as those in
healthcare, smart infrastructure design, and high-speed physics. There is a
fundamental mismatch between the capabilities of traditionally designed servers
and the dynamic requirements of modern applications. This mismatch leads to poor
utilization and significant waste of resources. A new way to design datacenters,
called the disaggregated approach, can address this problem by creating a need-
based on-demand model for computing. Here, servers are specialized to perform
specific functions, and applications use only those specialized servers that
best perform the functions needed by each application. While the disaggregated
approach improves utilization and makes datacenters easier to manage, it comes
at a performance cost: disaggregation requires applications to access critical
resources spread across a set of specialized servers over the datacenter
network. To mitigate such challenges of resource disaggregation, this project
designs HardLambda, a new Function-as-a-Service (FaaS) abstraction that brings
the functional and hardware requirements of an application together in a unified
fashion. HardLambda enables datacenters to allocate resources in ways that best
meet application needs while retaining the resource utilization and management
flexibility of disaggregated hardware. The designed algorithms and system
software will enable scalable control and sharing of disaggregated resources,
and create new approaches to adaptive resource allocation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HardLambda will make disaggregated datacenters a viable
and sustainable option for numerous applications in science and industry. The
project especially targets machine and deep learning (ML/DL) applications due to
their increasingly crucial role in many aspects of modern computing-powered
life. At the same time, HardLambda will improve the sustainability of large-
scale datacenters, where high utilization, efficiency, and continuous adaptation
to application requirements are all essential factors. The research will create
new knowledge on hardware and software co-designed FaaS systems and services,
and yield insights for efficiently supporting ML/DL applications at extremely
large scales. The project will engage with partners in industry and national
research laboratories to deploy HardLambda in real systems and will undertake
educational and broadening participation activities to improve community
awareness and understanding of the scaling and sustainability challenges of
large-scale computing infrastructure. Special emphasis will be given to engaging
students from underrepresented groups in the research and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.