* 2106892
* IRES Track I: US-Mexico Collaboration on Multimodal Detection of Objectionable Content in Online Videos in Spanish and English
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ioannis Kakadiaris, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,716.00

A major form of entertainment for children comes from movies, video games, and
online multi-media content. Content from these mass media communications sources
has the potential to negatively affect behavior, especially of young viewers.
The IRES team will design, implement, and evaluate new multi-modal technologies
to detect the presence of content that has been linked to negative effects on
viewers while training graduate and undergraduate student in research and
professional skills in a multi-cultural, multilingual international environment.
The project leverages a long-standing collaboration between faculty at the
University of Houston and the Instituto Nacional de Astrofísica, Óptica y
Electrónica (INAOE) of Mexico. IRES students will be trained and mentored on
multilingual methods of language processing, image/video analysis, and deep
learning for multimodal data. The goal of this IRES project is to contribute to
the growth of the U.S. national STEM workforce by training a cohort of future
computer science professionals (referred to as “IRES Scholars”) to thrive in a
multidisciplinary and multicultural environment and enabling them to acquire the
necessary knowledge and skills to pursue artificial intelligence research and
development. Through this project, IRES Scholars will be exposed to state-of-
the-art research in computer vision, natural language processing, and deep
learning. They will design, implement, and evaluate new algorithms and systems
that will contribute to the crucial goal of providing safer online spaces for
young viewers through clear and accurate descriptions of potentially problematic
online content. The project employs evidence-based mentoring that will support
program sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this IRES project
are to 1) advance the state-of-the-art in the research field of automated
analysis of multimodal content in multilingual and multidomain settings; 2)
prepare students with cross-disciplinary and multicultural research skills to
join a diverse and global STEM/knowledge workforce; 3) increase enthusiasm,
research skills, and professional skills of graduate and undergraduate students
from underrepresented population groups in STEM who otherwise might not have an
international opportunity for professional development; and 4) immerse students
in a community of native Spanish speakers to support engagement in an authentic
cross-cultural and multilingual training experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.