* 2106110
* IRES Track II. Engage Globally: Tropical Plants Metabolomics Advanced Studies Institute in Kenya
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Anne Osano, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2024
* USD 389,837.00

This IRES track II Award to Bowie State University, Bowie, in collaboration with
Morgan State University in Baltimore MD, will support ten graduate students for
three weeks annually during winter/ summers of 2021- 2023 for a series of
Advanced Studies Institutes. Training is primarily conducted at Nairobi
University with collaborating organizations in Kenya in the area of Plant
Bioactive compounds. This project trains global scientists and develops a
student’s identity as a scientist by providing global training exposure to
minority graduate students. The project has the following objectives: (1)
Educating student researchers for a global world; (2) Developing a student’s
identity as scientists; and (3) Developing student teamwork, leadership, problem
solving and presentation skills. The students will be mentored and trained in
research methodology and techniques and skills in Plant Metabolomics while being
involved in real research in Plant Science, thereby advancing discovery and
understanding in Natural Products as well as promoting teaching and training of
the underrepresented minorities in STEM and broadening
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant Metabolomics Advanced Studies
Institute (ASI) will use metabolomics approaches to study Tropical Plants used
in Traditional Medicine system in Kenya, Africa. Metabolomics Technologies is
one of the most recent of the ‘-omics’ approaches to emerge that enables the
analysis of the metabolite production by plants. Higher plants are ‘treasure
houses’ for a repertoire of phytochemicals, particularly secondary metabolites
with bioactive molecules which been used to combat several fatal diseases the
world over. Some of Kenyan forests have been defined as biodiversity hotspot of
great global importance and yet some of these plants are threatened with
extinction. Each ASI will include lectures by US and Kenyan Scientists, a field
trip, followed by laboratory analysis of samples. The student team of one US and
one Kenyan student will collaborate with their US and Kenyan mentors to develop
experimental plans, will perform analysis and then will give joint presentations
at the end of the ASI during a closing Symposium. Each team will co-author a
scientific presentation that will be given by the US student at an international
conference post-ASI. For more information, contact PI as
aosano@bowiestate.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.