* 2106754
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Heterogeneous Architecture for Collaborative Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Xiaoyong Yuan, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,960.00

The recent breakthrough of on-device machine learning with specialized
artificial-intelligence hardware brings machine intelligence closer to
individual devices. To leverage the power of the crowd, collaborative machine
learning makes it possible to build up machine-learning models based on datasets
that are distributed across multiple devices while preventing data leakage.
However, most existing efforts are focused on homogeneous devices; given the
widespread yet heterogeneous participants in practice, it is urgently important
but challenging to manage immense heterogeneity. The research team develops
heterogeneous architectures for collaborative machine learning to achieve three
objectives under heterogeneity: efficiency, adaptivity, and privacy. The
proposed heterogeneous architecture for collaborative machine learning is
bringing tangible benefits for a wide range of disciplines that employ
artificial intelligence technologies, such as healthcare, precision medicine,
cyber physical systems, and education. The research findings of this project are
intended to be integrated with the existing courses and K-12 programs.
Furthermore, the research team is actively engaged in activities that encourage
students from underrepresented groups to participate in computer science and
engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides the theoretical
underpinning and empirical evidence for an efficient, adaptive and privacy-
preserving design under heterogeneity, which fills a critical void - the
existing collaborative machine-learning approach fails to manage the immense
heterogeneity in practice. This project centers on three aspects: (1) design of
specialized neural architectures for heterogeneous hardware platforms to cope
with the limited efficiency of collaborative training due to heterogeneity; (2)
design of an efficient and adaptive knowledge-transfer framework to bridge
heterogeneous participants based on their underlying proximity benefits; (3)
privacy strategies for heterogeneous collaboration by identifying new
vulnerabilities and developing privacy-preserving mechanisms. A general-purpose
testbed is built to rigorously validate the proposed research and expand the
impact of this project. It is expected that this project opens a new research
paradigm to unleash the utmost potential of heterogeneous and collaborative
machine intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.