* 2106450
* CAS: A General Synthetic Platform for Atomically-Precise Functionalization of Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Christina Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 443,065.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Christina Li of Purdue University will
investigate the systematic incorporation of a library of metal ions into
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and subsequently study their catalytic
activity in the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), with the expectation that
isolated metal dopants exhibit high catalytic activity. The controlled
functionalization of these two-dimensional materials has the potential to expand
their uses because of the new and tunable properties that arise. After
synthesis, Dr. Li and her research team use a variety of instrumental techniques
to assess the structure and chemical properties of these materials and to test
their performance. They are also developing laboratory modules for advanced high
school coursework and teaching modules that are compatible for remote
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the exploration of the
synthetic phase space available for doping transition metals and post transition
metals into tungsten sulfide (WS2), the post-synthetic modification and
stabilization of the coordination environment around the metal dopants to
increase ORR activity, and the expansion of these synthesis, modification, and
dopant strategies to other TMDs. Broader impacts include the development of
electrochemistry modules for Advanced Placement chemistry courses and the
development of remote teaching modules. While developing a molecular level
understanding of TMD activation and functionalization, these materials will be
subsequently evaluated for their tunable and stable electrocatalytic
performance. This potentially broadly applicable strategy whereby metal-doped
TMD structures are synthesized is expected to yield enabling new opto-electronic
and catalytic technologies that have the potential to be utilized in batteries
or fuel cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.