* 2106417
* Non-classical Zinc Finger Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Sarah Michel, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 11/30/2024
* USD 429,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Sarah Michel of the University of Maryland Baltimore will
investigate the roles of native and exogenous metals on zinc-mediated RNA
regulation. Zinc is a critical metal found in living systems and plays an
important role in RNA regulation. This role includes associating with proteins
called Zinc Fingers (ZF). Under certain biological conditions (e.g.
inflammation) and certain environmental conditions (e.g. pollution), other
metals are present at elevated levels in the cellular environment and affect RNA
regulation. The PI will study how such exogenous metals affect the function of
ZFs in RNA regulation. Fundamental knowledge regarding the biochemical
mechanisms of metal mediated RNA regulation by ZFs will be obtained. Graduate
and undergraduate student participants will be trained in cutting-edge research
approaches to determine the principles of metal co-factored protein regulation.
The PI will continue SIMSI, a partnership with Notre Dame of Baltimore, that
connects female graduate students with undergraduate women for career panels,
mini-laboratory experiences, summer internships, and a ‘Minding your Metals’
activity. ‘Minding Your Metals’ was developed by the PI for students to test the
water in Baltimore City as ‘citizen scientists.’ The PI will work with
additional partners from UMB CURE Scholars (URM students from Baltimore City
middle schools) and Bryn Mawr School (high school girls in Baltimore City) to
expand ‘Minding Your Metals’ to survey the soil in Baltimore City and to make
connections with Baltimore City’s industrial past. Graduate students will
participate in the outreach efforts, which will be opportunities for them to
develop science communication and teaching skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is focused on three zinc finger (ZF) proteins that belong to the CCCH
class of ZFs, namely Tristetraprolin (TTP), cleavage and polyadenylation
specificity factor 30 (CPSF30), and YTH1 ll. TTP contains two CCCH domains and
regulates inflammation by controlling the levels of cytokines. TTP activity is
extremely sensitive to the local cellular environment, including the presence of
exogenous metals. A major goal of this work is to determine how exogenous metals
drive TTP function during inflammation using molecular, cellular and proteomics
approaches. These approaches include native ESI-MS, ICP-MS, XAS and NMR
spectroscopies, fluorescence anisotropy, and IP/ICP-MS. CPSF30 contains five
CCCH domains and one CCHC domain, and it regulates pre-mRNA processing. Dr.
Michel has discovered that CPSF30 contains a 2Fe-2S domain and binds two unique
RNA sequences. The research will focus on the identification of the specific
domain that “houses” the Fe-S cluster and elucidation of its function as well as
on answering the question how CPSF30 binds two distinct RNA target sequences.
YTH1 is a closely related yeast homolog of CPSF30, which lacks the CCHC domain.
Research on YTH1 will focus on the questions whether YTH1 contains a 2Fe-2S
cluster in addition to zinc sites and identification of the protein’s RNA
target(s). Another goal of this work is to determine the mechanisms of metal-
mediated RNA recognition by CPSF30 and YTH1 and to answer questions regarding
the evolution of this family of proteins and the commonality of the 2Fe-2S
cluster. EPR and CD spectroscopies, HDX and MCO/MS, and fluorescence anisotropy
will be used to answer these questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.