* 2106151
* Collaborative Research: Detailed Mechanistic Pathways of Surface Catalysis using SERS Spectroscopy: A Joint Theoretical and Experimental Synergistic Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lasse Jensen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 229,944.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors Stephen Cronin at the University of Southern
California (USC) and Lasse Jensen at Pennsylvania State University (PSU) will
investigate the physical mechanisms underlying a measurement technique called
surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). This work closes the loop between
theory and experiment, providing a detailed quantum mechanical picture of the
molecules adsorbed on metal surfaces during catalytic reactions. The project
uses a general SERS-based approach to study reaction mechanisms associated with
surface catalysis, and also toward the goal of imaging chemical reactivity of
catalytic surfaces with sub-micron spatial resolution. The information provided
by experimental SERS spectra is somewhat limited without the aid of supporting
theoretical work to provide atomistic insight on the underlying processes.
Therefore, it is crucial to carry out theoretical calculations in parallel with
the experiments in order to obtain a detailed picture of the molecules and their
reactions on surfaces, including the charge transfer between a molecule and the
metal surface, to distinguish between physisorption and adsorption, to establish
key catalytically active sites, and to identify surface-bound intermediate
species and the relative importance of other key aspects of catalytic reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative project, the experimental research
group led by Professor Stephen Cronin (USC) will record the SERS spectra of
electrode surfaces under electrochemical working conditions using a water
immersion lens, and the theoretical research group led by Professor Lasse Jensen
(PSU) will use time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) and related
methods to simulate adsorbed chemical species on metal surfaces. The direct
correspondence between the theoretical calculations and experimental
measurements in this effort promises to provide a robust test of the basic
hypotheses underlying charge flow between the adsorbate and metal surface. The
team is testing their hypothesis that dynamic charge flow between a molecule and
the metal surface plays an important role in the SERS enhancement process and
can be used to extract important chemical information from the mode-dependent
SERS enhancement factors. The researchers are testing this hypothesis by
correlating product formation with in situ SERS spectra that they record under
electrochemical working conditions. They will also examine a hypothesis that the
SERS enhancement is either correlated or anti-correlated with catalytic
activity. This hypothesis stems from the idea that both the enhancement and the
catalytic activity depend on the degree to which a given reactant or
intermediate is bound to the metal surface, which is ultimately based on the
amount of charge transfer that occurs at the interface. Additionally, the team
plans to use the relative SERS enhancement of different vibrational modes to
image reactivity and/or reactive sites based on the information they learn about
the relationship between dynamic charge flow and SERS
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.