* 2106388
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Movement of Computation and Data in Splitkernel-disaggregated, Data-intensive Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Ang Chen, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Resource disaggregation promises to change the way in which we design and
operate cloud infrastructure. But despite its positive impact on the operation
and cost-efficiency of data centers, disaggregation comes with overheads that
arise from introducing a PCIe and network round trip for each access to remote
memory, storage, or accelerators -- overheads that are particularly pronounced
for data-intensive applications. The core research question that this proposal
will answer is what the advent of disaggregation implies for the decades of
architectural decisions made by the designers of data-intensive systems, and
likewise, what OS-level primitives are required to adapt these systems to a
disaggregated setting. To that end, this work proposes a co-design of
disaggregated operating systems and middleware for data-intensive systems that
achieves both high performance and ease of use, &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Data-
intensive systems like the ones targeted by this work power much of todayâ€™s
world, providing analytics for everything from business informatics to Internet
search and healthcare. The proposed work will assist data center operators in
transitioning their infrastructure to support resource disaggregation while
minimizing performance overheads to applications written in common
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.