* 2106838
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Reinvented Data Plane for Memory-Disaggregated Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Harry Xu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2025
* USD 612,666.00

Cloud computing has become one of the most crucial elements behind how the human
society operates today. The cloud is powered by large datacenters, each
containing thousands of machines deployed across the globe. Recently, resource
disaggregation has been proposed as an effective means to improve datacenter
reliability and resource utilization by building each resource type as a
standalone resource “blade” and connecting different resource blades with a
network fabric. This project develops a novel kernel/runtime data plane that
allows users to run their applications efficiently on memory-disaggregated
clusters. It builds on an important insight: the current kernel/runtime modules
do not have any coordination between themselves, leading to severe performance
problems. We solve the problem with four major thrusts. The first two thrusts
develop semantics-aware caching, prefetching, and swapping modules so that these
low-level systems can operate with the consideration of what applications need,
improving efficiency. The last two thrusts develop disaggregation-aware runtime
and application support, making it possible for application/runtime developers
to leverage objects' location information to unlock massive optimization
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project builds a brand-new
kernel/runtime data plane, making it possible for future resource-disaggregated
datacenters to deliver superior efficiency to user applications. The development
of the project includes a postdoctoral scholar as well as several graduate and
undergraduate students, including students from minority groups. It not only
advances the state of the art of resource disaggregation, but also trains
current and future system developers. The project produces a set of artifacts
including technical reports, published papers, as well as code repositories. All
artifacts are made available online at the PIs'
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.