* 2106750
* SHF: Medium: PARIS: A New In-Sensor Computing Architecture for Intelligent 3-D Imaging Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Qing Yang, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

It is now a national research priority to design and develop novel computer
hardware for artificial intelligence as well as smart sensing with capabilities
for high-performance and energy-efficient computing. This project proposes a new
architecture, PARIS (Phased Array Radar with In-Sensor Computing), that
simultaneously senses and processes 3D images in real time. The new architecture
mimics the human visual system, which not only detects and senses 3-D visual
images but also performs first-stage image processing before the more complex
processing in the visual cortex of brain. It is the first in-sensor computing
architecture leveraging a phased-array radar system for an energy-efficient,
high-performance, low-cost, and compact sensing/computing platform. By combining
phased-array radar imaging and neuromorphic computing, PARIS opens up a new
avenue for research in in-sensor computing and intelligent image processing. The
project has transformative impact on a wide range of industries including
medical instruments, autonomous vehicles, machine vision, robotic control, IoT
devices, smartphones, and consumer electronics. Research activities of the
project are involving female and minority students, strengthening the PIs’
current K-12 outreach activities, and enhancing grand-challenge courses for all
majors at the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well-known in artificial-
intelligence systems that moving raw data from sensors to processing elements is
very costly in terms of energy, performance, and hardware. The newly proposed
architecture starts artificial neural-network computation concurrently while
sensors are acquiring data, substantially reducing data movement between sensors
and processing elements. Such simultaneous sensing and computation are made
possible by several technology breakthroughs. 1) In-sensor dot-product
computations with linearly tunable weights allowing in-sensor training and
inference of artificial neural network; 2) a novel statistical signal
acquisition technique, namely, Jitter-based Analog-to-Probability Conversion,
allowing for direct use of digital pins of integrated circuits for high-
bandwidth measurement with low-overhead; 3) a compact single-board system
supporting very high radio frequency bandwidths and completely removing the
radio frequency analog front-end required by conventional microwave imaging
systems (e.g. analog-to-digital converter, filter, or amplifier) by leveraging
the very short rising/falling edges of the digital waveforms used in today’s I/O
interfaces. The theory and design of the in-sensor computing architecture is
being established, and a 16-node prototype is being built. A thorough evaluation
and comparison is being conducted to demonstrate its performance, energy
efficiency, hardware cost, and potential applications to a wide range of
industries. Research results are being published in professional conferences and
journals and incorporated into undergraduate electrical/computer engineering
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.