* 2106965
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Stochastic Simulation Platform for Assessing Safety Performance of Autonomous Vehicles in Winter Seasons
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Xiaobai Liu, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,691.00

The safety of an autonomous vehicle (AV) highly depends on the generalization
capability of its automation systems (e.g., perception and decision-making) when
being deployed in diverse physical environments. Although the current
commercialization of AVs has been shown to improve traffic safety, AV safety
performance under adverse driving conditions in winter seasons still lacks
comprehensive evaluation. To bridge the research gap, this project aims to
develop a stochastic simulation platform, which examines the efficiency,
reliability, and safety of AVs, to prevent costly mistakes in widespread field
implementations. The research methods use a foundation of machine learning and
physics principles to formulate an integrated and hybrid approach to model
stochastic vehicle behaviors in traffic streams. Potential AV safety risks under
adverse driving conditions will be assessed with dynamic modeling of vehicle
behavior. The project will produce an open-source and cloud-based simulation
platform that allows public access to test vehicle automation systems. The
simulation models can be improved over time through the use of an online machine
learning architecture. The research activities will be closely integrated with a
set of education and outreach activities that include (i) incorporating advanced
computational techniques into the curriculum, (ii) sparking the interests of
younger generations in science and engineering by local K-12 outreach efforts
and summer camps, and (iii) broadening the participation of underrepresented
student groups in computing through the artificial intelligence club at San
Diego State University, a Hispanic serving institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary research project aims at
contributing improved algorithms in simulation and fundamental knowledge in
computing to building an advanced cyberinfrastructure toolkit. The project
focuses on producing a stochastic simulation platform that can evaluate the
capabilities of AVs' automated driving systems. The motivation is to produce a
reliable tool that can model stochastic vehicle behaviors, study vehicle
dynamics, and predict potential AV safety risks under adverse driving conditions
in winter. To this end, the project will first leverage the physics principles
of a microscopic traffic model to regularize the machine learning process for
simulating vehicle interactions. Second, both multi-vehicle and single-vehicle
crash probabilities in mixed traffic will be predicted by integrating the
traffic simulation model with a new vehicle dynamics model. The stochastic
vehicle motions will then be studied to assess AV safety performance on
icy/snowy pavement. Third, the models will be integrated into an open-source
software package with comprehensive documentation and multiple application
cases. The expected deliverable will be a public cloud-based platform that is
easy to access and is capable of incorporating new data streams for model
improvement. After validating the models with field data, the project will
connect the simulations with existing automated driving systems for testing. The
project can have broad impacts on other science and engineering fields, such as
physics-supported artificial intelligence, smart and autonomous systems, and
other research domains that depend on simulated data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.