* 2106453
* Collaborative Research: An Empirical Blueprint for the Gravitational-Wave Background
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Jenny Greene, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2024
* USD 333,903.00

Orbiting supermassive black holes in the centers of galaxies are thought to
produce very low frequency gravitational waves that could be detected by careful
timing of the arrival of radio pulses from pulsars through the ongoing pulsar
timing array project. It is expected that the combined signals from many of
these systems will produce a background noise that may soon be detectable by
pulsar timing arrays. This project will use a new method based on observations
of accreting supermassive black holes to provide an estimate of the strength of
this background noise as well as it's distribution in gravitational wave
frequencies. The project will use this new method to provide a framework for
determining the history of the growth of supermassive black holes once the
background noise is detected. The project will also create a Pulsar Search
Collaboratory hub in New Jersey and New York that will involve high school
students in the search for pulsars using real data. This award advances the
goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will use observations of quasar luminosity functions at different redshifts
combined with local observations of dual Active Galactic Nuclei to build an
empirically-based model of the cosmological distribution of supermassive black
hole binaries that will contribute to the stochastic gravitational wave
background expected to be detected in pulsar timing array observation. This
approach is complementary to the existing approach that is based on galaxy
merger simulations. The new approach will determine key physical parameters that
can be constrained through detection of the gravitational wave background. The
project will also create a Pulsar Search Collaboratory hub in New Jersey and New
York. The Pulsar Search Collaboratory is a long-standing NSF supported program
that allows high schools students to search for pulsars with real radio data. It
is a low-barrier way for students to experience science and scientific
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.