* 2106152
* CRII: III: A Bias-Aware Approach to Modeling Users in Interactive Information Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Jiqun Liu, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2024
* USD 182,959.00

People often act intuitively and are subject to systematic biases when making
decisions under uncertainty due to their inability to calculate all the possible
consequences of their choices - a fundamental cognitive phenomenon called
"bounded rationality". Without proactive information supports, these decisions
could be driven by misleading information, cognitive biases and heuristics and
may result in significant deviations from desired outcomes: Health information
seekers may easily trust medical misinformation that confirms their existing
expectations. Students often heavily rely on top ranked results and stop at
short satisficing answers, rather than exploring more credible and informative
Web pages. Online shoppers tend to quickly accept immediate mediocre
recommendations after encountering several bad quality products (with low
reference levels), without examining all available options. By investigating
users’ systematic biases, this project aims to break new grounds for information
retrieval (IR) research and address fundamental bottlenecks in the development
of bias-aware search systems. The outcomes of this project can help people
better leverage the power of information through 1) incorporating the knowledge
about their biases into search algorithms, and 2) proactively capturing bias-
related search problems and promoting informed, unbiased decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to study users’
systematic biases and leverage the learned knowledge in improving the
explanatory and predicative power of IR models. The technical aims of the
project include: (1) understanding the relationships between search interactions
and users’ systematic biases; (2) building bias-aware prediction models of
search interactions; (3) developing a scalable and potentially transformative
approach to modeling users and their decision-making processes under biases in
interactive IR. To achieve these goals, the investigator will conduct a series
of user studies and experiments. First, the research team will carry out
controlled lab studies to examine the associations between users’ search
interactions and several major systematic biases that have been widely confirmed
by behavioral experiments, including reference dependence, framing effect, and
loss aversion. Then, the team will extract new features and create bias-aware
models for predicting users’ search behavior, experience, and problems. Finally,
this project will apply deep neural networks in developing more fine-grained
bias-aware models based on large scale test collections and search logs, and
evaluate the performance of modified models in a wider range of search
scenarios. The proposed models can provide a more solid behavioral and
psychological basis for supporting the simulations of search interactions. Such
simulations, properly constructed, could address major challenges in the design
of boundedly-rational formal models and bias-aware intelligent
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.