* 2106069
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Distributions of Macrofungi: Quantifying Ecosystem and Climate Drivers of Fungal Reproduction
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Peter Kennedy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2025
* USD 209,582.00

Fungi are essential components of terrestrial ecosystems worldwide. Many fungi
produce fruiting bodies in the form of mushrooms. These mushroom-forming fungi
are key to forest nutrient cycling and, in association with plants, range from
beneficial symbionts to pathogens. Yet, we know very little about how regional,
landscape, and local factors such as fire combine to affect the distributions of
mushroom-forming species, nor how such distributions may be changing with a
shifting climate. Understanding mushroom distributions is particularly
challenging because these fungi spend most of their lives as branching filaments
of asexual cells (hyphae) below the soil, and there presence only becomes known
if and when they produce a mushroom. Recent work has shown that some fungi may
occur as hyphae inside plants thousands of kilometers outside their known
ranges, which are based on their sexual reproduction (i.e., mushrooms). These
extended ranges of fungal hyphae suggest that different factors drive the
distributions of life stages of these fungi, complicating efforts to forecast
how fungi will respond to changing environments. This research will examine the
distributions of mushroom-forming fungi across the United States by combining
mushroom collections with sampling of fungal DNA in soils, litter, plant
tissues, and the air, at study locations in eight different states (AK, AZ, CO,
FL, KS, NH, MN, OR). Information at each site such as climate, plant
communities, fire and soils will then be used to determine the conditions under
which particular fungi are able to sexually reproduce and where they can only
live as hyphae. The project will connect scientists with more than a thousand
community members from mushroom clubs, local schools, and museums who will be
involved in collecting mushrooms and working with fungal DNA for scientific
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the extensive climatic and geographic scope
of the study, containing diverse plant communities and fire disturbances, we
will test how environmental variables at multiple scales influence distributions
of sexual and asexual stages of fungi. We will also determine whether occurrence
of a fungus in one stage (e.g., mushrooms) is predictive of its occurrence in
other substrates at a site (e.g., soils, air, or plant tissues), allowing
improved sampling schemes for fungi. Together, this study will build the most
complete picture to date of how macrofungal communities and their relationships
change across climate gradients, thus building capacity to predict changes in
fungal distributions and ecosystem processes under changing climate. Further,
unprecedented fires in recent years have placed fire ecology in the public eye
like never before, such that expanding understanding of fire as a driver of
cryptic aspects of biodiversity and ecosystem dynamics is timely and of broad
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.