* 2106513
* Core Support for the National Academy of Sciences' Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology (BCST) and Chemical Sciences Roundtable (CSR)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Charles Ferguson, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Greg Collins
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,035,450.00

With the support of the Divisions of Chemistry (CHE) and Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET), Jeremy Mathis and
Maggie Walser of the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine
guide the management of the core activities of both the Board on Chemical
Sciences and Technology (BCST) and the Chemical Sciences Roundtable (CSR). The
results of BCST and CSR discussions and workshops are disseminated through
workshop reports made available through professional societies, scientific and
trade publications, and on the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BCST has broad
representation from academe and industry and uses its collective expertise to
identify the needs of the community. The BCST provides peer-reviewed consensus
reports, workshops, and symposia. The BCST enhances the impacts of the chemistry
and chemical engineering communities by engaging in questions of importance to
federal decision-makers. BCST members oversee a portfolio of ad hoc studies in
key areas of education, workforce, and research issues. Specific areas of
consideration for this funding period include: the quantum information
revolution, the green economy, materials sciences and its application to fields
such as heat transfer, electrochemistry related to battery technology, single
cell/molecule measurements, data sciences, undergraduate education and workforce
development, sensor miniaturization and improvements, and laboratory automation.
By raising issues impacting the conduct of chemistry and chemical engineering
research with federal officials, BCST helps assure that the community of
practitioners can remain at the forefront of knowledge. The CSR provides an
apolitical forum for leaders in the chemical sciences and engineering, with the
objective of enhancing understanding of issues that affect government, academic,
national laboratory, and nonprofit sectors. CSR discussions provide a vehicle
for interaction among the participants. These participants discuss and report on
education, exchange of information, and issues and trends that affect the
chemical sciences. CSR engages leading scientists and engineers to identify and
explore, through workshops, emerging topics of importance to the chemical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.