* 2106206
* Research Initiation: Facilitating Professional Formation of Engineers through Strategic Agency of Engineering Faculty
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Sindia Rivera-Jimenez, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2024
* USD 219,499.00

Professional societies are a crucial part of the ecosystem that fosters the
professional formation of engineers by, among other things, shaping the
technical direction of their disciplines and the ethical responsibility of
practicing engineers towards public health, safety, and welfare. In the last
decade, in partnership with engineering education institutions, these
professional societies have emphasized the need to include the social
implications of engineering in parallel to techno-economic fundamentals needed
to form engineering professionals. Despite these efforts, the transfer of
knowledge between academic institutions and professional societies, and its
influence in undergraduate engineering formation, is not well understood. Prior
studies have explored faculty stances on what social implications mean for the
engineering profession and what challenges they have encountered in implementing
transformations in the engineering curriculum. However, there is still a need to
uncover how engineering faculty develop strategies and the role their
involvement in professional societies can play in these actions. This project
will conduct a qualitative study to explore the strategic agency of engineering
faculty involved in professional societies as they transform their teaching
practices to address social implications in their classrooms. In a data-driven
field such as engineering, narrative inquiry research methods provide the
opportunity to place the experiences of chemical engineering faculty at the
forefront and find exemplar evidence-based strategies that can be shared with
other engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This longitudinal
qualitative study will use the Strategic Agency (SA) framework to understand how
engineering faculty involved in professional societies can become change agents
by transforming instructional practices that create a positive social change in
the formation of engineers. The three dimensions of the framework will involve
reflection, strategy, and action over time as individuals participate in
activities supported by a community of practice (CoP) formed by multi-
institutional engineering faculty within a professional society. SA suggests
that without reflection, strategies cannot be developed, and actions cannot
occur. The American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) was selected as the
professional society site due to its established commitment to chemical
engineering undergraduate education and the researcher's positionality within
the organization. The study aims to answer the following multidimensional
research question guided by the SA model: How do the reflections, strategies,
and actions within a community of practice (i.e., AIChE) composed of chemical
engineering faculty vary over time while changing instructional practices that
address social implications in the engineering profession? In this qualitative
study, Phase I will focus on the ethical validation of qualitative methods to
explore participant narratives as they learn about strategic agency and social
implications in engineering. In Phase II, the CoP will be formed within the
professional society and facilitated for eight months. Once the CoP is formed as
a setting for this study, purposeful and convenient sampling will be used to
find individuals willing to share their narratives. In this longitudinal study,
interviews and journal entries will be collected and coded using a combination
of in-vivo and focused coding. Finally, in Phase III, final revisions of the
data and interpretations will lead to co-constructing a narrative that reflects
faculty strategic agency (developed in this CoP) as they transform their
instructional practices in the classroom. The outcomes from this project will
advance the engineering education community's knowledge of how communities of
practice, supported by professional societies, can influence strategic agency
among engineering faculty willing to positively change their students' formation
as engineers. It is expected that understanding how this framework explains the
role of community support in fostering individuals to become change agents can
help other engineering organizations in implementing transformational
actions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.