* 2106331
* IRES Track I: US-South Korea Collaborative Training Program on Advances in Medical 3D Printing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2024
* USD 309,449.00

The use of cells, growth factors, and peptides for 3D printing of tissues and
organs to replace those affected by aging, disease, or injury is growing in an
exponential manner. Medical 3D printing is a multidisciplinary field that is
faced with several unique technical challenges. One challenge is that the cells
and other biological components in the "bioink" must not be damaged between
placement of the bioink in the bioprinter and patterning of the bioink by the 3D
printer. Another challenge is that the processing rates associated with
conventional 3D printing processes are too slow to create large cell-containing
tissue or organ substitutes. This International Research Experiences for
Students (IRES) project involves interactions by US students from diverse
backgrounds at North Carolina State University and its US regional partners with
the Pohang University of Science and Technology in South Korea to tackle the
“grand challenges” of medical 3D printing. Through this international
collaboration, the US students will develop valuable skills in theoretical
chemistry, materials science, physics, and biophysics that will allow them to
make important contributions to the medical 3D printing field over the coming
years.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The IRES project contains three years of
interrelated activities between US students and researchers at the Pohang
University of Science and Technology, which will enhance the global research
community’s understanding of medical 3D printing technologies. The training and
professional development activities associated with this project will enable the
students to develop independent research activities involving medical 3D
printing technologies. We envision several positive outcomes from this work,
including: (a) the participation by students, including those from
underrepresented groups, in medical 3D printing research, and (b) the
enhancement of the US medical 3D printing workforce through the training of
students in cutting edge medical 3D printing technologies. In addition, we will
use support from this project to develop quarterly Science Saturday lectures and
hands-on activities by the students, in which outcomes from the project
involving medical 3D printing will be disseminated to the wider community at the
NC Museum of Natural Sciences. The lectures and hands-on activities provided by
the students will give them the confidence necessary to pursue public speaking
and other dissemination activities related to medical 3D
printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.