* 2106214
* Collaborative Research: CNS: Medium:  Scalable Learning from Distributed Data for Wireless Network Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Vyas Sekar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 100,000.00

The transition to 5G is expected to witness not only an emergence of new
applications such as mobile augmented and virtual reality, but also opens up the
attack surface to both known, and previously unknown threats. Thus, wireless
networks of the future will need better control and management at different
temporal and traffic aggregation granularities (e.g., how to allocate spectrum,
how to quarantine distributed attacks etc.). This project aims to develop
scalable, machine learning based analytics on the data from a large set of
geographically distributed wireless core network entities such as base stations.
The research will enable new approaches for: (a) compressing the raw data via
novel summaries and sketches, that reduce overhead while simultaneously enabling
highly accurate scalable analytics (b) scalable yet highly flexible distributed
learning approaches that are built upon the emerging federated learning paradigm
and (c) flexible allocation of bandwidth to support the control plane analytics
that minimizes the impact on the data plane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research outcomes will be systems, algorithms, and data analytics workflows that
will inform the design and management of next generation critical wireless
infrastructures. The approaches developed will enable ISPs to better apportion
resources and enable better performance for emerging augmented reality
applications for societal benefit (e.g., disaster response and management). In
addition, the approaches can enable the discovery and profiling of new threats,
which will have significant implications on national security. The proposed
education activities are expected to provide students with a comprehensive
training in networking, security, system building, and data science. Thus, there
is significant potential for broader impact in terms of contributions to
workforce development in an area of national need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.