* 2106882
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Intelligent support for non-experts to navigate large information spaces
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Corey Jackson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2024
* USD 45,955.00

This project will build our understanding of how to enable non-expert volunteers
in a citizen-science project to contribute to analyses of large volumes of data
by searching for potentially causal relations. The increasing use of automated
scientific-data-collection instruments has led to an explosion in the amount of
scientific data collected, challenging the ability of scientists to analyze
them. Volunteers have less background knowledge than experts about the purpose,
context, content, provenance and processes associated with the data. A system
that provides such background knowledge will enable non-experts to make sense of
the data. The research plan also includes building system support to augment the
capabilities of the volunteers, for example by searching for related data and by
performing causal inference in conjunction with volunteers. Citizen-science
projects provide a vehicle to disseminate scientific practice, knowledge and
findings to the general public to increase awareness and understanding of the
practices and techniques of data-intensive science. Findings should be directly
applicable to the target context of involving citizen-science volunteers in
navigating and analyzing large quantities of science data and generalize to
other settings with big data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this research, volunteers
classify noise events (glitches) produced by the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO). Along with glitches observed in the main
Gravitational Wave channel, the detectors record around 400,000 auxiliary
channels of data that may provide information about the origins of the glitch.
The research will test hypotheses about the kind of additional information
needed to enable non-experts to productively navigate this large dynamic dataset
to find related information and will develop processes, techniques and tools to
allow the volunteers to manage and efficiently process the data. It will develop
our understanding of how and when to introduce which different types of
background knowledge about the data to enable non-experts to work on a task,
such as by providing maps and visualizations of particular data and
relationships at the time they are most needed in the volunteers' work process.
The gravitational physics and astronomy communities will directly benefit from
advances in LIGO detector characterization, data quality vetoes and hence signal
searches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.