* 2106319
* Research Initiation: A Hybrid Community of Practice Model to Prepare Pre-Service Teachers to Teach Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Courtney Faber, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

When pre-service teachers are provided with focused and effective training, they
will be better equipped to provide engaging, relevant engineering experiences to
K-12 students. Previous research has demonstrated that providing K-12 students
access to these types of activities is critical to create a more engineering
literate society, diversify the engineering workforce, and encourage and prepare
more students to pursue engineering careers. However, very few colleges and
universities currently provide any training to prepare pre-service teachers to
teach engineering, and although there are some courses that are currently being
offered at a few institutions, there has been very little research into the
effectiveness of these courses, and there is no clear guidance available on how
to best prepare pre-service teachers to teach engineering effectively. In this
project, pre-service teachers at the University of Tennessee Knoxville will
complete a service learning course in which they interact directly with
engineering students to learn about K-12 engineering education, develop lesson
plans and projects that can be used both in the K-12 classroom and in informal
educational settings, and work directly with K-12 students at after-school
engineering clubs, virtual and in person STEM family nights, and other outreach
activities. The impact of participating in this type of course, which is
structured to facilitate the development of a community of practice consisting
of both pre-service teachers and engineering students, on pre-service teachers’
perceptions of engineers and engineering work and confidence in their own
ability to teach engineering effectively will be examined. The ultimate goal of
this work is to develop best practices and models for training pre-service
teachers to teach engineering effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will explore the ways in which participation in a hybrid community of practice
affects pre-service teachers’ perceptions of engineering and teaching
engineering self-efficacy. Pre-service teachers enrolled in the VolsTeach
program at the University of Tennessee Knoxville will join engineering
undergraduate students to complete a service learning course that is co-taught
by faculty from engineering and education (EF 327 - Engineering Design in K-12
Education). This course is structured to create a hybrid community of practice
in which students collaborate with faculty and local K-12 teachers to develop
relevant, engaging engineering-focused projects and activities that can be
incorporated into K-12 classrooms. This course provides an ideal context to
examine the ways in which this model of engagement affects pre-service teachers’
perceptions of engineering and teaching engineering self-efficacy. This two
phase project will use both qualitative and quantitative methods to investigate
how pre-service teachers’ perceptions of engineering and engineering teaching
self-efficacy are affected by participation in this type of service learning
course. In phase 1, the perceptions and self-efficacy of pre-service teachers
who have not yet completed EF 327 will be explored, and the results of this
phase of the project will be used to modify elements of the course to address
the specific needs of these pre-service teachers. In phase 2, the perceptions
and self-efficacy of pre-service teachers who are currently enrolled in the
course will be examined as they work collaboratively with engineering students.
The overall goal of the project is to understand the ways in which pre-service
teacher self-efficacy and perceptions are impacted by participation in this
hybrid community of practice. The knowledge generated from this project will
inform the ways that pre-service teachers are prepared to teach engineering in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.