* 2106712
* IRES Track I: Mapping and Assessing the Seismic Hazard of the Guanacaste Tectonic Sliver, Costa Rica
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Paulo Hidalgo, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,893.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) contributes to the
formation of the next generation of research talent, thereby enhancing U.S.
leadership in research and strengthening economic competitiveness. It focuses on
mapping and quantifying the seismic hazard in rural communities in Costa Rica in
the vicinity of the Guanacaste Volcanic Arc. Over three years, fifteen U.S.
underrepresented minority undergraduate and graduate students from Historically
Black Colleges and Universities and minority-serving institutions in the state
of Georgia will participate in a four-week research experience that is enriched
by partnering with the University of Costa Rica, the Comision Nacional de
Emergencias, and Observatorio Sismológico y Vulcanológico Arenal-Miravalles. The
project creates unique linkages to these Costa Rican organizations that assist
in training, educating, and professionally developing the participating
students. Students' research findings will impact local communities and
organizations by providing them with data for advocacy to garner resources for
earthquake readiness. Intellectual products created by IRES participating
students will provide essential benefits to society, bringing the attention of
government agencies and local organizations. This experience will offer student
cohorts the knowledge, motivation, and inspiration to pursue internationally-
focused science careers to solve US-national and global challenges. More
importantly, this IRES program is built intentionally to deliberately contribute
to making the geosciences a diverse, equitable, and inclusive discipline and
produce future leaders and mentors for subsequent students in STEM research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES site project aims to have students
process Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar data (InSAR) and collect high-
resolution Global Navigational Satellite Systems (GNSS) data in the vicinity of
the Guanacaste Volcanic Arc in Costa Rica. By processing the data, participating
students will define the boundaries of the active seismogenic boundary and its
velocity vector. Using these results, students will (1) determine the main zones
of deformation, (2) identify potential seismogenic zones, and (3) produce an
assessment of seismic hazards. Our high-resolution approach could offer a rapid
identification method for other potential seismic zones. If successful, our
findings will be generalizable for focused research in active tectonic zones,
including the Western United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.