* 2106462
* Stochastic Optimal Control with High Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Halil Soner, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 285,000.00

Optimal control has been a central tool in many groundbreaking technological
advances starting with the moon-landing problem to recent developments in
machine learning. Impressive advances in the training of neural networks now
allow for further exciting complex and realistic applications. This project aims
to leverage these modern optimization techniques to build an almost data-driven
theory and to reduce the potentially catastrophic model risk that was prevalent
in the recent financial crisis. Additionally, as machine learning methodology is
becoming the dominant paradigm in many industries, education on these topics is
vital to the economy of the nation. Towards this goal, students from all levels
will be integrated into this research providing them with well-rounded training
on these omnipresent computational practices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technically,
several classes of problems will be investigated in-depth to highlight and
resolve different difficulties that the general theory faces. The main study
will be a general high-level analysis of recent numerical experiments based on
the efficient training of deep neural networks. Optimal control of McKean-Vlasov
jump-diffusions will be analyzed to provide a concrete setting. These problems
are naturally set in the infinite-dimensional Wasserstein-type spaces and pose
many interesting questions, including the construction of high-dimensional but
tractable approximations. Similar questions also arise in optimal transport
problems related to optimization with model uncertainty and risk management
problems in quantitative finance with many underlying risk factors, and they
have broad applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.