* 2106629
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Understanding and Strengthening Memory Security for Non-Volatile Memory
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Yan Solihin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 229,692.00

Memory safety is essential. Despite decades of research, unauthorized memory
reads and writes are still among the most common security attacks. The emerging
persistent memory (PM) amplifies the importance of strong memory protections. As
a promising supplement or substitute of DRAM as main memory, PM offers higher
density, better scaling potential, lower idle power, and non-volatility, while
retaining byte addressability and random accessibility. But PM poses some
principled differences for protection in comparison to traditional memory in
several ways: PM keeps persistent data so data corruption is persistent and
costlier; there is no obvious way to recover from data corruption; due to PM
data being long lived, its content and structure and hence the impact of data
corruption are likely shared by one or more applications over time. This project
aims to significantly advance the understanding of PM memory protection,
establish the foundation for persistence-conscious memory protection, create a
set of novel techniques for protecting PM memory, and for detection, recovery,
and diagnostic of PM corruption. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The growth of computer
performance that has enabled many scientific discoveries and inventions, is
slowing down due to the looming end of Moore’s Law. Persistent memory (PM) is
one of promising post-Moore’s Law technology that is expected to get into the
mainstream computing devices, from internet of things devices all the way to the
cloud. This research anticipates security vulnerabilities of the use of PM and
attempts to mitigate potential security breaches that could cause tremendous
loss to the industry, defense, scientific research, health, and many other
domains that will be relying on future computing
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.