* 2106225
* Scaled non-volatile bulk analogue memory for neuromorphic computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yiyang Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 393,983.00

The opportunity to harness the full potential of artificial intelligence rests
upon the vast quantities of data and the enormous computing power for data
processing. Such computing power come at the cost of ever-increasing demand for
electricity, often supplied by fossil sources. With silicon transistors nearing
its physical limits, these vast data and computing needs for future artificial
intelligence applications may necessitate novel, unconventional computing
approaches. Neuromorphic computing aims to replace the centralized digital
computing architecture with a high parallel, distributed, and analogue computing
architecture inspired by the human brain. Its core advantage for artificial
intelligence comes from the ability to co-locate information processing and
information storage on the same element. This results in many orders of
magnitude improvements in energy efficiency compared to conventional digital
computers, which must constantly fetch data between memory and processor. This
research aims to develop and improve a novel electrochemical resistive memory
cell that serves this memory-processor hybrid. This cell is inspired by a
battery; however, instead of storing energy, it stores information. This project
also trains undergraduate and graduate students in electrochemical and
electronic materials through both research and teaching. It also aims to develop
curriculum for secondary school teachers in functional materials through an ASM
teacher’s camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop an
electrochemical cell called bulk resistive random access memory (bulk-RRAM).
Conventional resistive random access memory, or RRAM, stores information in a
nanosized filament; this nanosized filament is extremely difficult to control
owing to the stochastic behavior of a discrete number of defects that control
the resistance state. In contrast, bulk-RRAM utilizes an ion-conducting solid
electrolyte to block filament formation and is instead sensitive to the
collective behavior of all oxygen vacancy defects in the material’s bulk. This
results in predictable and deterministic switching even with greater than 100
separable analogue information states. This research aims to solve the
outstanding challenges with bulk-RRAM, including the information retention time,
scaling to nanosized dimensions, device variability, and integration into
crossbar arrays. The goal is to determine whether the bulk-RRAM can provide the
elusive hybrid memory-logic cell to realize the promises of neuromorphic
computing that yields substantial improvements in energy
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.