* 2106268
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Inference and Control in Overlay Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Eytan Modiano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

An overlay network is a layered network, where the overlay layer makes use of
the underlay layer in order to deliver data to its destinations. Overlay
networks arise in many application scenarios such as content distribution
networks that are used to distribute content over the Internet (e.g., movies,
music, etc.), and are often used to deploy new technology that is incompatible
with legacy devices and protocols. A key challenge in such systems is that the
overlay cannot observe the innerworkings of the underlay, making it difficult to
use the underlay efficiently. This project will develop mechanisms to learn the
network topology and congestion of the underlay, and network algorithms for
routing messages efficiently across overlay networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing overlay systems mostly rely on simple models of
the underlay network, and may fail to achieve good performance when the underlay
nodes cannot be fully observed and controlled. This project will develop
fundamental limits and practical algorithms for monitoring and controlling
partially observable/controllable overlay-underlay networks. This will be
accomplished through two interdependent thrusts: thrust 1 will develop
techniques that utilize measurements and side information observable to the
overlay in order to infer the underlay network structure and state; and thrust 2
will develop algorithms that utilize the inferred information to control the
operation of overlay nodes so as to optimize the performance for overlay
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) and The Pennsylvania State University (PSU) brings
together expertise on network inference and network control to tackle the
problem of joint inference and control in overlay networks. The results of this
project will enable a more efficient migration to next-generation networks and
will facilitate system manageability for increasingly complex networks. The
project will also support educational activities at the participating
institutions and help broadening participation in computing of under-represented
groups through summer programs at MIT and PSU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A project
website will be maintained by the PIs for the duration of the project at:
https://sites.psu.edu/nsrg/research/inference-and-control-in-overlay/. The
website will contain information about project participants, significant
results, and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.