* 2106766
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Deep Generative Modeling for Urban and Archaeological Recovery
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Nathaniel VanValkenburgh, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 71,355.00

Modeling and understanding the evolution of urbanization over the course of
human history elucidates a key aspect of human civilization, and can
significantly help stakeholders today make better informed decisions for future
urban development. However, the modeling of current and past urban spaces
remains extremely challenging and a rigorous comparison between ancient and
modern urban form is lacking. In this project, the team will provide an
artificial intelligence based framework for discovering a relatively complex
urban model (walls, corners, rooms, orientation, and built area clusters) from a
sparse number of remote sensing and field observations. As opposed to cities
present today, modeling a historical urban site is fundamentally limited to
sparse (and few) data observations because most of the structures have been
eroded or destroyed. The research team will provide a preliminary
cyberinfrastructure, pursue 3D re-creations of historical sites, create a
feature- and time-based urban taxonomy of ancient sites from the late
Prehispanic and Colonial period Andes and the Bronze/Iron Age South Caucasus
periods, while leveraging the NEH and American Council of Learned Societies
funded GeoPACHA web platform for result dissemination. Moreover, the project
spans three major US universities and five departments, led by five experienced
senior researchers and a team of at least six multidisciplinary graduate
students, as well as additional undergraduates, who will produce publications in
top tier venues, conference workshops, as well as theses and PhD
dissertations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assist with modeling and understanding
the evolution of urbanization over the course of human history, this project
seeks a computational methodology for discovering a relatively complex urban
model from a sparse number of observations. While performing a dense acquisition
of a current city implies focusing on sensor deployment and on big data issues,
modeling a historical urban site is fundamentally limited to sparse (and few)
data observations because most of the structures have been eroded or destroyed.
Inferencing approaches show significant promise, but they struggle in a
situation of relatively sparse data and obscured structure. As a first domain
application, the team will assist computational archaeologists having relatively
sparse data but of an underlying structured site. First, they will solve a set
cover problem to determine a discrete set of atomic elements and rules that are
minimal yet sufficient to span the sparse data. Second, they will use these
atomic elements and rules to produce sufficient data samples for training deep
networks in a self-supervised manner in order to learn how to perform
segmentation, classification, and completion. Finally, they will use the learned
representations to model archaeological sites resulting in reconstructions,
semantic understandings, and site taxonomies, for instance. Further, the team
anticipates that the developed models can be re-tooled to assist with other
domains also limited to sparse observations of an underlying structured
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.