* 2106713
* Preparation and Development of Metal-Isocyanide Framework Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Joshua Figueroa, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 540,499.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, Professor Joshua S. Figueroa and his research team at the University
of California, San Diego develop a new class of metal/organic hybrid solid-state
materials. There is significant current interest in the development of solid-
state materials with advanced function and properties for a range of
technological and industrial applications, including chemical separations,
chemical storage, energy harvesting and chemical catalysis. Among such
materials, Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs), which are a type of hybrid
inorganic/organic solid-state material, are a standout. The reason for this is
because MOFs can be prepared with diverse structures, for example with different
inorganic portions of the material, and it is relatively easy to tune the
organic component for specific applications. While the synthetic and materials
chemistry aspects of MOFs have significantly advanced over the past two decades,
a common paradigm is followed for their preparation. This involves the
interaction of oxidized metal centers with anionic organic linker groups. From a
fundamental perspective, this particular constitution limits the chemical and
physical properties of the materials, especially from the perspective of
mediating chemical or adsorptive processes that rely on the presence of metal
centers with high electron counts. In this respect, this project establishes a
class of neutral linker groups for the routine and reliable incorporation of
electron-rich metal centers into network materials. The scientific work of this
award is augmented by a significant effort to broaden participation of junior-
and community-college transfer student participation in materials science
research at the University of California, San Diego, as well as to introduce
local San Diego Area high school students to modern aspects of materials science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, Professor Joshua S. Figueroa of the University of
California, San Diego explores the synthesis and properties of isocyanide
coordination networks featuring low-valent metal centers as secondary building
units (SBUs). Organoisocyanides are well established to form robust metal-ligand
linkages via strong sigma-donation and highly efficient pi-backbonding
interactions. This electronic duality has also been long recognized to stabilize
low-valent metal centers. Seeking to transport these discrete molecular
properties into a network-materials context, synthetic investigations are
undertaken to prepare porous, three-dimensional solid-state networks featuring
low-valent transition metal nodes using multi-topic isocyanide linkers.
Furthermore, in an effort to simultaneously impart coordinative saturation on
the metal nodes of these materials, the m-terphenyl isocyanide ligand topology
are a predominant feature of these studies. Newly prepared isocyanide
coordination networks are investigated in the context of their fundamental
materials properties. An emphasis is placed on chemiabsorptive properties of
these materials as function of the low-valent metal center incorporation. The
experimental work undertaken as part of this award is complemented by an
educational program targeting the early inclusion of junior/community college
transfer students at the University of California, San Diego in materials
science research. The goal of these efforts is to increase participation of a
broader student demographic in STEM research and advanced training. Lastly, to
augment training experiences for students working on this project, outreach to
local area high schools in the form of curriculum augmentation is also a major
component of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.