* 2106405
* Reimagining the Platform for Semiconducting Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Barry Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 464,024.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Barry C. Thompson of the University of
Southern California is developing a new class of semiconducting polymers by
decorating commodity plastics with electro-active segments. Semiconducting
polymers impact many areas of contemporary energy and electrical science. These
long chain carbon-based macromolecules are extensively used in solar cells, LED
screens and other applications that utilize the conversion of electricity to
light. In this research, electro-active segments will be attached to main
polymer backbone consisting of single carbon-carbon bonds with a specific
alignment relative to one another. Segments will be prepared that contain small
organic molecules featuring carbon-nitrogen pi-bonds (double bonds). When these
pi-bonds are broken, they create positive and negative charges along the side
chains of the main polymer backbone. With such a chemical approach, non-metallic
plastics are converted to plastics that conduct electricity and absorb light. If
successful, this work will fundamentally change the approach toward electro-
active polymers with improved environmental stability and mechanical properties.
This work will provide an outstanding framework for the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in polymer chemistry. Outreach and
educational activities will focus on participation in the USC-Cerritos Community
College summer research internship program and implementation of writing-to-
learn pedagogies in undergraduate organic chemistry courses. There is also
broader impact through international collaboration with the collaborators in
Germany adding a special dimension to the training experience for the students
engaged in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on
development of semiconducting polymers based on non-conjugated (meth)acrylate
backbones containing electronically active pendant groups. In the first specific
aim, the synthesis of homopolymers will be optimized using controlled radical
and anionic polymerization methods, with the goal to identify the influence of
critical aspects of polymer structure on charge transport with a central focus
on the role of stereoregularity. Post-polymerization methods to incorporate
electroactive pendants will utilize transesterification and thiol-ene addition
reactions. The second aim focuses on stereoregular block copolymers based on
acrylate backbones. Lastly, the prepared multi-functional polymers will be
explored for potential use in organic photovoltaics by evaluating the
correlations between polymer structure and thin film morphology. The proposed
research, if successful, will advance fundamental chemistry knowledge on how to
use tacticity to assist in the arrangement of the electro-active pendants into
an ordered conformation to facilitate and improve electron transport efficiency.
In the long run, this work could also enable the preparation of flexible,
lightweight and inexpensive organic semiconductors with roll-to-roll
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.