* 2106823
* Effect of Surface-Bulk Partitioning on the Oxidation of Aqueous Dicarboxylic Acid Aerosols
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Fabien Goulay, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,073.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry
Division at the National Science Foundation, Fabien Goulay at the University of
West Virginia will study the oxidation of atmospheric aerosols. The specific
focus is on the reaction of organic molecules at the surface of particles with
free radicals. The project will investigate how the chemistry between the gas
and particle phase can change particle composition. It will also provide
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, including first
generation college students and students from the Appalachian region, who have
been traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous chemistry at the surface of aqueous aerosols
will be investigated using a combination of flow tube experiments, molecular
dynamic simulations, and chemical modeling. By changing the composition of the
particle from surface-active to surface-inactive molecules, the comparison of
the model outcomes with experimental data will provide information about the
effect of interfacial reactions on aerosol chemical oxidation. In addition, by
using aqueous aerosols containing different dicarboxylic acids, Dr. Goulay’s
group aims to understand how the solute molecular structure affects the
oxidation of atmospheric aerosols. This work will also contribute to the
training of future scientists by providing cross-disciplinary training and
access to state–of–the–art experimental resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.