* 2106117
* CNS Core: Small: Rethinking High-Performance Persistent Transactions
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Michael Bond, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,998.00

Persistent memory is an exciting new technology that bridges the gap between two
well-established technologies: main memory, which is fast to access but loses
its contents in the event of power loss or hardware failure, and the disk, which
is slow to access but retains its contents if the power goes off or the hardware
fails. To help programmers write correct programs using persistent memory,
programming languages provide a construct called persistent transactions, which
help ensure that persistent memory can recover to an understandable state after
a power or hardware failure. However, existing algorithms for persistent
transactions slow programs significantly because they rely on techniques called
crash-consistency mechanisms that are inefficient. The project develops two
novel crash-consistency mechanisms that overcome the limitations of prior crash-
consistency mechanisms. The project applies these new mechanisms to develop new
persistent transaction algorithms. The project evaluates these algorithms
empirically in comparison to prior persistent transaction algorithms, on real-
world persistent memory programs and platforms. A key insight of the new crash-
consistency mechanisms lies in the novel way they leverage technology called
hardware transactional memory that is included in Intel processors. The work
aims to contribute efficient crash-consistency mechanisms and persistent
transaction algorithms that are more efficient than prior approaches and to
influence future research in this rapidly developing
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to improve the performance of a key
construct for achieving reliable persistent memory programs. This improvement
can help make persistent memory widely practical, by achieving both main
memory's performance and the disk's retention of contents in the event of
failure. Practical persistent memory will improve programmer productivity and
make computing systems faster and more reliable. These benefits in turn will
impact society across domains that rely on computing, including science,
engineering, transportation, and medicine. To increase impact, the
implementations resulting from the project will be made publicly available in
addition to published research papers. Undergraduate and graduate courses taught
by the PI will incorporate the project's research topics. Workshops organized by
the PI will expose undergraduate students, especially students who are members
of underrepresented groups, to computing research and grad school. These
activities will help to educate a diverse workforce of computer scientists
trained in the project's topics and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.