* 2106650
* Partial Differential Equation Methods in Kinetic Theory and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Yan Guo, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 367,690.00

The project considers boundary effects for several physical models widely used
to describe a hot plasma. The questions studied are motivated by, and have
implications for, a broad range of applications. As in the case of a nuclear
fusion device, where it is important to control and understand the plasma-wall
interaction, or in Einstein's theory for general relativity, where a fundamental
open question, known as cosmic censorship conjecture, is whether a gravitational
collapse of a star cannot (i.e., black holes) or can (i.e., naked singularity)
be observed generically. This work will construct examples of exact
gravitational collapse in Einstein's theory that can be observed, and will
investigate the dynamics of contact lines as well as the effect of a Coriolis
force in oceans. This project provides training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kinetic theory provides important models for
describing a confined plasma in a device. Because of the severe mathematical
difficulties caused by the presence of a grazing set at the boundary, questions
of well-posedness for kinetic plasma models in the presence of magnetic effect
remain open. Motivated by applications such as contact-line dynamics and the
effects of a constant rotation or a constant magnetic field on a fluid, the
investigator will pursue several lines of research. The problems investigated
are the asymptotical stability of BGK waves; the rigorous analysis of numerical
evidence that indicates the existence of a relativistic Larson-Penston self-
similar gravitational collapse, leading to formation of a stable naked
singularity and the violation of the cosmic censorship hypothesis; and the well-
posedness of a hydrodynamic model describing contact line dynamics. The project
will also develop a new mechanism to construct long time (global) smooth
inviscid fluid flows based on the dispersive effect induced by a constant
rotation or a magnetic field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.