* 2106383
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Precise Static Analysis of Event-based Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Zhijia Zhao, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Event-based programming is used to construct software systems
with&lt;br/&gt;billions of users, including mobile apps, Web clients and
servers, and&lt;br/&gt;Internet-of-Things devices. Despite their popularity,
event-based&lt;br/&gt;systems are poorly understood and prone to errors because
the&lt;br/&gt;underlying platform, not the program, generates and
invokes&lt;br/&gt;events. These difficulties have wide-ranging consequences such
as&lt;br/&gt;losing users' work in mobile apps, silent errors or downtime in
Web&lt;br/&gt;services, and unexpected Internet-of-Things device behavior.
This&lt;br/&gt;project is (1) making event-based systems easier to analyze,
(2)&lt;br/&gt;constructing an approach for extracting order between certain key
events&lt;br/&gt;before the program runs, to prevent ordering errors, and (3)
allowing&lt;br/&gt;rigorous reasoning about event-induced volatility, to prevent
errors&lt;br/&gt;such as state loss and state inconsistency. The project
is&lt;br/&gt;introducing students to new approaches to event-based
system&lt;br/&gt;reliability, as well as providing researchers and software
developers&lt;br/&gt;with models and infrastructure for analyzing such systems.
End-users&lt;br/&gt;are expected to benefit from more reliable event-based
systems, whether mobile,&lt;br/&gt;browser/server, or Internet-of-Things. The
project is increasing the&lt;br/&gt;participation of underrepresented groups in
computing via outreach,&lt;br/&gt;mentoring, and research
involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Event-based systems continue to surge in
popularity. The relative&lt;br/&gt;novelty of this paradigm, coupled with
essential programming&lt;br/&gt;difficulties (such as non-deterministic event
processing, asynchronous&lt;br/&gt;state manipulation, and state destruction)
complicate the construction&lt;br/&gt;of robust, reliable applications.
Furthermore, there is a shortage of&lt;br/&gt;program-analysis approaches and
tools for this space. To address these&lt;br/&gt;issues, this project is
introducing program-analysis foundations and&lt;br/&gt;practical tools such as
event sensitivity, making event&lt;br/&gt;creation/initiation a first-class
object of program analysis, and&lt;br/&gt;allowing precise analysis via path-
based event ordering. The project&lt;br/&gt;is intended to result in: static
analyses that incorporate the aforementioned&lt;br/&gt;advances, enabling
analysis of event-based applications; as well as&lt;br/&gt;automatically-
constructed platform models (which address&lt;br/&gt;deficiencies in current,
manual/ad-hoc platform models, and are intended to be&lt;br/&gt;usable in other
contexts, e.g., to facilitate program&lt;br/&gt;understanding). The project is
targeting the Android mobile platform,&lt;br/&gt;JavaScript client and server
programs, as well as Internet-of-Things&lt;br/&gt;applications. Using these
tools, developers and researchers are&lt;br/&gt;able to gain effective insights
into event-based applications&lt;br/&gt;facilitating the construction of
reliable applications as well as&lt;br/&gt;exposing incorrect behavior in
existing programs; this, in turn is&lt;br/&gt;benefiting event-based ecosystems'
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.