* 2106416
* IRES Track I: International Research Experience for Students on Artificial Intelligence for Congenital Heart Diseases
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Yiyu Shi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 10/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this IRES project is to provide U.S. students with valuable
research experience in the exploration of novel artificial intelligence (AI)
algorithms for congenital heart diseases (CHDs) in Guangdong Provincial
Cardiovascular Institute (GCI), located at Guangdong General Hospital (GGH).
Located in Guangzhou, China, GGH is one of the biggest hospitals in China, and
the GCI affiliated with it is constantly ranked top three in terms of
cardiovascular disease research. The project will select three (3) graduate
students and three (3) undergraduate students nation-wide each year and support
them to visit GCI over a period of twelve (12) weeks to work with world-renowned
researchers on cardiovascular medicine in an immersive setting, addressing some
of the most critical and challenging problems through innovative AI algorithms
that can benefit the large population suffering from
CHD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHD is the leading cause of mortality from birth
defects, which occurs 1 in every 110 births in the United States, and even more
in developing countries. CHD comes with very large structure variations which
makes it time-consuming and tedious to diagnose manually. In addition, the most
common treatment for CHD is cardiac surgery, which is rather complex and is
widely regarded as the jewel in the crown of surgery. Currently, only
radiologists and surgeons with extensive experience in CHD can handle them
confidently. The outcome of this project will potentially boost the
effectiveness and efficiency of CHD treatments, and benefit the large population
worldwide who suffer from CHD. The project will also enable U.S. students to
conduct high-quality research on AI for CHD, in collaboration with their
research mentors at GCI. Such experiences expose them to the international
research community at a critical early stage in their careers. It is expected
that through participating in this program, U.S. students will gain extensive
experience on the research of deep learning with medical applications, on the
international healthcare prospects, on Chinese culture, and on performing and
collaborating in an international environment in general. The experience will
also be shared to the broader community through personal social media as well as
outreach events such as KidAI webinars for national K-12 students interested in
AI. To ensure sustainability, the project will provide professional development
support for the participating students. It will also focus on minorities and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this
IRES project is to explore innovative AI algorithms that can benefit the
diagnosis, treatment planning and prognosis of CHDs. The proposed research,
through the collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between doctors at GCI and the IRES visiting
students in the engineering fields, targets fundamental&lt;br/&gt;issues in
medical image processing and diagnosis of CHD that need to be addressed
urgently. Although AI has shown great potential in general medicine, the large
heart structure and great vessel connection variations in CHDs cannot be handled
well by existing AI algorithms developed for other diseases. The proposed
research will be the first to tackle this challenge and innovative algorithms
are expected to be developed. It can also be anticipated that with the close
interaction with leading research group on cardiovascular diseases in China, the
breakthroughs made from these projects at GCI can have a direct impact on AI-
based medicine research, clinic usage, and social
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.