* 2106511
* Diverse Degradable Polymers from Versatile Ring-Opening Metathesis (Co)Polymerization of Electron-Rich Cyclic Olefins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Yan Xia, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Yan Xia of Stanford University will
develop new chemistry for generating new types of degradable plastics to address
the grand end-of-life challenge of persistent plastics to the environment and
human health. In 2018, 27 million tons of plastics were landfilled or released
into the environment in the US and are nondegradable. New polymers that are
strategically designed to be recycled, degraded, or depolymerized on demand are
highly desirable for environmental sustainability as well as many technological
and biomedical applications. This project integrates educational endeavors at
several levels to raise the public awareness of plastic pollution and recycling,
and recruit and cultivate pre-college students, especially underrepresented
students in the Bay Area, for future STEM careers. The research also provides
perfect examples to interface organic chemistry, polymer science, and
sustainability in undergraduate and graduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP)
of cyclic alkenes is a widely used method to synthesize controlled functional
polymers. Enol ethers with an electron-rich alkene have long been believed to
deactivate the catalysts for ROMP and routinely used to quench the
polymerization. But the Xia laboratory discovered surprisingly efficient ROMP of
cyclic enol ethers and their copolymerization with strained cyclic alkenes,
leading to new types of degradable polymers with acid labile backbones. This
research project will explore the metathesis chemistry of electron-rich
heteroatom-substituted cyclic alkenes and their copolymerization for the first
time, and understand how the thermodynamic and kinetic parameters impact the
control, microstructures, degradation profiles, and physical properties of the
resulting degradable/depolymerizable polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.