* 2106738
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Robust, Scalable, and Practical Low Rank Approximation
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Haesun Park, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

Nearly all aspects of society are affected by data being produced at a faster
rate in recent years. The data from experiments, observations, and simulations
are not only in more classical science and engineering domains but also in
numerous other areas such as businesses tracking more and more facets of
consumer behavior, and social networking capturing vast amounts of information
on the relationships between people and their actions and interactions. There is
a strong need to distill a set of data into a smaller representation that
separates useful information from noise and captures the most important trends,
patterns, and underlying relationships.  Such a representation can be used for
direct interpretation of hidden patterns or as a means of simplifying other data
analytic tasks.  This project addresses these challenges by studying a concept
from linear algebra called low rank approximation.  The project develops
techniques that faithfully distill the meaningful information within a data
set.  The algorithms are also designed to exploit high-performance computers so
that analysts can get results more quickly and tackle larger problems.  The
overall effort in the project is expected to close the gap between algorithms
that can effectively handle very large-scale problems and the data analyst’s
ability to convert raw input into meaningful representations and actionable
insight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The matrix and tensor low rank
approximations being studied in this project serve as foundational tools in
numerous science and engineering applications. Imposing constraints on the low
rank approximations enables the modeling of many key problems, and designing
scalable algorithms enables new applications that reach far beyond classical
science and engineering disciplines. In particular, mathematical models with
nonnegative data values abound, and imposing nonnegative constraints allows for
more accurate and interpretable models. Variants of these constraints can be
designed to reflect additional characteristics of real-life data analytics
problems. The primary goals of this project are (1) to develop robust techniques
for evaluating computed low rank approximations for rank and model
determination, (2) to develop scalable parallel algorithms for large and robust
low rank approximations on today’s extreme-scale machines, and (3) to provide
end users the practical tools required to compute and analyze solutions at
scale. Typical data and application scientists use Python or Matlab to
iteratively compute, visualize, and evaluate solutions, and they are limited to
small data sets with feasible memory and computational requirements. While high-
performance algorithms and implementations exist, end users would not leverage
these tools if they cannot rely on the robustness and generalizability of the
results. This project aims to close this gap, developing an end-to-end system
with scalable solutions for all steps of the data analytics
workflow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.