* 2106444
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Fundamental Challenges in Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Santosh Vempala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 827,543.00

Efficient Optimization is the bedrock of modern computation. Progress over the
last century has led to powerful techniques to solve problems from myriad
applications. The complexity of basic questions such as solving linear systems,
linear programs and integer programs is at the core of the theory of algorithms.
The goal of this project is to advance the field by addressing challenging
problems on the frontier of efficient optimization. New algorithms for the
problems considered would be of direct interest to many disciplines in science
and engineering. The project includes a research workshop targeted at junior
researchers, as well as a video tutorial course by the team of investigators on
contemporary techniques in optimization. Research findings from the project are
being incorporated into courses on “Continuous Algorithms”, “Spectral
Algorithms” and “Integer and Linear Programming”. Course content and software
resulting from the project is being made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus problems of this project range from
continuous to discrete: (1) sparse general Linear Systems, (2) sparse Linear
Programs and p-norm minimization, (3) using Semi-definite Programs for efficient
low-rank approximation to combinatorial optimization problems, (4) advancing the
continuous approach to discrete optimization and (5) resolving the complexity of
integer programming. Recent progress on discrete optimization has relied heavily
on inspiration and analysis from continuous methods, while the solution of
continuous optimization problems often uses graph theory. It is anticipated that
new techniques bridging this spectrum, and of broad, general applicability, will
be developed. The connections to operations research, numerical analysis,
stochastic processes (including various types of diffusion), homotopy methods,
graph theory, geometric properties of convexity and the theory of lattices are
being enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.