* 2106560
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: Emerging Directions in Robust Learning and Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Shaofeng Zou, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 05/31/2025
* USD 278,852.00

Future applications of national importance, such as healthcare, critical
infrastructure, transportation systems, and smart cities, are expected to
increasingly rely on machine-learning methods, including structured learning,
supervised learning, and reinforcement learning. In many of these applications,
the probabilistic distribution governing the data may undergo variations with
time and location, and data could be corrupted by faulty or malicious
agents/sensors. Such model deviation and data corruption could result in
significant performance degradation. The goal in this project is to explore new
ways to design learning and inference methods that are robust to distributional
uncertainty and data corruption. This project is bridging and further advancing
research in areas of statistical learning, optimization, control theory, network
science, reinforcement learning, statistical signal processing and information
theory. The methods developed are likely to have significant impact on a wide
range of applications in areas of societal importance such as healthcare,
transportation systems, smart grids, and smart cities. The investigators are co-
organizing special sessions at conferences, workshops and symposia on robust
learning and inference to disseminate the research outcomes of this project,
formalize far-reaching research directions, identify new challenges in this
emerging area, stimulate the development of original research ideas, and foster
interdisciplinary collaborations. The investigators are committed to broadening
participation of under-represented minorities and women both among the graduate
and undergraduate students in computing and engineering. The investigators are
enriching their current courses and further developing new courses on topics
related to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to make
new contributions to the theory and practice of robust learning and inference.
Several emerging directions are being investigated, including robust sketch-
based learning, robust mean estimation, synthesis of confusing inputs to
machine-learning models, robustness to distributional uncertainty at inference
time, and robust model-free reinforcement learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.