* 2106402
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Connecting Practitioners to Design:  Methods and Tools for Live Participatory Design Fiction
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Nicolas LaLone, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2025
* USD 234,221.00

This project will develop a novel approach to doing participatory design through
live streaming media: Live Participatory Design Fiction (LPDF). Live media have
the ability to stream video and afford interaction by participants. Previously,
live media afforded audience participation through text-based chat. Now, new
live media forms and democratizing systems have progressively enabled viewers to
participate more directly and collectively. Participatory design incorporates
stakeholders in the design process to provide subject-matter expertise and
surface issues; however, prior approaches work with small, co-located groups
with banal results. The work draws on playing out design fiction - imagining
technology futures in service to designing systems well and equitably - as part
of the design process. We can envision a future wherein live media affords
participation not only for entertainment, but to shape the future of a specific
design, a field, or an entire industry. Further, rendering a design fiction
system into an interactive artifact holds promise to make these imagined systems
more real for potential users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to establish new methodologies that broaden participation of diverse
stakeholders in designing new technologies, enabling participatory design at
scale while evaluating how best to use live data to iterate designs and uncover
design principles for live media collaboration and active involvement. To better
support building future systems for specialized, geographically distributed
populations, innovative and realistic simulation methods and tools will be
developed. LPDF will facilitate participatory design at distance and scale by
asking participants to play out a role in a design fiction, in this case one
focused on the future of information technology in emergency management. This
project will iteratively develop LPDF methods and tools, building on an existing
live media platform. In parallel, it will develop scenarios, grounded in
practice, for design fictions to be developed within the emergency management
domain to foster technology integration and influence systems being designed on
other projects. The project's broader impacts will come through releasing and
promoting open-source tools for doing LPDF that support designers and
researchers, impacting emergency management practice through system designs,
releasing reusable scenarios based on practice, and developing educational
resources for doing LPDF in conference courses and college
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.