* 2106821
* Catalyst Project: Infusion of Data Expertise into Undergraduate Biology Curriculum
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* ByungHoon Kim, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,869.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Albany State
University intends to infuse data science and computational analyses into its
biology curriculum. The proposed curricular enhancements aim to incorporate
teaching and learning strategies that support studentâ€™s ability to understand
and interpret globally accessible biological data, which has the potential to
increase student preparedness for STEM graduate programs or the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adapts a unique curriculum framework for
promoting Data Expertise in the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum (DEUBiC). The
central hypothesis is that students with data expertise are better prepared and
are qualified for the globally competitive computational science-intensive
workforce, as developed through strategic evidence-based teaching and learning.
The team at Albany State University will infuse selected existing courses with
content for honing data expertise as well as design and offer new upper-level
courses: Biological Instrumentation Technology, Advanced Computing Resources in
Biology, and Computational Genomics. Students will engage in data intensive
research both as course-based research projects, and as mentored senior research
projects. Through the project-based experiences, students will transfer learning
from new and infused courses to pose research questions, develop testable
hypotheses and design appropriate experiments to test predictions. The
assessment of scientific literacy, quantitative literacy, and strategic learning
approach, if successful, will contribute a transferable blueprint that could be
applied to undergraduate STEM education, with potential for impact among
underserved communities, minorities and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.