* 2106155
* IRES Track II - Cape Horn ASIs: Climate change and disease ecology at the southern end of the Americas
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ricardo Rozzi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 396,610.00

Over sixty percent of Earthâ€™s ice-free areas are best described as human-
modified anthropogenic biomes. This means that pristine areas are scarce, and
that most ecological studies are de facto studies of anthropogenic impacts on
ecological systems. However, the study of pristine systems is necessary for
developing a baseline understanding of ecological function so that we can apply
this understanding to develop meaningful and appropriate conservation plans, or
even know what applied research questions are worth pursuing. Unfortunately,
pristine systems are at a premium. In general, graduate students do not have the
opportunity to develop their ecological understanding under pristine or near
pristine ecological systems. In addition, the National Academy of Science,
Engineering and Medicine data suggest that current STEM graduate student
training may not be providing a rigorous education in quantitative experimental
design. Quantitative experimental design is designing studies with an eye toward
the statistical analyses that will be used to analyze the data. Using
quantitative design principles, rooted in sound ecological theory, ensures that
researchers are asking relevant and testable questions that will lead to
meaningful results. This is a crucial component of graduate student education
and researcher professional development, as it ensures that increasingly scarce
research funding are not wasted Additionally, collaboration is becoming the norm
in research, and international collaboration via electronic media was becoming
increasingly common even before the current pandemic. In this IRES Track II
project, students will have the opportunity to be trained in quantitative
experimental design and work as part of a multinational research collaboration
to study infectious disease emergence in one of the few remaining pristine
places on Earth. The Cape Horn Biosphere Reserve (CHBR) off the southern tip of
South America protects pristine ecosystem is perfect for this type of graduate
student training. The CHBR is part of the sub-Antarctic Magellanic ecoregion,
which is globally significant because it houses the worlds southernmost forest
biome, contains numerous endemic species, is remote, and is relatively free of
anthropogenic impacts. In addition, with the exception of Avian Malaria which
arrived just a few years ago, the system is relatively free of zoonotic
diseases. Making the region a living laboratory to study the ecosystem
transformations that co-occur with human discovery and settlement of an area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will bring graduate students from across the
US to work in international collaborative teams with Chilean students from the
Universidad de Magallanes (UMAG) and the Institute of Ecology and Biodiversity
(IEB) in Chile, and a diverse group of faculty from across the US and Chile. The
focus of the program will to be provide graduate students robust and hands-on
training in quantitative experimental design and international collaboration
resulting in publications. The research questions themselves will be flexible,
but organized thematically. Specifically, this IRES Track-II will focus on the
merging molecular genetic analysis using a mobile next generation sequencing lab
with mist netting and arthropod trapping to investigate the impacts of wildlife
disease on local biodiversity and community structure. Secondarily, eDNA and
traditional wildlife disease monitoring approaches will be applied to understand
the potential for zoonosis and understanding ecological factors that contribute
to, or inhibit, zoonosis. Resultantly, participation in this program will help
train the next generation of scientists with the skills needed to make
meaningful contributions to the study of ecology, conservation, and wildlife
disease ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.