* 2106501
* Collaborative Research: FET: Medium: Probabilistic Computing Through Integrated Nano-devices – A Device to Systems Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Joerg Appenzeller, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 783,896.00

The world has seen a steady increase in demand for computational power, with no
end in sight. Search engines that allow users to find answers to pretty much all
of their questions are expected to deliver results in less than a second, while
understanding the customer with a high probability based on just a few words of
input. This is not the type of computation that is precise and gives the
“correct” answer; it instead provides solutions that are more associative,
mimicking the human way of addressing problems. In fact, many problems in the
real world are probabilistic in nature, and conventional computing schemes are
not optimized for these tasks. In 1982 Nobel Prize winner Richard Feynman stated
in recognition of this fact: “The way to simulate a probabilistic nature might
still be by a computer which itself is probabilistic... So, it becomes what I’ll
call a probabilistic computer, in which the output is not a unique function of
the input.” To promote the progress of science, this proposal aims to explore,
model and build hardware components and circuits that ultimately enable such a
probabilistic computer, which will greatly benefit the society as a whole.
Moreover, educational tools, new courses and training opportunities both for
undergraduate and graduate students are being created that expose them to a
device-to-systems research program on probabilistic computing in order to
prepare them for the new era of electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
adopts a Device-to-Systems approach that covers experiments from single devices
and small circuits all the way up to simulations with thousands of devices. It
addresses the question of how to implement probabilistic functionality in
hardware from a variety of different angles. The key objective of this proposal
is to take the next step in the development of probabilistic computing by
experimental demonstrations of integrated probabilistic bits (p-bits) and
p-circuits and quantifying advantages of scaled probabilistic computers through
key figures-of-merits in system-level applications based on experimental input.
This is being achieved by employing unstable magnets in a magnetic tunneling
junction (MTJ) configuration as random number generators that become tunable by
the use of field-effect transistors in a suitable circuit layout. Initial
projections estimate that if integrated MTJs coupled with conventional
transistors can be scaled up, one can expect to achieve orders of magnitude
improvements compared to what is achievable in conventional semiconductor
technology in key figures-of-merits, such as the number of statistically
independent samples per second (also referred to as flips per second) that a
probabilistic sampler can go through.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.