* 2106445
* Unveiling relationships between synthesis, structure and nonaqueous ion cycling in chemically preintercalated layered oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ekaterina Pomerantseva, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 378,391.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The expanding variety of applications
relying on portable autonomous power sets a challenge for the discovery of
innovative materials to be used as high-capacity electrodes in batteries with
lithium and more affordable sodium and potassium ions in electrolytes. The
solution is offered by hydrated layered oxides with a large interlayer region,
such as bilayered vanadium oxides (BVOs). This research, funded by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at
NSF, exploits controllable BVOs preparation via a low-temperature wet-chemical
synthesis route, developed in the Prof. Pomerantseva’s laboratory and called
chemical preintercalation, to incorporate specific amounts of various ions and
molecules into the interlayer region of material structure. The structure
parameters governing improved transport of electrochemically cycled ions and
enhanced structural stability are revealed leading to advanced electrochemical
properties. This research provides necessary information for the design of
electrode materials to enable next-generation energy storage systems with high
energy density and long cycle life. The fundamental new knowledge gained from
this study also advances emerging applications based on reversible cycling of
ions beyond energy storage, such as sensing, actuation, ion-tunable non-volatile
memory and electrochromics. This project provides a platform to equip senior
undergraduate and graduate students with interdisciplinary skills. The
educational and outreach efforts enrich undergraduate and graduate curricula at
the PI’s institution, enhance women’s involvement in science and engineering,
and introduce pre-college students to energy storage technology through the
development of a new intercalation reaction
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research at NSF, develops strategies to alleviate
performance degradation of high-capacity metastable hydrated layered insertion
oxides with an expanded interlayer region over extended electrochemical cycling
caused by structural instability. The goal of this research project is to
provide a fundamental understanding of how the nature and amount of interlayer
species affect the structure and energy storage properties of this family of
materials. Bilayered vanadium oxides (BVOs), which demonstrate unique chemical
versatility of the interlayer region, serve as the model material system.
Complimentary X-ray and neutron pair distribution function analysis is used to
determine the positions of all atoms in the structure of BVOs to establish
structure – property correlations. The goal is achieved by testing the
hypothesis that interlayer species define diffusion pathways and mechanism of
charge storage by not only forming certain arrangements in the interlayer region
but also directing the formation and intralayer structure of V-O layers. The
hypothesis consists of three parts, each of which is tested in the project: (1)
The nature and amount of chemically preintercalated inorganic ions determine the
structure of V-O layers, thus affecting diffusion of electrochemically cycled
ion; (2) Interlayer water molecules contribute to creating intercalation sites
and diffusion paths for electrochemically cycled ions and their concentration
can be controlled at certain value, enabling stability of layered structure with
minimized parasitic reactions which cause performance degradation; (3) Further
tunability of the structure and charge storage properties of bilayered vanadium
oxides can be achieved via chemical preintercalation of versatile organic
species. The ultimate aim of this research is to determine correlations between
chemical composition of the interlayer region and the structure of bilayered
vanadium oxides and to establish parameters that lead to facilitated diffusion
of electrochemically cycled ions and enhanced structural and electrochemical
stability of the electrodes in nonaqueous Li-ion, Na-ion and K-ion intercalation
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.