* 2106605
* IRES: Human-Wildlife Feedbacks in the Mountains of Southwest China
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Vanessa Hull, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 10/31/2024
* USD 299,746.00

The earthâ€™s ecosystems are increasingly threatened by the growth and
industrialization of human societies, which places increasing pressure on global
wildlife populations. Interdisciplinary approaches are needed to untangle the
complex reciprocal interactions (feedbacks) between human activities and
wildlife. Knowledge about feedbacks can help predict the unintended, and
potentially adverse, consequences that arise in the aftermath of the
implementation of conservation policies designed to protect wildlife and their
habitats. This IRES program will give 15 U.S. undergraduate students a rare
opportunity to conduct interdisciplinary research on human-wildlife feedbacks in
flagship protected areas in a biodiversity hotspot in the mountains of
southwestern China. Three cohorts of 5 students each will spend 8 weeks in the
summers of 2022-2024 in China working with experts at the Key Laboratory of
Southwest China Wildlife Resources Conservation in Sichuan, China. The Key
Laboratory is a globally renowned institute with a long history of conducting
pioneering research on biodiversity, wildlife ecology, and conservation in the
region, including on the giant panda, an international icon for conservation.
Students will also attend intensive training sessions at the University of
Florida that will focus on learning scientific methods and honing professional
development skills. Student recruitment will explicitly preference
underrepresented groups in the sciences to enhance their future career
opportunities. While abroad, students will also have a rare opportunity to be
immersed in Chinese culture and expand their worldviews, in turn better
preparing them to join the global internationalized
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on human-wildlife feedbacks is scarce,
which contributes to high levels of uncertainty and failure in the wildlife
conservation realm. This work seeks to uncover previously hidden social and
ecological mechanisms shaping human-wildlife feedbacks to allow for better
predictions of adverse conservation policy outcomes in the future. The 15 U.S.
undergraduate students who are recruited to participate in this IRES program
will join long-term research projects being conducted collaboratively between
the US PIs and Chinese host researchers that address three main types of human-
wildlife feedbacks. Feedbacks include complex interactions between (1) forest
recovery and wildlife crop raiding, (2) antibiotic use in livestock rearing and
the microbiome of giant pandas, and (3) interaction between non-timber forest
product (NTFP) collection and wildlife occurrence. The diverse collection of
interrelated projects will give students the opportunity to gain experience
implementing a variety of field and lab techniques (e.g., infrared camera
trapping, vegetation surveys, specimen collecting, molecular analyses, and semi-
structured interviews) as they tackle key questions that shape cutting-edge
development of interdisciplinary and systems-level research on wildlife
conservation. The project will thus uniquely prepare students from
underrepresented backgrounds to pursue competitive careers in science in a
globalized world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.