* 2106046
* Conference: Bureaucratic Cultures, Rigidities, and Latitude in Interactions with Survivors During Disaster Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Katherine Browne, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 46,052.00

Anthropologists have documented how asymmetrical relationships produce great
suffering for disaster survivors. Yet, in the absence of a robust theoretical
apparatus for analyzing the mechanisms of power exercised and contested in such
relationships, there is limited understanding of how bureaucratic systems may
inhibit recovery outcomes. This conference would convene scientific specialists
working on issues of disaster recovery and preparedness to explore the
intersection between bureaucracy and disaster recovery. The workshop broadens
the participation of groups historically underrepresented in science. It will
also facilitate the development of more effective methodologies and avenues for
the dissemination of findings from anthropological research to promote public
understanding of science and the scientific process. The conference also
provides a platform for the training of graduate students in science and the
scientific method. Finally, it will create policy recommendations on harm and
risk mitigation from disasters that will be presented at the Global Platform on
Disaster Risk Reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data collected by the
Culture and Disaster Action Network (CADAN), a network of practitioners and
academics, demonstrate that some individuals within bureaucratic hierarchies
will engineer bureaucratic mandates to optimize outcomes for survivors. This
three-day workshop aims to develop a clearer sense of what variables contribute
to behavioral changes among bureaucratic actors oriented to such optimization.
The fourteen participants include established and early disaster experts as well
as doctoral students from a range a scholarly and professional disciplines. The
project advances anthropological science in the areas of environmental risk,
disaster preparedness and recovery, and theories of bureaucracy. It explores
bureaucratic culture in disaster recovery, with a focus on its cultural logics,
structural functions, and the normative assumptions that underpin its
institutional mandates. The workshop aims to develop a conceptual model to
provide a foundation for mapping the interactions between legal mandates,
cultural norms, and bureaucratic precedent in addressing disaster
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.