* 2106607
* Turbulent structures in the magnetic interstellar medium
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Susan Clark, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 477,828.00

The Interstellar Medium (ISM) is the stuff that fills the space between the
stars in our Galaxy. The ISM includes ionized gas and a variety of molecules, as
well as dust threaded with magnetic fields. The investigators will learn how
magnetic fields interact to form new structures in interstellar gas and dust.
They will better understand turbulence and magnetism in galaxies. This project
is important because the magnetic structures in our galaxy obscures objects much
farther away. By better understanding our galaxy, they hope to detect faint
signals that provide clues on how our universe began. The investigators will
pilot a new summer research experience for formerly incarcerated undergraduate
students. They hope to enable these students to begin careers in science and
technology. Graduate students will develop data visualization tools used in
scientific and public outreach talks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
combine archival Arecibo Observatory neutral hydrogen data with new dust
polarization maps from the Atacama Cosmology Telescope to quantify the coherence
of the magnetic field between the warm and cold neutral media, and to
characterize the spatial structure of dust polarization on small angular scales.
Their work will also use archival Zeeman splitting measurements to make a new
determination of properties of the magnetic field and of magnetohydrodynamic
turbulence in the diffuse interstellar medium. The code and data products
produced in this work will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.