* 2106076
* Collaborative Research: MRA: ConFines: Continental-scale study of the role of fine particles in riverine material fluxes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Arial Shogren, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 151,442.00

Streams and rivers move more than water and the material dissolved in it—they
also carry a complex blend of small particles, collectively called seston.
Seston typically includes silt, clay, organic material, and microbes that
originate from the surrounding land or that are produced within the stream
itself. While the significance of seston transported by streams can be seen in a
muddy river after a rainstorm, the function of these particles in streams
remains poorly understood. However, as seston moves downstream it can serve many
crucial roles, including as food and energy for stream animals and as a source
of the life-building elements carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus for coastal
ecosystems. Using field samples and high-frequency water quality data from
environmental sensors at National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) sites,
this project will increase our understanding of the role of fine particles as
they travel in streams. Results from the project will help to refine estimates
of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus carried from the land to the coast by
riverine particles. These data can be used to inform global earth-system models.
Undergraduate and graduate students will participate in this research. NEON data
will be used to introduce data-science techniques, computer modeling, and
graphical analysis into several undergraduate courses and educational modules
developed by the team will be made publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
role and importance of seston in flowing waters is underappreciated, both
because of its diverse composition and because of challenges associated with
robust sampling capable of capturing spatial and temporal dynamics. This project
will increase understanding of riverine seston composition as well as how seston
couples carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus transport in rivers. The team will test
three complementary hypotheses that will expand understanding of the role of
seston in riverine fluxes: 1) seston composition depends on continental-scale
patterns in geology and climate; 2) seston is an integrated signal of
terrestrial and in-stream biogeochemical processes that varies according to
seasonal or hydrologic context; and 3) seston quantity and quality will reveal
river network-scale processes that connect headwaters to larger rivers. This
project will leverage new and ongoing data collection efforts at 22 wadeable-
stream and river NEON sites to measure seston quality and quantity. These data
will be used to develop predictive models for seston composition and transport
across seasons, hydrologic conditions, and NEON domains. By shedding light on
the role of seston in riverine carbon and nutrient biogeochemistry at the local,
regional, and continental scale, the work proposed here will provide key data
needed to parameterize models that further define the role of rivers in global
biogeochemical cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.