* 2106881
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: Structured Inference and Adaptive Measurement Design in Indirect Sensing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Zhihui Zhu, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Scott Acton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 344,017.00

Modern sensors and imaging systems can capture far richer information than ever
before, but with this capability comes certain challenges. First, the
measurements provided by these systems are often not directly interpretable. A
specially designed algorithm must process them to extract the information of
interest and create, for example, the cleanest possible image. Second, the
measurement systems themselves often have different configurations that can be
used to collect information in different ways. It may not be evident in advance
which configurations are best in any particular scenario. To address the above
challenges, this project focuses on (i) developing new theories and algorithms
for processing measurements and extracting the underlying information and (ii)
providing guidance on how to optimally design such measurement systems and
adaptively reconfigure them during the measurement process. Much of the research
in this project is general and intended to be applicable across broad classes of
measurement systems. Therefore, the advances in this project have significant
potential benefits across diverse areas such as biomedical imaging, astronomy,
computation, and communications. The project also involves an integrated
outreach and education plan, focusing on promoting accessibility and awareness
of STEM concepts for K-12 students through virtual and in-person outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pushing the frontiers of what can be measured about
the physical world requires going far beyond direct linear measurements.
Instead, by design or necessity, many modern sensors acquire only indirect
nonlinear or probabilistic observations of some object of interest. This project
focuses on three motivating applications that involve such indirect
measurements: (i) phase imaging, in which simple imaging systems use defocus to
convert (classically unmeasurable) phase information into (measurable) intensity
variations; (ii) sparse super-resolution imaging, in which direct imaging
(photon counting) is combined with various types of quantum measurements to
overcome "Rayleigh's curse" and achieve super-resolution of scenes with multiple
point sources; and (iii) quantum state and quantum process tomography, in which
probabilistic measurement techniques are used to infer the states of quantum
systems and the quantum processes that act on these systems. Integrated with
these applications, the project is focused in two overarching research thrusts:
(i) structured inference, in which new representations and algorithms are
developed for efficiently recovering low-rank matrices, structured factors, and
other parameters of interest from indirect measurements; and (ii) adaptive
measurement design, which aims to answer questions such as how to optimally
design and configure the measurement system, how to incorporate structured
inference algorithms, and how to adaptively adjust the measurement system state
based on the collected measurements. Using atomic norm minimization as a
foundation, the project develops new analysis of the nonconvex geometry of low-
rank matrix recovery from probabilistic measurements and new techniques for
sparse density estimation that allow inference of structured factors and other
parameters from probabilistic measurements. The project also leverages modern
machine learning and optimization-based signal recovery techniques to develop a
cohesive and general framework that enables indirect measurement systems to
adaptively configure the measurement system and ultimately reconstruct signals
with enhanced signal-to-noise ratio, improved resolution, and reduced overall
sensing budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.