* 2106771
* CNS Core:Medium: NFLambda -- A Granular, Scalable and Secure NFV Framework for High Performance  Packet Processing at 100 Gbps and Beyond
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Zhi-Li Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,216,000.00

The rapid growth of network bandwidth at the edge makes it possible to support
high bandwidth 8K &amp; volumetric video streaming, Augmented Reality/Virtual
Reality and Distributed AI and IoT applications. The growing traffic demands
from these new applications will pose enormous burdens on cellular packet core
networks and mobile edge clouds, where NFV is meant to be a key enabling
technology. The software nature of network function virtualization (NFV) enables
network operators to dynamically scale out/in by instantiating more/fewer
instances of network functions (NFs) in accordance with traffic demands or in
preparation for or reaction to failures, thereby providing high scalability,
availability and fault tolerance. Perhaps more importantly, NFV endows network
carriers and service providers with the ability to quickly adapt, upgrade or
roll out new network features or services. This proposal advances a new
"greenfield" framework for refactoring and re-architecting NFV, referred to as
NFLambda. The goal is to tackle the challenges in scaling packet processing for
service function chaining in commodity multi-core servers to 100 Gbps and
beyond. If successful, NFLamda will serve as an enabling technology for creating
more cost effective and elastic service environments in emerging 5G and other
access networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to tackle the
challenges in scaling service function chain packet processing in commodity
multi-core servers to 100 Gbps and beyond, while at the same time being able to
fully take advantage of the software nature of NFV. NFLambda is designed with
several salient features using a novel actor framework in the style of
functional reactive programming (FRP). The NFLambda actor framework provides a
powerful declarative, secure-by-design programming model with built-in
monitoring and security mechanisms. The proposal advances a principled approach
for decomposing conventional ("monolithic") NFs into a collection of granular
actors via separation of control and data, refactoring both states and
operations. NFLambda is designed to not only take into account the server
architecture and cache/memory access resource constraints, but also effectively
leverage software/hardware capabilities (e.g., compilation optimization
techniques and hardware accelerators), smart NICs and programmable switches to
achieve high performance packet processing. NFLambda is highly scalable,
resilient and secure by design. The project will engage undergraduate, women and
URM students in integrative research and education and provide outreach to K-12
students. The project will also engage industrial partners for tech
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.