* 2106597
* IRES Track I: US-Germany Research Experience for Students on Materials for Energy and Sustainability
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Andrea Hodge, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Materials research and development is empowering novel technologies and enabling
competitive energy solutions, which are essential for a sustainable future. In
particular, research on materials is contributing to efforts in clean energy
generation, energy storage, and carbon sequestration. The proposed work is
centered around a strong international collaboration with Forschungszentrum
Jülich (FZJ) scientists, allowing for innovative research based on both
experimental and computational studies of materials for sustainable energy
technologies. The research will combine advanced synthesis and characterization
techniques with novel mechanical testing and simulations. This proposed research
will deliver an exceptional international research experience to the
participating students guided by three main objectives: (1) to introduce an
international research environment to graduate and undergraduate U.S. science
and engineering students; (2) to broaden the participation and dissemination of
global research; (3) to enhance U.S.-based research and innovation for materials
in energy and sustainability through international collaborations. Through
recruitment efforts, underrepresented students from the University of Southern
California (USC) and from minority serving partner institutions will be
encouraged to apply and participate in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
IRES Track I: U.S.-Germany Research Experience for Students on Materials for
Energy and Sustainability at USC and FZJ in Germany prepares both graduates and
undergraduates, particularly underrepresented science and engineering students,
for global research. The project focus is on materials for energy technologies
within the framework of climate and environmental protection. The overarching
goal is the development of novel engineered materials with enhanced properties
and behaviors to empower efficient and sustainable energy solutions. Design-
processing-property relationships of materials for high temperature
applications, electrochemical storage, and clean energy generation are
particularly important in the context of global climate and environmental
protection. A long-term scientific goal of this proposal is the development and
optimization of new materials for efficient energy technologies. The research
theme of the program “Materials for Energy and Sustainability” is strengthened
by the collaboration with two elite Institutes at FZJ: “Institute of Energy and
Climate Research” and “Institute for Advanced
Simulation.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.