* 2106180
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: The Use of Mobile Technology and Innovative Pedagogy to Improve Undergraduate Thermal-Fluid Science Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Diana Bairaktarova, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 42,912.00

Student retention remains a problem in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) programs. This project will utilize mobile technologies and a
technology-enhanced curriculum to improve student engagement and learning in
STEM undergraduate courses. The technology-enhanced curriculum will be fully
integrated in the thermal-fluids course to deliver content and to facilitate
student engagement with the content, instructor, and peers. This research
project will measure how mobile technology, when purposefully integrated into
engineering teaching, impacts student engagement, enhancement, and extension of
learning to real-life problems. Through the full integration of mobile devices,
findings from this research will transform the teaching and learning of the
thermal-fluid science curriculum. The study will be led by a researcher who is
new to the field of engineering education research who will be mentored through
research methods by an engineering education researcher. This aligns with the
Research Initiation in Engineering Formation program’s goal of initiating new
researchers into engineering formation research to meet the needs of a diverse
workforce. Undertaking such research project will supplement the lead
researcher’s experience in developing and implementing mobile learning in the
classroom while using social science research approaches to advance both the
professional formation of future engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying
goal of this research is to measure how mobile technology, when purposefully
integrated into engineering teaching, impacts student engagement, enhancement,
and extension of learning. Using an undergraduate thermal-fluid science course
as a model course, the primary contribution of this research is to directly
improve and transform engineering students’ learning in one of the most
difficult and abstract content in engineering curricula. Guided by a social-
constructivist theoretical framework and the Triple E framework (Engagement,
Enhancement of learning outcomes, and Extension of learning goals to real-life
problems), the research team will conduct a mixed-methods study, implementing
mobile devices with a stylus and a technology-enhanced curriculum. To examine
the impact of mobile devices on student learning, the following research
questions will be addressed in the areas of engagement, learning outcomes, and
extension of learning goals to real-life problems: (1) Does mobile device use
facilitate engagement in thermal-fluid science course content? (2) Does mobile
device use increase learning of identified difficult concepts in thermal-fluid
science courses as indicated by increased achievement scores? (3) What are
student perceptions of using mobile devices for solving real-life problems? The
findings from this research will provide educators a blueprint for broader
implementation of mobile devices in teaching and learning across STEM
disciplines. Further, this project is one of the first applications of the
Triple E Framework in higher education, offering potential to bridge research on
educational technologies with evidence-based teaching
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.