* 2106571
* Targeted Infusion Project: Earlier Access to Cutting-Edge Research Experiences for Undergraduate STEM Education at Jackson State University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Farshad Amini, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,693.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects support the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. This project at Jackson State University
intends to involve undergraduate students in original research problems during
their coursework. It is expected that the undergraduate curriculum in
Engineering will be enhanced and students will have increased academic
confidence and a deeper understanding of STEM knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project aims to include cutting-edge course-
based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) for undergraduate students at
an HBCU so that they can succeed in STEM. The project goals are: (1) to promote
African American students’ persistence and success in various STEM disciplines
through CUREs; (2) to help African American students become more engaged in STEM
learning and make research accessible to a more diverse group; (3) to improve
students’ creativity, analytical, and problem-solving skills, and (4) to inspire
African American students’ desire to pursue a higher level of education in STEM.
The proposed CUREs models can be expanded to other HBCUs and the engineering
education community to help minority students succeed in not only the STEM
classroom but also in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.