* 2106562
* NSF-BSF: CNS Core: Small: Reliable and Zero-Power Timekeepers for Intermittently Powered Computing Devices via Stochastic Magnetic Tunnel Junctions
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Pedram Khalili Amiri, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 498,899.00

This project seeks to advance the state-of-the-art in timekeeping for low-power,
battery-free, energy harvesting embedded systems. These systems must perform
computation and sensing tasks across multiple, frequent power failures. This
intermittent operation requires a strong sense of time to ensure no energy is
wasted and computed results are not stale. Existing timekeepers (i.e. real-time
clocks) require significant amounts of energy to turn on and operate, are
relatively large (millimeter scale), are slow to restart, and use energy
proportional to the length of a power failure (which can be impractically long).
This project takes advantage of the unique properties of emerging nano-scale
non-volatile magnetic random-access memory (MRAM) devices, particularly
adjustable data retention length, to create orders of magnitude lower power,
adjustable, ultra-small timekeeping devices. A system can set a few bits of the
timekeeper and check them later to see which ones have lost information. By
tailoring each bit, or array of bits, to particular lengths of time, the system
can measure time regardless of whether a power failure occurred. Such a
timekeeper requires the same amount of energy if it times an outage of one
second, one day, or one year, with arbitrary accuracy depending on the number
and characteristics of the magnetic elements used. The project cuts across the
system stack to realize the benefits of this timekeeper; exploring circuit
designs, architectural, and system paradigms to embed this new timekeeping
device in the context of intermittent computing: as an alternative to a runtime
clock, an interrupt source, a data and input/output (I/O) controller, and as an
expiring memory allocator. These modules are made available to application
developers to enhance the timeliness of their programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technologies developed in this project will enable more efficient and accurate
timekeeping for an important emerging class of computer systems. Batteryless and
energy harvesting computing devices offer a more sustainable future for the
Internet of Things and enable numerous health, agriculture, and intelligent
infrastructure applications. The elimination of batteries in remotely powered
sensors will mitigate the growing waste stream resulting from battery wear out
and replacement. The fabrication and eventual distribution of the devices and
systems from this project will provide a more accurate timekeeping module for
future batteryless systems, enhancing the reliability, security, and timeliness
of batteryless systems. The resulting tools and experimental results will enable
robust cross-stack simulation for battery-free devices and fabrication methods
for magnetic memory devices. Outcomes of this project will be integrated into
several ongoing outreach activities that expose K-12 and undergraduate students
to the usage and application of embedded computing. This effort will train
graduate students in essential skills across computing, materials, and physics
and engage them in mentoring, teaching, and outreach activities via GoBabyGo!–
where students help build power wheelchairs from ride-on toy cars for children
with mobility issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.