* 2106519
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Community Role In Emergence Of Complex Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Borislava Simova, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 24,639.00

This research addresses the role of large-scale public architecture in the
emergence of early communities and the formation of complex societies.
Monumental construction remains one of the most widely recognized markers of
settled agricultural communities and relationships of inequality which structure
labor organization. Thus, it is often viewed as an outcome of social complexity.
However, several noteworthy early instances of monumental constructions
throughout the world indicate impressive projects could be accomplished through
cooperative relationships among largely mobile and minimally stratified
populations. These findings require an adjusted framework for interpretation of
the social relationships between individuals engaging in the construction and
use of public spaces and the role of constructed space in promoting new social
relationships. Does the act of creating and interacting in a constructed space
bind people together in new ways? Do such constructions promote integration
across broader regions, as well as local communities? This dissertation project
will investigate the role of public architecture in local community formation
and regional integration at an archaeological site. In an effort to increase
analysis capacity and offer laboratory experience to aspiring researchers, local
students will participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project investigates how the development of the public architecture relates to
markers of increased community integration by focusing on evidence for labor
investment, activity, ritual deposits, and regional interaction. A key
architectural complex at the site dates to very early in its history. Its
foundation appears to predate household construction at the site and indicates
the complex was integral to the formation of a local settlement. Changes in the
architectural materials and arrangement of the complex correlate with important
temporal and political regional changes providing a fitting archaeological
context to examine the long-term relationship between public architecture and
integration and the local and regional scales. In this project, shifts in labor
investment and activity within a public plaza-structure complex will be examined
as markers of local community development while increased similarity in ritual
deposits and ceramic styles between those found within the site and those
reported from others in the region will be examined as markers of regional
integration. Indicators of change will be anchored in time through the use of
statistical modeling in building and improving the site chronology. Activity
residues, derived from geochemical testing of samples, collected from buried
floors across the site, add an important dataset to the study of early monuments
and elucidate additional aspects of their uses and meanings to local
populations. Integrating this dataset within systematic examination of
traditional archaeological measurers derived from architectural excavations and
analysis of recovered artifacts expands understanding of early construction and
stands to further understanding of the diverse drives contributing to social
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.