* 2106158
* Self-Assembly of Shape-Defined Micro-Hydrogels: Top-Down Meets Bottom-Up
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Carson Bruns, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 455,786.00

Nature uses a genetic code to dictate the structures of proteins which, in turn,
underpin their functions. However, there is no analog to a genetic code when
fabricating synthetic materials. The goal of this project is to create a
platform for fabricating materials by assembling soft, polymeric microparticles
(particles whose sizes are in the 1-1000 micrometer range) with specific shapes
into precisely controlled arrangements. The research idea is that that the
molecular information necessary to guide the assembly of the polymeric
microparticles can be embedded into the particles themselves. The particles will
be formed in a microfluidic system equipped with flow lithography, which is a
particle synthesis method for fabricating microparticles by exposing polymers to
UV light under precise control. Then, the assembly of the particles into
structures will be guided by molecules that are patterned onto the microparticle
surfaces. Once established, the platform could be used to construct a variety of
innovative structures, such as healable and recyclable tissue-mimetic materials,
self-assembled micromachines that harvest waste energy, or soft micro-robots
that execute complex tasks in biological environments. To broaden participation
in STEM research, the project will support several research and education
experiences for underrepresented high school and undergraduate students in
collaboration with campus organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programmable self-
assembly on the mesoscale is limited to periodic lattices, one-dimensional
chains, and small high-symmetry clusters. It is not yet possible to program the
self-assembly of particles at the level of sophistication that is achieved in
biology or using certain top-down approaches such as 3-D printing. This dearth
of methodology limits bottom-up access to anisotropic or highly detailed
structures. Despite the emergence of many preparation methods and applications
of shape-defined microgels, research on their hierarchical self-assembly into
ordered superstructures is limited. Using custom-built flow lithography devices,
researchers on this project will control how various functional molecule pairs
(e.g., charge-pairing and host-guest motifs) are localized within sequence-
defined, one-dimensional and shape-defined two-dimensional polymer microgels.
This synthetic method will encode information that governs where and how the
particles interact and how they respond to stimuli. The assemblies will be large
enough for direct observation in a microscope, facilitating the development of
an empirical framework to understand and predict the information-structure-
property-behavior relationships. This combination of top-down and bottom-up
fabrication techniques will enable a versatile strategy for scaling up
molecular-level work to the mesoscale and beyond, the high-throughput synthesis
of complex geometries for soft colloids, and a more diverse library of motifs
and stimuli for building and actuating soft micro-
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.