* 2106540
* Collaborative research: Cascade “Ecohydromics” in the Amazonian Headwater System
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Loren Albert, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 06/30/2023
* USD 175,023.00

Water movement through landscapes supports plant, animal, and human life, and
through evaporation affects cloud processes and large-scale atmospheric
circulation. The Amazon Basin cycles more water through streamflow and
evaporation than any other contiguous forest in the world, and transpiration by
trees – water taken up by roots and released to the atmosphere – is a critical
part of this cycle. Understanding how plant roots, stems, and leaves interact
with soil water to jointly regulate forest transpiration across landscapes is a
critical knowledge gap, especially as climate changes. Forests are likely
adapted to distinct soil moisture conditions in different parts of Amazonian
landscapes. Specifically, forests on elevated plateaus with deep groundwater use
water conservatively in order to tolerate drought, while those in wet valleys
with shallow groundwater use water freely but may be poorly prepared for
droughts of the future caused by the climate change. To understand landscape
hydrology, rainforest compositions, and their susceptibility to global change,
an integrated understanding of how water flows are regulated from upstream-to-
downstream by plants and soil is required. This understanding is also critical
for Earth-system modeling used to project the fate of Amazonian rainforests and
quantify their future influence on climate. This project links diverse
disciplines – plant physiology, ecology, hydrology – and integrates them into a
model of landscape function. This project will also help train the next
generation of scientists, both in the U.S. and Brazil, on interdisciplinary
approaches in research, and through a summer school on computer modeling of
vegetation and hydrologic processes. The project will develop a novel science
outreach program connecting K-12 students to real-time Amazon tree data as well
as a short class curriculum and a series of videos that teach students how to
interpret data, understand the broader scientific context, and build a personal
connection with scientists and real-time “talking trees” from the world’s most
famous tropical forest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project characterizes
landscape variation in physiological and hydrological processes, and integrate
observations with watershed modeling and hypothesis testing. Project activities
focus on the spatially intricate mosaic of plateaus and valleys characteristic
of central Amazonian headwater catchments. This research hypothesizes that: (H1)
strong landscape variation in forest transpiration capacity arises from distinct
characteristics of trees residing on plateaus (no root access to groundwater)
and valleys (root access to groundwater) zones; (H2) previously unquantified
“hybrid” soil hydraulics govern soil water fluxes and transit times connecting
plateaus and valleys; and (H3) plateau forests influence the composition and
function of valley forests by regulating subsurface water flows from higher to
lower landscape areas. Study sites are located in the Brazilian Amazon: “KM34”
near Manaus contains an instrumented watershed with more historical data and
research on hillslope hydrology than any other watershed in a pristine wet
tropical forest, and “KM67” near Santarém sits on a broad plateau with
previously deployed deep soil moisture pits, allowing the isolation of processes
typical for flat, elevated plateaus. Both sites contain eddy flux towers, canopy
access walkways, and a rich history of ecological research and available
datasets. A new valley subsite near KM67 will serve as an independent replicate
of KM34 observations in valleys. Process-based models of vegetation
ecophysiology, subsurface hydrology, and groundwater will be parameterized with
observations of leaf physiology, tree morphological traits, soil moisture and
physical properties, water table, and streamflow. These models will be
integrated employing novel tools in probabilistic learning and uncertainty
quantification for proper parameterization and validated with independent
observations of tree sapflow, and ecosystem gas exchange and energy
balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.