* 2106080
* Collaborative Research: MSA: Tree crown economics: testing and scaling a functional trait-based theory
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Brenden McNeil, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 249,963.00

Climate change is subjecting trees to new environmental conditions and it is
increasingly important to understand how trees respond to these changes. While
ecologists have long known that tree crown architecture (the arrangement and
orientation of leaves within a tree crown) can be an important way that trees
adapt and acclimate to environmental change, there is not well-established
theory or techniques for measuring crown architecture. This study tests novel
theory and applies new technologies for measuring crown architecture, including
from automated cameras mounted to nine National Ecological Observation Network
(NEON) towers in the eastern USA, and from accompanying laser ranging (LiDAR)
measurements from the NEON Airborne Observation Platform (AOP). By testing how
measured differences in crown architecture relate to coincident airborne and
satellite measurements of tree productivity, the research can inform ecological
models and forest management techniques aimed at maximizing sustainable forest
growth. The research team includes students from West Virginia University (WVU)
participating in a research experience for undergraduates (REU) program, as well
as hundreds of sixth-graders and their teachers making tree architecture and
productivity measurements from a “Sustainability Treehouse” used by the WVU
Science Adventure School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementing the successful
theory of leaf economics, the research develops a trait-based theory of crown
economics. First, by measuring the trait of mean leaf angle from new time-lapse
cameras mounted to nine NEON towers and the Sustainability Treehouse, and traits
of crown density and rugosity from NEON AOP LiDAR data, the researchers assess
theory positing that economic tradeoffs drive co-variation in these three crown
traits. Second, the researchers examine the role of crown traits in driving
patterns of near-infrared reflectance from vegetation (NIRv), as measured by:
(1) tower-mounted phenocams, (2) NEON AOP spectral data, and (3) Landsat
phenology metrics of peak NIRv reflectance and the rate of NIRv “greendown”
within a growing season. The research team uses spatial variability within and
across the sites to test that the annual peak of NIRv (and correlated rates of
water, carbon, and albedo fluxes) is higher in denser, but less rugose, crowns
that have more horizontal leaf angles. And, the team uses temporal variability
to gauge the degree to which rates of NIRv greendown are driven by increasingly
vertical leaf angles through the growing season. Thus, by analyzing these
relationships among crown traits and NIRv, the research can demonstrate how
predictions of crown economic theory can elucidate new mechanisms controlling
local- to continental-scale responses of forests to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.