* 2106334
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Athena:  Learning-oriented Search with Personalized Learning Flows
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jaime Arguello, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 240,530.00

The Athena project will develop technology called "search as learning," a set of
search technologies that encourage and support learning rather than just simple
document finding. In order to learn, searchers must engage with information that
is both novel and understandable. Therefore, at the core, Athena will support
learning by modeling several important factors: (1) the knowledge connections
between documents covering a topic, (2) a user's current state of knowledge on
that topic, (3) the types of knowledge a user is likely to gain from a document,
and (4) the knowledge required for a user to successfully engage with a
document. The Athena project will involve two types of end-to-end systems, both
of which will model and leverage the learner's state of knowledge (LSK): an LSK-
aware search engine and an LSK-aware question answering system. The Athena
systems will guide a user through a topic and find relevant information in the
context of previously encountered information and the topic structure captured
in a web of topics. The team will evaluate Athena using standard measures as
well as a series of studies involving human subjects. If the Athena project is
successful, it will make it easier for people to use search engines and related
technologies to learn about complex topics, where there are numerous
interrelated and dependent subtopics that should be considered. Given that
search is among the most common online activities on and off the Web, Athena and
its technologies will have a substantial impact on searchers trying to learn
such topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Athena enables "search as learning" using a
data structure referred to as a Learning Flow Graph (LFG). An LFG comprises
nodes that represent sub-topics (e.g., concepts) within a given domain and
vertices that represent relations between sub-topics (e.g., one sub-topic being
foundational to understand another). Athena leverages LFGs to model the
different factors mentioned above. It uses probability distributions across
nodes in an LFG to model: (1) a user's knowledge state, (2) the potential
knowledge gains from an information item, and (3) the prerequisite knowledge
required for a user to successfully engage with an information item. The Athena
team will develop algorithms for generating LFGs from structured and semi- and
unstructured resources (e.g., course syllabi, tables of contents, book indices,
knowledge bases, query logs), algorithms for integrating LFGs into search and
question-answering models, and algorithms for re-estimating LFGs and a user's
knowledge state based on search behaviors (e.g., queries, clicks, skips, dwell
times, etc.). Structuring textual data to find the optimal learning paths
through it is of great interest, though most existing work has focused on
extracting information to fill slots in a "knowledge base," a much finer grained
task. The LFG representation also provides a type of explanation of a larger
topic, connecting to the broad interest in explainable systems. The Athena work
will extend the state of the art in text representation, neural approaches
including attention techniques, query and topic modeling, contextual text
summarization, and understanding human approaches to complex search
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.