* 2106293
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium:  Harnessing Intrinsic Dynamics for Inherently Privacy-preserving Decentralized Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Yongqiang Wang, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 367,736.00

Recent advances in communication and networking technologies lead to the
emergence and proliferation of distributed interconnected systems such as swarm
robotics, sensor networks, smart-grid, the Internet of Things, and collaborative
machine-learning systems. A task that is fundamental to the operation of these
systems is decentralized optimization, where participating nodes cooperate to
minimize an overall objective function that is the sum (or average) of
individual nodes’ local objective functions. Moreover, since individual nodes’
local objective functions may bear sensitive information of local nodes such as
medical records in collaborative learning and user energy-consumption profiles
in a smart grid, in many cases, the decentralized optimization algorithm has to
make sure that a participant’s sensitive information is protected from being
inferable by other participating nodes or external eavesdroppers. Although
plenty of results have been proposed for decentralized optimization, most of
these results do not consider the problem of privacy protection. Conventional
information-technology privacy mechanisms are inappropriate for decentralized
optimization because they either have to compromise the accuracy of optimization
(in, e.g., differential-privacy-based approaches) or incur heavy extra
computation/communication overhead (in, e.g., cryptography-based privacy
approaches). The lack of effective privacy solutions for decentralized
optimization not only severely hinders the social adoption of new technologies,
but also leads to potential vulnerabilities since stealing private information
is usually the basis for sophisticated cybersecurity attacks. Leveraging the
iterative properties of decentralized optimization algorithms, the project aims
to establish a new privacy-preserving approach for decentralized optimization
that neither compromises optimization accuracy nor incurs large
computation/communication overhead. Combined with the additional merit of
needing no assistance of a trusted central coordinator, the proposed approach is
expected to transformatively advance privacy-preservation in networked systems
and make impacts in many applications ranging from connected vehicles, swarm
robotics, smart grid, sensor networks, to collaborative machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging control theory, this project seeks to establish
methodologies and associated theories for inherently privacy-preserving
decentralized optimization by exploiting the intrinsic dynamical properties of
decentralized optimization. Besides maintaining optimization accuracy, the
dynamics-based privacy approach is also free of encryption, which not only
guarantees limited extra computation/communication overhead, but also promises a
decentralized implementation without the assistance of any trusted third party
or data aggregator. The main research thrusts are to: 1) Develop a privacy
framework for dynamical systems that explicitly considers the iterative
evolution of information in decentralized optimization; 2) Design perturbations
to dynamics that enable privacy without affecting the accuracy of decentralized
optimization methods for convex problems, and quantify the effects of the
perturbations on convergence speed; 3) Investigate the influence of privacy
design on decentralized non-convex optimization and exploit freedom in privacy
design to facilitate decentralized non-convex problems; and 4) Evaluate the
results using experiments on a multi-robot platform and connected
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.