* 2106391
* RI: Medium: Probabilistic Box Embeddings
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Andrew McCallum, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2025
* USD 849,885.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning are revolutionizing the pace
of progress in science, biomedicine, healthcare, business, economics, and the
national defense. A foundational technical choice in AI and machine learning is
that of representation. Before a machine can reason over data, that data must be
represented in a way that enables parameters to be learned, and useful
inferences to be made. The choice of representation has profound implications
for the method’s capabilities and safety. This project explores an new
alternative fundamental representation that is expected to provide better
expressivity, interpretability, uncertainty characterization, and robustness,
thereby laying groundwork which has the potential to provide in future
representational foundations advantageous to AI safety and commonsense
reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental representation for data and
concepts in nearly all machine learning, including neural networks, is the
vector: a point in d-dimensional space. Vectors conveniently support symmetric
distance calculation, semantic neighborhoods, and geometric reasoning. For
example, learned vectors representing "eagle," "bird," and "fly" may designate
points that are close to each other, indicating that they are semantically
closely related. However, there are intriguing reasons to consider
representations based not on points, but rather regions––regions of varying
breadth and overlap, able to capture (like Venn diagrams) that "bird" is a
broader concept than "eagle" and "all eagles are birds" and "some but not all
birds fly." This project focuses on machine learning research in a new learnable
representation called box embeddings, d-dimensional hyperrectangles, which are
closed under intersection, can represent arbitrary directed acyclic graphs,
define regions whose volume is easily calculated, and can precisely and
compactly represent large joint probability distributions. The research will
address foundational open research questions concerning (1) fundamentals such as
expressivity, regularization, and alternative geometric spaces; (2) relation to
graphical models, having already shown that boxes have interestingly different
strengths; and (3) deep learning with boxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.