* 2106708
* Catalyst Project: Biology Program Enhancement Through Education and Research in the Ecological Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Mark Melton, Saint Augustine's College
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing the research capacity of
faculty to strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Saint
Augustine’s College seeks to enhance the quality of STEM education for
undergraduate students enrolled in the biology curriculum by emphasizing
ecological sciences and incorporating research-based educational approaches.
Specifically, the project outlines strategies to implement evidence-based
pedagogical interventions that advance students’ critical thinking and
analytical skills, as well as increase the number of biology majors, who
ultimately enter the ecological sciences workforce or pursue graduate degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, STEM majors at Saint Augustine’s College
will be exposed to authentic research experiences in the ecological sciences for
emerging scientific workforce opportunities and/or competitive entry into
cutting-edge graduate programs that infuse robust biomathematics. The ecological
sciences initiative will offer students hands-on training in the areas of
ecosystem, molecular, and biomathematics research, which are currently limited
at Saint Augustine’s College. Students will be introduced to ecological sciences
research in a first-year biology course in years 1 and 2 and through a combined
field and molecular ecology workshop series in year 2 of the project. In
addition, students will be supported in off-campus research experiences at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill – Institute of Marine Sciences,
North Carolina State University, or Duke University. For molecular and data
science training, next-generation sequencing using the Nanopore MinION System,
quantitative PCR studies, and R programming analysis will be included. This
project will also evaluate student recruitment to the biology major, their
academic success and retention, coupled with student post-graduation
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.