* 2106181
* Targeted Infusion Project: Development of an Interdisciplinary Materials Science Graduate Certificate Program (IMS-GCP) to Strengthen STEM Education through a Bridging Approach
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shubo Han, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Targeted Infusion Projects (TIP) support the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. This project at the Fayetteville State
University is intended to develop an Interdisciplinary Materials Science
Graduate Certificate Program (IMS-GCP). The intent of the project is to provide
undergraduate students at Fayetteville State University the opportunity to
participate in collaborative research projects that will contribute to materials
science knowledge, enhance the research capacity at Fayetteville State
University and strengthen an existing collaboration with Tuskegee University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This TIP project has four goals: (1) to develop and
implement IMS-GCP to strengthen undergraduate STEM education through a bridging
approach with Tuskegee University (TU); (2) to enhance research and education
infrastructure for materials research and education; (3) to increase student
enrollment in IMS-GCP at FSU and number of FSU graduates to enter graduate
programs at TU; and (4) to develop research capacities in two areas of polymers
and biomaterials through research collaborations with TU. This project will be
conducted collaboratively at two HBCUs. It will facilitate undergraduate career
development so that undergraduates are better prepared for graduate studies or
professional STEM careers. Faculty and students are supported to work
collaboratively on mechanical and tribological properties of green polymers to
develop natural, biodegradable, low-cost, and competitive new materials, which
are expected to reduce dependence on fossil fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.