* 2106112
* Collaborative Research: MSA: Uncovering local and regional controls on organic matter processing in freshwaters using in situ optical sensors
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Joanna Blaszczak, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 07/31/2024
* USD 46,867.00

Inland waters, including streams, rivers, wetlands, and lakes, are critically
important to the global carbon cycle. A portion of the organic carbon produced
on land by plants is eventually transported into inland waters. Organic carbon
that enters waterways is processed by aquatic organisms and sunlight into carbon
dioxide. Aquatic plants and algae convert some of this carbon dioxide back to
organic carbon via photosynthesis. These processes are well understood, but how
environmental conditions such as temperature, salinity, and nutrient levels
influence the relative importance of each process is not. Furthermore, the
molecular composition of the organic carbon created and consumed in waterways
remains unclear. To fill this knowledge gap, the investigators will use a
national network of water quality sensors to estimate organic carbon processing
in streams, rivers, and lakes at a continental scale. The research team will
build interpretive websites for interested individuals to view how organic
carbon processing varies in streams and rivers across the United States. This
website will be used to communicate how such models can be used to predict the
presence of harmful algae blooms or organic carbon compounds that cause harmful
disinfection byproducts in water purification systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Alterations to carbon cycling by inland waters can negatively impact
water quality. Therefore, up-to-date information is needed to prevent and manage
emerging water quality problems. Models based on data from optical sensors
provide a solution for rapid and automated analysis of aquatic carbon cycling.
The National Environmental Observatory Network (NEON) maintains a network of
sensors in streams, rivers, and lakes that measure ultraviolet and visible light
absorption of water, which can be used to estimate the amount and composition of
organic carbon in water. To improve the reliability and accessibility of these
datasets for the scientific community, the investigators will develop correction
factors to convert raw sensor data to chemically relevant absorbance units. To
estimate how environmental conditions in streams, lakes, and rivers influence
organic carbon production by photosynthesis and consumption by heterotrophic
metabolism and photo-oxidative degradation, the investigators will analyze the
calibrated sensor data entailing sunlight levels, water chemistry, temperature,
and hydrology data from NEON. The research team will perform laboratory
incubation experiments to measure actual rates of organic carbon consumption and
production under controlled conditions, thereby disentangling the different
processes influencing organic carbon production and consumption in freshwater
ecosystems across North America. All code produced for this project will be
annotated and made publicly available via a GitHub repository. Resulting data
products will be published and models will be integrated with existing data
streams where possible. This project will support early-career investigators
including one post-doctoral scientist and one research experience for
undergraduates (REU) trainee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.