* 2106059
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Simulation-driven runtime resource management for distributed workflow applications
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Henri Casanova, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2024
* USD 279,988.00

Many scientific breakthroughs in domains such as health, climate modeling,
particle physics, seismology, etc., can only be achieved by performing complex
processing of vast amounts of data. This processing is automated by software
systems that use the compute, storage, and network hardware provided by the
cyberinfrastructure. In addition to automation, a key objective of these systems
is the efficient use of the resources as measured by cost and energy usage,
while making the processing as fast as possible or as needed. To this end, these
systems must make decisions regarding which resources should be used to do what
and when. Many such systems are used in production today and make such
decisions. Yet making good, let alone best, decisions is still an open research
challenge. Theoretical research has proposed solutions that are difficult to put
into practice, and practical solutions are known to not make good decisions, or
at least not consistently so. However, both theory and practice follow the same
basic philosophy: make decisions by reasoning about known information on what
needs to be computed and on what hardware resources are available. This
philosophy has shown its limits, so this project adopts a radically different
approach. The key idea is to repeatedly execute fast, computationally
inexpensive simulations of the application execution in order to evaluate large
sets of potential resource management decisions and automatically select the
most desirable ones. The benefits of this approach will be demonstrated for
several software systems used to support scientific applications that are
critical for the development and sustainability of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software systems are used to run scientific
applications on advanced cyberinfrastructure. These systems automate application
execution, and make resource management decision along several axes including
selecting and provisioning (virtualized) hardware, picking application
configuration options, and scheduling application activities in time and space.
Their objective is to optimize both application performance and also a set of
resource usage efficiency metrics that include monetary and energy costs.
Consequently, the resource management decision space is enormous, and making
good decisions is a steep challenge that has been the subject of countless
efforts, both from theoreticians and practitioners. However, the challenge is
far from being solved: theoreticians produce solutions that are rarely used by
practitioners, and conversely practitioners implement solutions that may be
highly sub-optimal because they not informed by theory. This project resolves
this disconnect by obviating the need for developing effective resource
management strategies. The key idea is to use online simulations to search the
resource management decision space rapidly at runtime. Large numbers of fast
simulations of the application's execution are executed throughout that very
execution, so as to evaluate many potential resource management options and
automatically select desirable ones. This approach thus shifts the overall
problem from the design of complex resource management algorithms to the
enumeration of many resource management decisions. The transformation of
resource management practice in cyberinfrastructure systems not only renders the
resource management problem tractable but also unlocks previously out-of-reach
resource management decisions. The benefits of this transformation will be
demonstrated for a critical class of production systems and applications,
specifically Workflow Management Systems and the scientific applications they
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.