* 2106027
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Dynamic Data-driven Systems - Theory and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Zhenhua Liu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Modern computer systems must be continually optimized in a data-driven manner to
maintain performance, even as their deployment and workload environments change.
This holds for traditional systems like content delivery networks and emerging
architectures such as edge/cloud systems. The design of dynamic data-driven
systems requires both theoretical advancements and new systems architectures. A
key challenge is a tradeoff between optimality, i.e., choosing an optimal
deployment for the current environment in terms of performance and/or cost, and
smoothness, i.e., ensuring that the deployment changes are not too costly at any
point. This project seeks to develop tools at the intersection of machine
learning and optimization that enable systems to balance between optimality and
smoothness. Further, this project deploys and empirically evaluates these tools
in the context of 360 video streaming as a representative case study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smoothness is not a traditional system performance
measure, and so it is typically enforced only in ad hoc ways by existing
systems. However, it is a crucial consideration for systems that seek to
continuously optimize their configuration since the switching costs associated
with changing configurations can be significant. Managing the tradeoff between
optimality and smoothness in a rigorous fashion can lead to dramatic
improvements; however, it is challenging since it requires a robust data-driven
design that can determine whether it is worth incurring a switching cost in the
present, without knowledge of the future environment. This project develops
analytic tools that enable the design of algorithms for dynamic systems that
balance optimality and smoothness through the integration of data-driven and
optimization approaches. There are also planned test-bed deployment activities
for 360 video streaming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide new
foundational tools for the design of dynamic systems across multiple application
areas. While we choose video streaming as our target application, the proposed
fundamental research is applicable much more broadly. Notably, this project
broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM areas through
programs at both K-12 and undergraduate levels. Planned activities include
developing accelerated mathematics programs for middle-school students, summer
programs for middle-school and high-school students, and summer research
programs for undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
collaborative project with investigators from the University of Massachusetts
Amherst, California Institute of Technology, and the State University of New
York at Stony Brook. The results of this project will be maintained on the
project website at https://groups.cs.umass.edu/hajiesmaili/soco/. These will
include technical reports of the research findings, software prototypes of the
algorithms designed, datasets, and experimental results collected for the 360
video streaming experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.