* 2106025
* I-Corps:  An in vivo central nervous system drug screening platform with noninvasive imaging
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Michael Lin, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps program is the development of bioluminescence
tools that may be applied to drug discovery and optimization, particularly for
the non-invasive imaging of animals. To date, bioluminescence imaging in the
pharmaceutical industry has been limited due to poor light penetrance and enzyme
instability. Fundamental research has contributed to the advancement of
bioluminescence imaging. The goal is to bridge the gap and expand the use of
bioluminescent reporters. Specifically, the proposed technology will use
biosensors for rapidly evaluating drug candidates in laboratory animals, in
addition to cell cultured cells. This technology may have a significant impact
on central nervous system (CNS) drug development and accelerate the optimization
of drugs for brain malignancies. This tool may lead to improved compounds with
better blood brain barrier (BBB) penetrance and better activity in the brain,
while also preventing the testing of suboptimal compounds in human volunteers
and patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of new drug screening platforms that enable non-invasive detection
of drug activity and efficacy in living animals. Recently, bioluminescent
reporters have been engineered to be brighter and red-shifted, thereby allowing
deep tissue imaging of biological events. These molecular tools enable the
detection of drug activity in an approach that is label-free, non-invasive, and
pathway-specific. In addition, these biosensors may be used to monitor drug
activity in living animals, thus circumventing the numerous limitations of
terminal analyses. By evaluating targeted drug candidates in vivo, without
termination, the performance and efficacy of the compounds can be more
accurately appraised. This is especially valuable for optimizing molecules
penetrating the central nervous system (CNS), in which the blood-brain barrier
(BBB) has presented significant challenges in CNS drug development. The goal of
this project is to determine the ways in which these biosensors could facilitate
the rapid assessment of CNS compounds, and when these tools may have the most
impact in the drug development pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.