* 2106243
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Leveraging Design Thinking to Deal with Ambiguity Embedded in Data-Driven Engineering Problems
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Jeremi London, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2023
* USD 74,814.00

We are in the midst of a data revolution. Whether it is analyzing sensor data
collected from a complex manufacturing process, customer preference data
harvested from Facebook or Amazon, or real-time patient health data transmitted
via wearable technology like an Apple Watch or Fitbit; today’s engineers are
routinely asked to leverage large data sets to solve problems that are
increasingly complex and abstract in nature. However, there has been little
corresponding change in the way that undergraduate engineers are trained and, as
a result, many are not adequately prepared to confidently address such problems
when they enter the workforce. Moreover, there is a dearth of researchers
adequately trained to study such pedagogical problems in higher education. The
research team for this project, which seeks to address both issues, pairs a
seasoned engineering education researcher with a less experienced engineering
education researcher in a mentor-mentee relationship. We aim to explore the use
of design thinking to train engineering students to solve abstract problems that
are data-rich and include elements of uncertainty and ambiguity. While much of
the existing scholarship and practice surrounding engineering design is centered
around the development of a physical artifact, we argue that its potential has
been largely untapped as applied in this novel, data-centered
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We introduce a pedagogical approach to promote
engineering design thinking in conceptual courses to better prepare engineering
students to join a contemporary STEM workforce. Using a case study approach, our
specific aim is to advance our understanding of how engineering design can be
leveraged to solve ambiguous, data-driven engineering problems presented in an
undergraduate probability and statistics course while influencing students’
approach to conceptualizing, solving, and communicating solutions to
introductory probability and statistics problems. There are two research
questions guiding this study. First, “In what ways might the content,
assessment, and pedagogy of an introductory probability and statistics course be
modified to facilitate design thinking and tolerance for ambiguity among
undergraduate engineering students?” Second, “To what extent can the development
of design thinking influence engineering students’ tolerance for ambiguity when
dealing with data-driven engineering problems?” The proposed case study includes
three phases. During the redesign phase, the research team will critically
examine an existing probability and statistics course design and adapt the
content, assessment, and pedagogy to reimagine how the course concepts are
introduced and evaluated in a way that also includes an emphasis on design
thinking. Then, the course will be redesigned around a semester-long project
that will require student teams to: select among options for an open-ended
project, leverage design thinking and course concepts learned to address the
problem, and communicate their results to stakeholders. During the
implementation phase, the research team will implement the pedagogical
innovation, and collect qualitative and quantitative data to address the
research questions. Qualitative data will include pre-post scores on the
Tolerance for Ambiguity Scale. During this final phase, the data will be
analyzed and the results will be disseminated to colleagues on the University of
South Florida campus and to the broader engineering education community via
conference proceedings and a journal publication. We expect our findings to not
only impact how engineering courses are taught at the focal institution, but
also lead to insights that can be leveraged by other engineering education
scholars. In addition to producing insights situated in the engineering
education literature, the mentor-mentee relationship inherent in this RIEF
project is designed to extend the community of engineering education
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.