* 2106758
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Self-Supervised Recommender System Learning with Application Specific Adaption
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Philip Yu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

In the era of big data, to effectively help people get their desired
information, recommender systems are widely adopted by various online platforms.
Recommender systems aim to provide users with high-quality recommendation
services. In addition to e-commerce, other potential applications include
precision medicine to recommend targeted patient treatment, friend
recommendation in online social networks, decision support, e-learning, etc.
However, various data quality problems and model learning challenges will create
great obstacles for recommender system deployments in the real world. To address
these challenges, this project explores to develop new techniques for learning
recommender systems that donâ€™t rely on supervision information like manual label
or annotation, which can be costly to obtain. This is referred to as the
recommender system self-supervised learning, which provides a promising learning
paradigm that can discover the supervision signals from the data itself without
the need of costly manual annotation. As an effective technique, self-supervised
learning will enable recommender systems to work well in a variety of
challenging application scenarios to provide people with high-quality and fair
recommendation services for almost all the existing online platforms mentioned
above. This project focuses on developing a general recommender system framework
with self-supervised learning, and investigating its various
extensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop unified and
extensible principles, methods, and technologies for recommender system
learning, and study the general applicability and benefit of recommender system
self-supervised learning. The recommender system tasks studied in this project
are extremely challenging due to many reasons: (1) lack of supervision
information, which renders many existing recommendation models to be
ineffective; (2) inherent data biases, which can lead to unfair treatment to the
minority user groups; (3) the cold-start problem, which concerns on the issue of
inferences for subjects with little collected information; and (4) recommender
system dynamics, which reflects the changing characteristics or behaviors of the
users. This project will these challenges on learning representations for
recommender systems with a novel and extensible graph neural network model.
Based on the state-of-the-art self-supervised learning techniques, e.g., data
augmentation which aims to significantly increase the diversity of data
available for training models without actually collecting new data, and
contrastive learning which intends to learn succinct data representations such
that similar samples stay close to each other, while dissimilar ones are far
apart, the proposed model can be pre-trained with self-supervised learning,
which will be further transferred to address the problems studied in this
project via effective fine-tuning. Specifically, this project will focus on
studying four main tasks: (1) fairness-oriented recommender systems pre-training
and fine-tuning, (2) cold-start recommender system learning via data
augmentation; (3) inter-platform recommender system contrastive learning; and
(4) lifelong dynamic recommender system learning via self-supervised model
tuning. In terms of broader impacts, besides the recommendation tasks as
investigated in this project, advances in such research studies have
transformative potentials for fundamental development in reforming the current
and future AI model fairness, trustworthiness, and lifelong learning studies in
broad applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.