* 2106699
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Adventures in Flatland: Algorithms for Modern Memories
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Kunal Agrawal, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2025
* USD 218,218.00

The computer industry is in the midst of a revolution in data-storage technology
that is forcing a major reevaluation of the algorithms used for moving data
through the computer. Every new generation of storage hardware has required a
new theoretical understanding of these algorithmic building blocks. Such
theoretical improvements have had a profound impact on other fields of computer
science, including databases and file systems, and even networks, operating
systems, and machine learning. This project aims to develop the algorithmic
solutions needed to exploit this seismic shift in storage
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team considers three impacts on algorithm
performance that arise from new hardware technology such as nonvolatile memories
and increased parallelism: (1) there are smaller gaps between levels in latency
and in bandwidth, (2) many-core technologies introduce sharing effects on
caches, and (3) memory hierarchies do not adhere to a standard strictly nested
model. The team is investigating: (a) algorithmic problems in parallel-cache
allocation and high-bandwidth-memory scheduling and allocation; (b) data
structural problems that arise from different I/O cost models, including those
that factor in the computational cost and/or the cost of durability; (c)
extensions to the streaming and semi-streaming models, where algorithms have
some amount of sequentially accessible working memory in addition to the
traditional small pool of randomly accessible memory; (d) new I/O-efficient
algorithms for directed graphs. The team is continuing community-building
efforts to span systems and algorithms, including founding, steering, and/or
running two new conferences and organizing workshops on the theory of non-
volatile memory and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.