* 2106989
* Catalyst Award: Targeted Infusion Project: Advancing STEM Education Through Transportation Studies (TIP-ASETTS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Maranda McBride, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,938.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing the research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University (NCA&amp;T) intends
to create a digital badging program for students interested in the
transportation industry. The proposed work has the potential to increase student
skillsets to increase competitiveness for technical opportunities in the
transportation industry and increase diversity in the transportation field. It
is the intent to position the proposed work in the P21 framework which focuses
on equipping students with the skills they need to succeed in school and their
careers in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Advancing STEM
Education Through Transportation Studies (ASETTS) digital badge program is to
advance knowledge and understanding within STEM education through activities
designed to increase the number of highly skilled NCA&amp;T undergraduate
students entering the transportation workforce. This goal will be achieved by
using the following approach: (a) creating a stackable-units digital badge
program that encourages undergraduate students to increase their skillsets along
various dimensions such as life/career, innovation, technology, and core subject
matter skills; (b) increasing the number of undergraduate students participating
in transportation research experiences and other engaging activities that will
expose students to career opportunities in transportation; (c) establishing a
professional-to-student and student-to-student mentorship program, and (d)
updating current courses by including activities designed to develop specific
competencies needed in the transportation workforce. A successfully implemented
program has the potential to serve as a case study through which the ability of
a stackable-units digital badge program to increase students’ engagement in
educational activities will be evaluated. By focusing on students across
different STEM majors, the proposed program will be unique and novel in that it
will develop students’ competitive skillsets such as initiative and self-
direction as well as introduce them to transportation innovations and
technologies. The research projects intend to cover diverse topic areas within
the transportation domain including transportation demand management,
optimization, emerging technologies, and human factors. Finally, through the
integration of the P21 and experiential learning components in transportation
courses along with the mentorship activities, the ASETTS program aims to
innovate existing curricula and provide a much-needed support network to
facilitate the success of students underrepresented in STEM disciplines who
desire a career in the transportation industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.