* 2106594
* SCC-PG: CrossGuard: Enhancing Pedestrian Experience at Intersections
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Shubham Jain, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The urban transportation infrastructure that we have inherited from previous
generations is centered largely around the needs of vehicular traffic, with
little or no regard to accommodating the needs of a growing pedestrian
population. One of the key challenges in enabling smart urban communities lies
in integrating pedestrians’ needs into the design of the urban infrastructure.
For example, lack of timely support to cross the streets at intersections,
particularly in inclement weather conditions, frustrates many pedestrians and is
conducive to jaywalking, a well-documented source of pedestrian fatalities in
big cities. It is, therefore, of a fundamental importance to provide pedestrian-
centric services, particularly for vulnerable pedestrians such as children, the
elderly, and the disabled. This proposal aims to develop and build CrossGuard, a
system which will make crossing at intersections safer and, in the process,
elevate pedestrians' quality of experience. CrossGuard will explore new
opportunities available at the nexus of intelligent infrastructure, data
analytics, intelligent sensing, and engaged pedestrians towards Vision Zero, a
world-wide initiative that aims for zero traffic fatalities. The design of
CrossGuard is inspired by human crossing guards, often stationed at busy
intersections, most notably near schools. Just like a vigilant crossing guard,
CrossGuard will anticipate pedestrian needs and accommodate them promptly and
effectively. We expect this project to have a profound and lasting societal
impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of CrossGuard will be realized via
the exploration of four research questions: (1) Investigating and developing an
understanding of the challenges facing the pedestrian community; (2) Designing
algorithms to identify vulnerable pedestrians and developing stochastic models
for ensuring that they can cross safely; (3) Developing sensing modalities and
resource allocation strategies for the successful provisioning of CrossGuard’s
services; and (4) Expanding CrossGuard to non-signalized intersections.
&lt;br/&gt;The team will actively engage citizens and officials from the cities
of Norfolk and Virginia Beach in a meaningful dialogue via focus groups and
workshops. They will also make efforts to ensure participation from a
representative cross-section of the citizens, particularly parents of school-age
children, the elderly, and people with disabilities. The team envisions that the
wealth of real-time traffic data collected in conjunction with perceived traffic
trends will make the seamless integration of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
possible. In turn, this will offer new opportunity for connected urban spaces,
and will drastically reduce traffic accidents involving pedestrians, especially
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.