* 2106322
* Research Initiation: Understanding Teamwork Experience and its Linkage to Engineering Identity of Diverse Students
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Stephanie Claussen, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,919.00

This project focuses on engineering identity (EI), which measures how strongly a
person identifies with being an engineer and serves as an indicator of
persistence and retention in engineering. The project is aligned with the goals
of the Research Initiation in Engineering Formation program by investigating how
teamwork explains or is explained by EI among undergraduate engineering students
and to support a community of new researchers conducting engineering education
research. Repeated calls from engineering employers and educational
accreditation bodies have stressed teamwork training in undergraduate education.
This emphasis has led to a proliferation of studies on how teamwork promotes
metacognitive ability, communication, and related skills. However, less is known
about how teamwork informs or is informed by the EI of students from diverse
backgrounds. The connection between team-based experiences and engineering
identity is instrumental to inclusive teaching and learning because EI may be
disproportionately lower for some students. In addition, teamwork designed
without considering EI may further exacerbate that gap. Although more students
from diverse backgrounds are entering engineering programs, the challenges they
face in performance expectations, resource access, and peer interactions still
hamper their retention and advancement. In a university context, these
challenges are most clearly manifested in student teams. This grant will: (1)
analyze teamwork experience through the behaviors of and disagreement patterns
between team members in a student population with high social and economic
diversity; and (2) evaluate how teamwork informs EI. Disagreement patterns will
be depicted by the variation in team membersâ€™ views on basic team constructs
(task, process, satisfaction, cohesion, and
relationship).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded in dispersion theory, this project
will employ a mixed-methods approach to understand the prevalence and
disagreement patterns, illuminating how EI, gender, and other student-specific
variables (demographics, transfer student, etc.) explain the likelihood of a
student to disagree on tasks, process, and other teamwork constructs. The
results have the potential to reveal gaps or equity issues. Moreover, by
leveraging survey instruments that have been tested by prior NSF-funded work,
this project will explore how teamwork experience, via a lens of behaviors and
disagreement pattern, relate to EI. Thus, providing evidence on which behaviors
are linked to stronger EI and which types of team dynamics (disagreement
patterns) promote EI development when a disagreement occurs in teamwork. The
project will develop a more robust model to effectively handle Likert-style
variables on EI. It addresses new questions that are expected to shape future
work on inclusive teamwork design and interventions, while illuminating the
gains in estimation accuracy as a result of the use of the new model with codes
written in an open-source program to facilitate dissemination. This project will
acquaint three early- and mid-career faculty members with new methods in
engineering education research. By leveraging teamwork experiences to strengthen
the EI of diverse students, they will be able extend this research to many
inclusive learning or teaching endeavors. This work will take place at a
Hispanic-serving institution, where improvements in the curriculum and student
experience in team-based coursework will lead to improved learning experiences
for a diverse student body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.