* 2106212
* Self versus group-sensing in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Martin Schuster, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 711,268.00

This project investigates quorum sensing, a widespread cell-cell communication
process in microbes relevant to natural ecosystems, agriculture, and medicine.
Quorum sensing controls collective microbial behaviors such as interactions with
plants and animals, growth on surfaces, and production of antibiotics. The
studies proposed here will explore how coordinated behaviors in bacterial
populations emerge from distinct quorum sensing mechanisms in single cells.
These investigations will reveal general principles that govern communication
and cooperation between individuals, and will provide the knowledge to engineer
or manipulate quorum sensing pathways in a variety of biotechnological
applications. The project will train a diverse group of graduate, undergraduate,
and high school students in a cross-disciplinary environment that combines
biological and mathematical approaches. It will further provide graduate
students with science communication training and outreach opportunities to
broaden their skill set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quorum sensing is a ubiquitous
mechanism in microbes that coordinates collective behaviors through self-
produced chemical signals. Although major advances have been made in this field,
there are still large gaps in our understanding of the functional capacity of
quorum sensing. Quorum sensing is generally perceived as a cell density-
dependent on/off switch that synchronizes gene expression in a population,
although recent experimental studies show great response heterogeneity on a
cellular scale. This project will holistically characterize the mechanisms that
govern this spectrum of quorum responses in the widely studied bacterium
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The objective is to test a model that distinguishes
between two quorum-sensing modes: group-sensing mediated by extracellular signal
feedback, and self-sensing mediated by intracellular signal feedback. The
central hypothesis is that genetic network architecture and environmental
factors determine the quorum-sensing mode in P. aeruginosa, which in turn shapes
response patterns at cellular and population scales. A range of experimental
approaches and mathematical modeling will be employed to investigate this
hypothesis. The results attained from this project will provide a systems-level
understanding of the principles that govern decision-making in bacterial
populations. They will find application in the design, analysis, and control of
multicellular signaling circuits in synthetic biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.