* 2106583
* Implementation Project: Introducing STEM to Provide Incentives for Research and Education (INSPIRE)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Marius Schamschula, Alabama A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,799,727.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) provide support to design, implement, study and
assess comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students
and the quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation
project at Alabama A &amp; M University (AAMU) identifies professional
development opportunities for STEM faculty and middle school teachers to enhance
the teaching and learning experience for undergraduate STEM students at the
university, as well as middle school students. The project is grounded in
evidence-based practices, specifically leveraging student research experiences
to bolster engagement and retention in STEM. The project is guided and informed
by an ongoing evaluation, as well as by internal and external advisory
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to 1) augment a
robust undergraduate program by retaining, mentoring, and graduating students
from communities that are underrepresented in STEM disciplines, 2) enhance the
quality of the student learning experience and depth of knowledge by expanding
undergraduate research opportunities, 3) engage pre-service and in-service
middle school mathematics teachers to inform pedagogical best practices, and 4)
institutionalize evidence-based pedagogical interventions. The project aims to
advance knowledge and understanding in STEM education by investigating the
effect of these interventions on student learning outcomes in STEM courses, as
well as in retention, persistence, and graduation
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.