* 2106517
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: On the Criticality of the Submarine Cable Network
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Paul Barford, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 342,954.00

Ninety-nine percent of all international data is carried by a fiber cable
network at the bottom of the world’s oceans. This submarine cable network (SCN)
consists of hundreds of cables stretching over 1 million kilometers, connects
nearly every region in the world, serves as the operational backbone of global
services, and closes connectivity gaps in the world’s underserved areas. Yet,
despite its impressive scale, very little is known about the SCN’s broader
characteristics and its role in the global Internet. This collaborative project
brings together researchers from Northwestern University and the University of
Wisconsin, Madison to develop a thorough understanding of the criticality of the
submarine cable network in context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort
will: (1) define a methodology for the analysis of the SCN criticality across
regions, applications, and uses, (2) design and build a SCN observatory that
embodies this methodology, and (3) conduct analyses of criticality in a range of
contexts from country-specific to third-party service dependencies to
environmental threats. The goals of this work are to advance the foundational
understanding of the SCN and to create data sets, metrics, methods, and tools
that will enhance performance, robustness, and
manageability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved understanding of the SCN and its
critical role in the public Internet has a broad interest, from the millions of
users that rely on these systems for their social, political, economic, and
media exchanges, to the policymakers, regulators, operators, and entities that
decide on new infrastructure deployment. The tools developed and the data we
collect over the course of this project will be made available to the community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings, techniques, and tools developed in this
project, including related course materials, will be made available at
https://www.cs.aqualab.edu/projects/Critical-SCN. The site will be maintained
for at least one year past the ending of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.