* 2106459
* Membranous Energy Harvester with Tuning Capability for Flexible Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lin Dong, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 385,300.00

Flexible electronics are emerging as a promising new platform for wearable and
implantable body sensor networks (BSNs). However, the practical utility of BSNs
is compromised by the limited battery life of the electronic devices. The
objective of this research is to harness the biomechanical energy of the human
body by developing a membranous and tunable energy harvesting strategy that
retains flexibility and stretchability to be integrated with bioelectronics.
Successful completion of the research will bridge the gap between flexible
electronics and sustainable energy, and result in the maximization of the use
and performance of BSNs. The proposed work will provide fundamental
understanding and systematic studies that can solve the power issues that arise
when developing sustainable and flexible electronics. An integration of
education and outreach plan will (1) promote the development of science and
technology for multidisciplinary research at the interface of energy materials
and flexible electronics; (2) provide opportunities to strengthen K-12 programs
in STEM; and (3) broaden the research participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To take full advantage of biomechanical energy
sources in the human body and overcome current obstacles to creating flexible
electronic systems, the proposed research will: (1) leverage advanced polymeric-
based energy materials to enhance energy harvesting performance; (2) develop
solid-state tuning strategies to achieve the maximum power output; and (3)
implement a self-sustainable system for powering electronic devices. These
achievements will enable a long-term goal of translating the membranous energy
harvesting technology in BSNs to revolutionize power solutions for flexible
electronic systems. The research findings will advance knowledge of engineering
fundamentals in applications of materials and energy science that will lead to
innovations and improvements in BSN applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.