* 2106031
* PROBING PHOSPHORYLATION EVENTS IN BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANES
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Kalina Hristova, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,004,927.00

The plasma membrane, which surrounds every cell, must not only permit selective
uptake of nutrients, but also allow for information to be communicated across it
so that the cell can appropriately respond to external signals. A family of
membrane-embedded proteins that transduces signals across the plasma membrane,
known as receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK), stimulates diverse processes such as
the growth of blood vessels or the response to insulin. Intriguingly, individual
RTKs can respond to multiple signals, and the biological consequences of the
response can differ. How a single RTK can trigger distinct downstream processes
in response to different stimuli is unknown. The goal of the project is to
establish a method that quantifies the very first step in the information
transfer pathway to define the efficiency of signal transduction across the
plasma membrane. Differences in the efficiencies with which the various stimuli
signal through an RTK may explain the distinct processes triggered by the
stimuli. The project will provide research opportunities for graduate students
and will enhance the educational experience of undergraduate students who are
conducting research. In addition, it will support broad outreach activities
benefiting young scientists from diverse backgrounds and students in
Baltimore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of the project is to
establish osmotically-derived plasma membrane vesicles as a model system for RTK
phosphorylation transducer function measurements in fluorescence microscopy
experiments. The second objective is to measure the transducer function for
epidermal growth factor (EGFR) phosphorylation in response to its activating
ligands. The third objective is to measure the transducer function for
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) phosphorylation in response to its
ligands. The ultimate goal is to directly compare the transducer functions for
different RTK-ligand pairs and thus gain insights into the differential
functional effects mediated by the different ligands. The new methodology will
strengthen the over-all experimental capabilities in the field of molecular
membrane biophysics. In the long run, the methodology can also be used to
advance knowledge about different types of receptors such as (i) cytokine
receptors and associated Janus kinases, which modulate antiviral and anti-cancer
activities and inflammatory responses, (ii) death receptors, which initiate
cytotoxic signals upon ligand binding, and (iii) G-protein coupled receptors,
which mediate the recognition of light, taste, odors, hormones, pain, and
neurotransmitters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.