* 2106587
* Learning and characterizing DNA sequences in DNA-nanotube hybrid structures for high-affinity binding and recognition of molecular targets
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Markita Landry, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 05/31/2024
* USD 482,153.00

Nanomaterials with unique and powerful optical properties have emerged as
promising tools for imaging and sensing small biological molecules present in
cells, tissues, and live organisms. Imaging these important molecules is
hampered by the lack of sensing tools, limiting our ability to understand how
certain biological molecules allow the brain to communicate with the body. This
project will develop new experimental and theoretical tools to detect the
presence of brain-relevant molecules, with a focus on two molecules called
serotonin and oxytocin, which are involved in human mood, emotions, social
behavior, and their dysregulation in disorders like depression and autism. The
new tools are based on DNA molecules, long molecules composed of repeating
subunits, wrapped around long and rigid carbon nanotubes, which will detect
serotonin and oxytocin in the sample by emitting light. The key objective is to
discover special DNA molecules that will bind strongly to serotonin and
oxytocin, bring them close to the nanotube surface, and change the optical
signal that the nanotube emits. This objective will be addressed by combining
the information obtained in experimental screening of DNA-nanotube systems with
the artificial intelligence computer methods and computer simulations. The
project will lead to new methods for discovery of useful DNA molecules, which
could be applied towards developing tools to detect other biological molecules
of interest that currently remain ‘invisible’. The efforts in this project will
enrich the training and research experiences of underrepresented students at the
University of Texas at El Paso and the University of California, Berkeley and
provide the basis for demonstrations on science behind serotonin and oxytocin to
middle school student groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensing and imaging of small
molecular analytes within complex biological samples is of high interest but
remains a challenge due to the lack of suitable imaging tools. This project will
establish methods to systematically develop conjugates of single-walled carbon
nanotubes and single stranded DNA for optical sensing of selected analytes. The
methods will be established for two analytes, serotonin, and oxytocin brain
neuromodulators. To develop new DNA-nanotube optical sensors, unique DNA
sequences, which simultaneously bind with high affinity to the analytes on
nanotube surfaces and lead to strong optical response of the nanotubes, need to
be identified. Yet, discovering these useful DNA sequences has been a challenge,
with most research efforts relying on screening-based serendipity. In this
project, the research team will combine the high throughput datasets of
experimental DNA sequence screening methods, lower throughput spectroscopic
measurements, and the artificial intelligence-based methodology to learn and
predict DNA sequences that bind with high affinity to analytes on nanotube
surfaces and induce high nanotube optical activity. First, the team will develop
and validate new methods to: 1) determine short DNA sequences that bind with
high affinity to serotonin and oxytocin molecules on nanotube surfaces; and 2)
learn and predict DNA sequences that provide high optical response to DNA-
nanotube conjugates in the presence of the analytes. Then, the molecular basis
of analyte recognition by DNA sequences on nanotube surfaces will be explored
with simulations. This project should have a significant impact on many
individuals from underrepresented groups at the University of Texas at El Paso
and the University of California, Berkeley through several activities that will
be organized. The computational chemistry modules will be introduced into
physical chemistry laboratory classes, a student-coordinated research event will
be organized, and demonstrations on the science behind serotonin and oxytocin
will be developed for middle school student groups. Undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will be recruited and trained in the above
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.