* 2106924
* Self-Assembly of Multicomponent Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Parquette Jon, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the NSF Division of Chemistry, Professor Jon Parquette of Ohio State
University will develop new strategies to construct multicomponent nanomaterials
via the self-assembly of simple building blocks. The capability to build
abiological nanomaterials comprised of discrete, self-sorted domains is expected
to enable the emergence of novel properties that will drive the development of
novel biomaterials, drug delivery modalities, catalysts, and optoelectronic
materials. This work will create a platform to also address other problems in
human health and society, such as renewable energy, greenhouse gas conversion,
and medicine. This project will be used to enhance public awareness of
nanoscience in society and will expose a diversity of students to scientific
research. The PI will achieve these goals by supervising undergraduate and high
school students in research, by mentoring undergraduate career clubs, and by
participating in science exhibitions at Columbus Center of Science and Industry
(COSI) as a member the Center of Applied Plant Science (CAPS) at Ohio State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to gain a better fundamental
understanding of the factors that govern "self/non-self" interaction at the
nanostructure level and to establish new design principles to construct
multicomponent hierarchical architectures by the coassembly of spatially sorted
domains of components. This is important because the nanoscale organization of
the components of an assembled structure critically impacts the functional
attributes of a nanomaterial. The first aim of this work will construct block
sequences of two types of supramolecular rings within a self-assembled nanotube
via a heterogeneous nucleation-elongation mechanism. The second aim facilitates
the interactions between the separate domains by incorporating an intervening
polydopamine layer to stabilize one component and mediate further interactions
with additional assembled structures. Transient nanostructures that only persist
in the presence of fuel play critical roles in living cells, such as controlling
the mechanical properties of the cytoskeleton. Thus, the third aim of this work
will focus on the design of transient multicomponent hydrogels that exhibit
time-dependent physical/optical characteristics, whose temporal evolution can be
directly visualized using confocal light microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.