* 2106203
* Collaborative Research: Stability and Instability of Periodically Stationary Nonlinear Waves with Applications to Fiber Lasers
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Zweck, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 240,922.00

Since the introduction of the soliton laser in the 1990's researchers have
developed several generations of short pulse, high energy fiber lasers for a
variety of applications. These lasers are configured to produce periodically
stationary pulses by propagating light many times around a loop. Although
different physical effects change the shape of the pulse as it traverses the
loop, the pulse returns to the same shape once each period (round trip). A
significant challenge for the modeling of these lasers is that from one
generation to the next there has been a dramatic increase in the amount by which
the pulse breathes, necessitating novel mathematical approaches. This project
will develop theoretical and computational methods to determine periodically
stationary pulse solutions of nonlinear wave equations modeling laser systems
and to analyze their stability (robustness in the presence of random noise and
other system perturbations). The project will provide computational tools to aid
in the design of high energy lasers for medical applications, and of frequency
combs for highly accurate measurements of time and frequency, with applications
to geo-location systems, time and frequency standards, the calibration of
astronomical instruments, and trace gas sensing. The project will provide broad
training in applied mathematics for doctoral students and mentoring for junior
faculty. In addition, the project will support complementary activity focused on
pedagogical innovations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The laser models to be studied
in this project are based on variants of the cubic-quintic complex Ginzburg-
Landau equation. Classically, the spectrum of a stationary nonlinear wave is
given by the zero set of the Evans function of the linearized differential
operator. The stability of periodically stationary solutions of the Ginzburg-
Landau equation and of models of fiber lasers will be characterized in terms of
the spectrum of the monodromy operator of the linearization about the pulse.
Since the stability problem for time-periodic solutions is formulated on a
cylinder, rather than on the real line, any generalization of the Evans function
will involve Fredholm determinants of operators on infinite-dimensional function
spaces rather than classical determinants of matrices. To avoid the extreme
stiffness of the differential equations used to compute the Evans function in
this infinite dimensional context, the point spectrum of the monodromy operator
will be identified with the zero set of an infinite-dimensional Fredholm
determinant of a Birman-Schwinger operator on an infinite cylinder. Numerical
methods will be developed to compute Fredholm determinants of such Birman-
Schwinger operators. These methods will then be employed to determine stability
regions in design parameter space for periodically stationary solutions of the
Ginzburg-Landau equation and of models of experimental fiber laser systems. The
generic instability of stationary solutions of reaction diffusion equations has
recently been established by applying a related topological invariant called the
Maslov index to the spectral theory of self-adjoint operators. A novel version
of the Maslov index will be used to establish general stability results for
periodically stationary solutions of the Ginzburg-Landau
equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.