* 2106093
* EAGER International Type II: Collaborative Research: Reimagining International Research for Students in a Virtual World
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Kirsten Davis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2024
* USD 203,735.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;International research collaborations provide important
opportunities to support innovative research and address the significant global
challenges facing the world today. To develop U.S. researchers who are both
interculturally competent and able to navigate global research networks within
their field, it is important to provide international research experiences for
students. Reimagining international research programs for students in a virtual
environment will ensure the resilience of future international engagement to
sudden changes such as COVID-19 and potentially broaden access to such
opportunities. This project will explore the future of international research
experiences for STEM students in the post-COVID era. Building on prior research
of student experiences and program structures for these programs, we will
convene stakeholders to think creatively about how similar experiences can be
provided for students in a virtual environment. To strengthen the international
research collaborations of the future, we need to understand the challenges,
benefits, and supports necessary to provide international research experiences
for students in a virtual environment. Developing virtual programs that maintain
the learning outcomes students gain from the traditional format will require
intentional design based on the experiences and best practices of the community
of educators who have coordinated international research experiences for
students previously. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the design of international research experiences for STEM students in
virtual environments. In particular, we will address the following research
questions: 1) How could each element of an international research experience for
students be translated into a virtual environment?; 2) What program structures
would allow for these new virtual experiences?; 3) What support would program
leaders need to implement such programs? This project will include two phases,
the first focused on collecting a broad range of ideas through virtual focus
groups, and the second collecting feedback on these ideas from a wider audience
through a questionnaire. We will use a participatory design approach to collect
information from the community of researchers who currently run international
research experiences for students as this will allow us to build on their tacit
knowledge and expertise in this area. In a post-COVID world, more educational
experiences may need to be provided virtually, and our findings can support the
development of virtual research experiences and laboratory experiences generally
(e.g., REUs and RETs). Similarly, studying abroad is often a challenge for
students in STEM disciplines where programs are highly structured, so providing
virtual experiences may increase access. We will disseminate our findings
broadly through academic channels and through webinars and online resources that
can support faculty and universities seeking to develop virtual research
experiences for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.