* 2106167
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track II: Rivers of the Andes Field Training
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Wilcox, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 145,456.00

This project will train students in interdisciplinary, international river
sciences and prepare them for the STEM workforce, for their research, and for
applying river science toward developing sustainable solutions to the human-
induced stresses on rivers in the Andes and globally. The proposed 12-day
Advanced Studies Institute will immerse 14 US-based graduate students in
innovative field training in hydrology, geomorphology, and ecology for, in each
of two years. Working in the Magdalena River basin, Colombia, students will
learn cutting-edge field, remote sensing, and computational tools, develop
critical and systems thinking, and complete team-based research projects.
Students will work with instructors from University of Montana, University of
Colorado, and Colombia, taking advantage of long-term research sites in the
Magdalena River basin and broad expertise. The Rivers of the Andes Field
Training course will recruit a diverse group of students that broadens
participation in sciences, and course materials and lessons learned will be
shared openly and widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River systems are under stress
from climate change and growing demands for water, energy, and food. There is a
strong disconnect, however, between where research and teaching about fluvial
processes is concentrated, and where stresses on river systems such as new dam
construction and associated impacts on humans and biodiversity are more recently
evolving, such as in the Andes. Moreover, innovative and interdisciplinary
approaches are needed to address challenges such as those surrounding river
systems and to prepare students for the 21st century workforce. To address these
challenges, we propose Rivers of the Andes Field Training (RAFT), a course to be
taught in Colombia that will provide field-based training in river sciences.
Course content will focus on hydrology and fluvial geomorphology, especially
river mechanics, floods, and sediment regimes, and complementary content in
tropical fish ecology and basin-scale, cumulative-impact and decision-support
analysis. RAFT will use the Magdalena River and its tributaries as a field site
to illustrate broader content about river processes and Andean rivers. The
course will augment field training with classroom teaching about fluvial
processes and observational, measurement and modeling approaches for
understanding river processes. RAFT will provide a transformative experience for
graduate student participants by combining innovative approaches and
technologies with evidence-based best practices to not only advance knowledge of
river sciences and associated tools, but also to promote critical and systems
thinking and observational, interdisciplinary, and teamwork skills. RAFT will
include international and multicultural experience, interdisciplinary teaching
on cutting-edge process knowledge and tools, training in cross-scale and systems
thinking, team-based projects, and practice in science communication.
Participants will be equipped to tackle wicked problems at the nexus of water,
energy, and food systems and to apply science toward sustainable solutions to
the challenges surrounding rivers in the Andes and in the
Anthropocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the NSF
Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.