* 2106315
* Electrochemical Liquid-Liquid-Solid Growth of Intermetallic Nanocrystals from Liquid Metal Alloys
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stephen Maldonado, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Stephen Maldonado of the University of
Michigan is merging a diverse set of approaches and tools to develop
nanostructures that are composed of multiple metals. These intermetallic
nanostructures are synthesized using electrochemical reactions performed in
nanoscale liquid metal droplets. Control over electrochemical parameters allows
for tunable programming of both composition and structure. In addition, the
synthesis of two-dimensional materials at liquid metal interfaces under
electrochemical control is being explored for the development of an alternative
synthetic toolbox for synthesizing intermetallic nanostructures. Through this
research, students are learning how to synthesize and characterize
nanostructures without disturbing the reaction. Dr. Maldonado continues to
engage and educate the broader community through K-12 activities as well as
through the development of digital content related to electrochemistry and
nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on advancing the
mechanistic understanding and synthetic scope of the electrochemical liquid-
liquid-solid (ec-LLS) process for the formation of intermetallic crystalline,
nanostructures. Two key developments are being targeted. First, the ec-LLS
method is being explored for the synthesis of two-dimensional Pb crystals (e.g.
plumbene) through characterization by X-ray reflectivity. Second, in-situ liquid
electrochemical transmission electron microscopy is employed to record
individual intermetallic nanoparticle growth events by ec-LLS. Researchers
involved in this work are trained in electrochemistry, materials, metallurgy,
nanoscience, solid-state chemistry, X-ray reflectivity, and transmission
electron microscopy. All researchers involved in this work assist in the
development of interactive activities that introduce the wonders of
electrochemistry and nanoscience to elementary school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.