* 2106077
* Path-Dependent Partial Differential Equations and Optimal Control
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Christian Keller, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 133,000.00

This research will advance optimal control theory to understand realistic and
complex scenarios in applications. The research will potentially provide better
or even optimal decision-making procedures, especially relevant for problems
that affect many stakeholders such as pension fund investments and financial
risk management. The project will provide training opportunities for graduate
students and opportunities for STEM students to build their careers in the
financial industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three parts.
In the first part, the investigator will study optimal control problems
involving non-Markovian piecewise deterministic processes and the associated
non-local Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations. Applications are optimal execution
or liquidation problems in mathematical finance with richer classes of models.
For example, non-Markovian Hawkes processes can be incorporated. Those processes
provide a more accurate description of the relevant financial data. The second
part deals with path-dependent Hamilton-Jacobi equations whose Hamiltonians can
have quadratic or even super-quadratic growth in the gradient. Those equations
are important for optimal control problems with unbounded controls. The
investigator will develop new notions of non-smooth solutions and establish
well-posedness results with respect to those notions. In the third part of this
project, the investigator will completely carry out a path-dependent dynamic
programming approach for the optimal control of locally monotone evolution
equations. This large class of equations covers the two-dimensional Navier-
Stokes equations and the tamed three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations. In
addition, this research provides a new line of methodologies for the largely
open problem of optimal synthesis for infinite-dimensional control
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.