* 2106168
* Intersections in Assessment Conference: Exploring Informal Science Learning Assessment Methods to Improve Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Davida Smyth, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,913.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying ways to improve
assessment in STEM higher education. To do so, the project will convene a group
of experts from the fields of higher education assessment and informal science
learning assessment for an online conference. The conference attendees will
explore how informal learning assessment approaches may inform assessment
methods in undergraduate STEM education. The effort expects to identify new
methods, approaches, and assessment frameworks to contribute to effective
assessment in higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experts from informal
science education and from higher education assessment will engage in a series
of online meetings over a six-week span. The conference aims to explore
innovative strategies to integrate assessment approaches developed for informal
learning into STEM higher education. The intended outcome is the identification
and recommendation of specific, proven methods currently in use in informal
science learning as innovative strategies to test in higher education settings.
The project builds from a framework established through Science Education for
New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities (SENCER) that seeks to interest and
engage students in science to help them connect science with civic
responsibility. Dissemination of conference results will include awhite paper
describing conference proceedings and conclusions, a peer-reviewed journal
article, and a workshop for faculty at the 2021 SENCER summer symposium. The NSF
IUSE: EHR program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.