* 2106359
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Optimizing Storage Caches via Adaptive and Reconfigurable Tiering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Vaidy Sunderam, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2025
* USD 175,435.00

New types of data storage and memory devices are being developed and released,
but they have very different properties, such as speeds, costs, sizes,
reliability, and energy. With these new options, there is an opportunity to
reduce the cost or environmental impact of storage while improving its
reliability and performance. To realize these benefits, this project explores
techniques to use new storage devices together. By exploring when and how to
move data between “tiers” of new storage, as well as automatically determining
what devices to use in data storage tiers, the project dramatically improves
storage for both providers and the end users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
analyzes methods to detect optimal reconfiguration points using machine-learning
and time-series techniques via three interrelated thrusts. In the first thrust,
accurate, analytical, multi-tier tail latency models are developed using queuing
theory. Then, the project builds an efficient platform to simulate
configurations and investigates methods to estimate tiered-cache reconfiguration
costs. Finally, lightweight, low-overhead, accurate sampling techniques are
explored for running systems, to quickly detect significant input/output and
cache behavior changes. In response, this project further builds techniques to
reconfigure a tiered-cache on running systems with minimal interference.
Empirical case studies are applied to Memcached and Kubernetes
containers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The storage community benefits from multiple
artifacts this project produces: an open-source versatile multi-tier cache
simulator, workload and analytical latency models, several case studied systems,
a database of metrics from empirically evaluated devices, and publications
reporting unexpected or counter-intuitive results. Storage consumers (e.g.,
companies) can simulate many “what-if” scenarios before actually purchasing any
hardware, so as to avoid under- or over-provisioning. This project develops new
course modules including short video tutorials. Several students, including
women and members of underrepresented groups, are mentored and trained in
research techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's artifacts—software,
source code, data sets, multi-tier cache simulator, traces, and results—are all
embodied in a system we call "MTCache: Multi-Tier Cache". Results will be
disseminated using peer-reviewed publications and arxiv.org. All artifacts will
be made public through the project Website: https://www.filesystems.org/mtcache.
The project plans to maintain that site for at least ten years following the end
of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.