* 2106429
* AF: Medium: The Trace Reconstruction Problem
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Rocco Servedio, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2025
* USD 910,360.00

Problems that involve the transmission and recovery of information play an
important role in computer science and many related areas. For example, the
field of coding theory studies how to cleverly encode a message so that the
underlying information can still be recovered even after the message has been
subjected to some kind of corruption by noise. While coding theory has been
hugely successful and influential, there are many real-world settings in which a
noise process affects information "in the wild" where coding schemes cannot be
applied. For example, given a DNA sequence that is subject to mutations or
deletions, there is no opportunity to encode the sequence using tools of coding
theory because it occurs in nature in a way that is not under human control. So,
there is a need for techniques that can reconstruct information that has *not*
been cleverly encoded, and yet has been corrupted with different types of noise.
One particularly challenging type of noise is "deletion noise", meaning that
some of the characters of the message are deleted with no indication being given
as to where the deletions took place. Fortunately, in many scenarios of this
sort it is natural to assume that multiple independent copies of the deletion-
plagued data are available; for example, in a biological setting one might have
many copies of a given DNA sequence where deletions have affected each copy in a
different way. This project will study algorithms for performing reconstruction
in scenarios such as the above. Another important goal of this project will be
dissemination and outreach activities. Planned activities include new advanced
courses on reconstruction problems, training graduate students and postdocs
through research collaboration, disseminating research results through seminar
talks, survey articles and other publications, and continuing ongoing outreach
activities aimed at increasing interest in and awareness of theoretical computer
science in a broader population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the
research team will build on their preliminary results to develop new algorithms
for the trace-reconstruction problem, where independent copies of data corrupted
by deletions (such a deletion-corrupted data string is known as a "trace") are
available and the challenge is to reconstruct the original uncorrupted data.
They will analyze a number of different natural variants of this problem, which
are obtained by making different assumptions about the nature of the deletion
process (low, intermediate, or high deletion rates, correlated versus
uncorrelated deletions, and so on); the type of data that is being transmitted
(worst-case data, average-case data, etc); and the desiderata for successful
reconstruction (perfect reconstruction versus different notions of approximate
reconstruction). The research team will also investigate new algorithmic
problems related to deletion noise, including more challenging versions of the
problem described above in which the reconstruction algorithm is given a mixture
of traces from multiple different source strings and the goal is to reconstruct
the entire underlying "population" of source strings rather than just a single
source string.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.