* 2106666
* RI: Medium: Automatically Understanding and Identifying Digital Expression of Black Grief
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jessica Grieser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

In today’s world, multiple large-scale events have converged, causing increased
emotional distress for many in the United States. In addition to large-scale
events, such as COVID-19, incidents of police brutality against Blacks, and the
economic downturn, people also experience distressing personal events, such as
loss of a close family member or friend. This project develops novel machine
learning-based natural language processing (NLP) tools to automatically identify
the online expression of grief and component emotions that occur in reaction to
these triggering events. The focus is on Black grief, a phenomenon that is not
well understood, especially when it occurs in a networked public. The results of
this project will include a dataset, annotated at different levels, that
scholars and computational researchers can use to understand the online
expression of Black grief and develop novel NLP models for its identification.
The project has the potential for truly broad and profound impact in society.
Given the rate at which people post online, an NLP tool that can automatically
identify grief expressed in a post would be useful to professionals who respond
to grief. Automatic flagging of posts indicating that the poster may need help
would be more efficient than having professionals manually scan all online
spaces of interest, an approach that is now common. New NLP tools developed
during the project have the potential to shift how social workers, mental health
professionals, and outreach workers treat complex grief online, informing new
intervention and treatment programs that respond to an individual’s digital
life. The investigators work with Black Harlem residents who are helping other
residents cope with and process emotions including grief and other disturbing
events, engaging them in the evaluation of the developed NLP
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is an interdisciplinary collaboration
between computer scientists, social work researchers, and linguists. It includes
the use of layered annotation and computational methods to analyze social media
posts after triggering, often traumatic, events to identify how people
communicate about different types of loss. The goal is to understand the digital
expression of grief in posts by Black community members. The plan is to collect
corpora containing expressions of grief in reaction to triggering events, and to
produce a layered annotation of the corpora reflecting semantic interpretation
and context, psychological interpretation of ex- pressed emotion, as well as
linguistic expression of grief. Using this data, a computational approach will
be developed to automatically identify grief, its component emotions and
intensity, and how emotional re- actions change over time. The Natural Language
Processing (NLP) team will develop new semi-supervised methods to identify
grief, its component emotions and intensity as expressed in different dialects
as well as conversational patterns that lead to different resolutions of grief
over time. The social work team will perform a qualitative analysis of complex
historical trauma, bias, and racism embedded in annotations of social media
posts. They will work with community experts to identify the best strategies for
deciphering different expressions of emotions that use hyper-local language that
is deeply regional, nuanced, and cultural. The linguistics team’s work will
advance understanding of the role of specific digital language strategies in the
creation of social meaning, identifying the significance of morphosyntactic
variation in digital language. The approach also includes identifying racial
bias in systems that are developed in the award and understanding the impact on
predictions when the computational model is applied to the language of different
different demographics in communities (e.g., age, socio-economic
status).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.