* 2106990
* The Final Step: Establishing the Relations Between Black-Hole Growth and Host-Galaxy Properties During the Last Half of Cosmic Time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* William Brandt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 317,977.00

One of the most important discoveries of the last two decades has been the
realization that the lives of galaxies and their central super-massive black
holes (SMBH) are inextricably intertwined, and in fact, have evolved together
over cosmic time. In a real sense, a clearer understanding of the formation and
evolution of one depends on that of the other. Observational studies at high
redshift (z = 0.5 - 3) reveal compelling galaxy-SMBH coevolution despite
relatively small sample sizes that almost certainly limit a full accounting of
the factors influencing SMBH growth. The research team will take advantage of
the wealth of existing data from deep and wide-field multi-wavelength galaxy
surveys to conduct a thorough investigation of galaxy-SMBH coevolution over low-
to-moderate redshifts (z = 0 - 0.8), an epoch covering roughly the final half of
cosmic time, to connect SMBH-galaxy properties in the very distant universe with
those we observe locally. The proposal will also support graduate research as
well as middle/high-school teacher development
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will exploit existing wide-
field multi-wavelength (X-ray to far-infrared) surveys to identify approximately
7,100 galaxies with active galactic nuclei (AGN, i.e., actively accreting
SMBHs), including nearly 200 dwarf galaxies, from a total of 300,000 galaxies
spanning z = 0 – 0.8, which comprises a much larger sample than comparable
studies. The UV-to-far-infrared data will yield galaxy redshifts, stellar masses
(M*), star formation rates (SFRs), and structural parameters, while X-ray
luminosities will be used to estimate the time-averaged SMBH accretion rate
(&lt;BHAR&gt;), which minimizes the influence of intrinsic AGN variability. The
collected data will be used to conduct statistically robust partial-correlation
and multi-parameter studies to address multiple lines of inquiry, such as (e.g.)
combining the IlustrisTNG simulation suite with the observed &lt;BHAR&gt; to
predict the z = 0 SMBH mass vs. host galaxy M* relation and assess the relative
importance of mergers and accretion on SMBH growth. Other questions to be
considered include: do SMBHs and galaxy bulges continue to grow in lockstep over
the last half of cosmic time? Do dwarf galaxies “grow” their black holes
differently than more massive galaxies, and does the presence of an AGN somehow
keep galaxies on the star-forming galaxy “main
sequence”?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.