* 2106048
* Anisotropic Human Mesenchymal Stem Cell Patch with Oriented Vasculature
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Feng Zhao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 153,901.00

Replacement of diseased tissue requires that the implanted material not only
have the proper mechanical strength, but it must also have a functioning blood
distribution network (vasculature; veins, capillaries), and these are often
difficult to manufacture. This project will seek to understand and mimic the
structure and vasculature of three-dimensional (3D) cardiac tissue. The goal is
to engineer a mechanically strong and functional cell patch for the regeneration
of damaged heart tissue. The proposed research will also provide opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as underrepresented community
college students, to be involved in interdisciplinary stem cell and tissue
engineering research. In addition, a series of seminars will be hosted to
increase stem cell and tissue engineering awareness among the health community
and public in the UP (Upper Peninsula) of Michigan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of the project is to create aligned nanofibrous natural
extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffolds for the biofabrication of a prevascularized
anisotropic stem cell patch and elucidate the mechanism of microvessel
orientation within the in vivo microenvironment. Human mesenchymal stem cells
(hMSCs) are immunoregulatory, regenerative, effective in promoting myocardial
regeneration, and function as pericytes to stabilize the microvessels formed by
endothelial cells (ECs). These unique properties enable hMSCs to combine with
ECM scaffolds and ECs to biofabricate an off-the-shelf or patient-specific
prevascularized patch, in which hMSCs will play a dual role of stabilizing
vasculature formed by ECs in vitro and orchestrating the regeneration of dead
cardiac tissue after implantation. In this project, hMSCs will be co-cultured
with ECs in a nanofibrous ECM scaffold to form an aligned capillary-like
vasculature, and the effects of aligned nanofibers on the density, orientation
and maturation of the microvessels will be investigated. The prevascularized
hMSC sheets will be multi-layered and further matured in a perfusion bioreactor,
and the role of physiological interstitial flow on the inter-connections,
alignment and maturation of the existing microvessels within the 3D biomimetic
tissue platform will be evaluated. If successful, this project could lead to the
development of personalized or off-the-shelf cardiac tissue patches that could
dramatically increase the success rate for the treatment of dead cardiac muscle
associated with heart attacks.