* 2106488
* Novel Challenges in Nonlinear Waves and Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Barbara Prinari, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 219,999.00

This research concerns nonlinear wave phenomena, with particular emphasis on the
study of a class of nonlinear evolution equations commonly referred to as
soliton equations or integrable systems. These systems model physical phenomena
in diverse fields such as deep-water waves, plasma physics, nonlinear optical
fibers, low temperature physics and Bose-Einstein condensates, and magneto-
static spin waves. Some of the equations studied belong to the class of the
nonlinear Schr√∂dinger (NLS) equation and its various generalizations, which
constitute universal models for weakly dispersive nonlinear wave trains. Others
belong to the complex short-pulse equation and its generalizations, which
describe the propagation in nonlinear media of ultra-short optical pulses. These
have applications to laser material processing, laser microscopy, optical clocks
and measurements, medicine (e.g., eye surgery and vision correction), and
telecommunication. A distinguishing feature of these systems is that, in
addition to standard solitons, localized traveling waves that preserve their
shape and velocity, they also admit so-called loop solitons, which are not
single-valued solitons, as well as solutions that oscillate between the two.
Another phenomenon that this research aims at elucidating is the formation of
rogue waves. These extreme events are unusually large surface waves with wave
crests up to four times the mean level that appear from nowhere and disappear
without a trace and can therefore cause significant damage to ships, and
offshore drilling units. This research addresses the role of solitons and
modulational instability as possible concurrent mechanisms for the formation of
rogue waves. Rogue waves have also been recently observed experimentally in
optical fibers. The training of graduate students at the University at Buffalo,
and outreach activities aiming at promoting the growth of women in applied
mathematics will be integral components of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, the investigation deals with
certain integrable systems in situations in which the boundary conditions play a
key role, as well as various kinds of singular limits. Specific tasks include:
(i) the development of the inverse scattering transform for various NLS systems
with non-zero boundary conditions at infinity, and in particular with boundary
conditions corresponding to counter-propagating waves; (ii) the investigation of
concrete questions from applications in Bose-Einstein condensates (e.g., trains
of solitons, bound states, windings) and in nonlinear optics (nematic liquid
crystals, etc); (iii) the rigorous study of the discrete spectrum and spectral
singularities of NLS systems; (iv) development of the inverse scattering
transform for the complex coupled short-pulse equation; (v) the investigation of
solitons, soliton interactions and rogue waves for the above systems, and
applications to non-integrable systems in regimes close to the integrable ones;
and (vi) the study of phase transitions in networks as critical behavior of
solutions of soliton equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.