* 2106229
* Research Initiation: Exploring the Associations Between Personality Attributes and Transformative Learning of Engineering Study Abroad Program Participants
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sheryl Sorby, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,980.00

The dynamic and global nature of the marketplace make proficiency in key
professional skills a major differentiator in the competition for engineering
jobs and an important factor in career success in engineering. Across U.S.
higher education, there is a strong focus on developing students’ professional
skills through life-altering study abroad programs. A life-altering study abroad
program transforms participants’ reference frames and allows them to build
professional competencies, such as analytical problem solving, planning and
organizing, communication, teamwork and global understanding. An experientially
designed short-term study abroad program (STSAP) has the potential to play a
critical role in the values and behaviors that students take from global
experiences, making it essential that STSAP programmers fully consider the
potential holistic outcomes of their programs and how they are best achieved.
Unfortunately, experience shows that a given study abroad experience elicits
vastly different responses among students; for some students, the experience is
life-altering while for others, it is decidedly not. This research will pave the
way to a methodology for improving students global engineering mindset
development through mapping personality traits to study abroad outcomes. The
project will serve as a foundation for future work to guide the preparation and
support of short-term study abroad participants for their life-altering
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transformative Learning Theory (TLT) focuses
on the processes involved in changing an individual’s frames of reference, while
Experiential Learning Theory (ELT) provides direction to how we can develop the
type of action oriented STSAP experiences that are likely to induce
transformation. Building on these two theories, the research hypothesizes that
student experience in STSAP could be related to personality traits associated
with ELT and TLT. The overarching goal of this research is twofold: (a) to
advance knowledge about the association of students’ personality traits and
transformative learning from study abroad programs; and (b) to advance our
understanding of the formation of engineering students by examining mechanisms
that prepare and support them for rich study abroad experiences. The research
questions are formulated as follows: (i) To what extent does transformative
learning from experientially designed study abroad programs equally occur for
different personality attributes and for different attitude toward other
cultures? (ii) To what extent the association of transformative learning from
experientially designed study abroad programs with different personality
attributes and attitude toward other cultures differ by program structures
(length, destination and nature -culturally-focused program and engineering-
focused program)? (iii) To what extent does the association of transformative
learning from experientially designed study abroad programs with different
personality attributes differ among demographics? This exploratory project will
use a mixed methods approach to answer the research questions. In Year 1, we
will conduct a pilot study using a survey and focus group interviews for
engineering study abroad program participants at UC. The findings from the pilot
study will inform the construction of a national survey, particularly open-ended
questions and focus group interview questions, for engineering study abroad
program participants at five other universities, for the main study in Year 2.
The findings will be structured to identify how to best structure STSAP along
the Kolb’s experiential learning cycle in order to trigger transformative
experience for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.