* 2106954
* Collaborative Research:CNS Core:Medium:Unlinking the (Block)chain: Scalable Byzantine-Tolerant Databases
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2025
* Lorenzo Alvisi, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 05/31/2025
* USD 292,714.00

This project proposes a new architecture for enabling safe and secure data
sharing among mutually distrustful parties. Blockchains are today the platform
of choice for such needs. They offer the appealing abstraction of a shared,
totally-ordered, tamper-resistant log of operations, implemented via a
distributed protocol run by a collection of computing nodes, each replicating
the entire state of the log. While the details of these protocols vary for
different blockchain implementations, they all rely on an underlying
architecture that suffers from two key limitations. First, it predicates
correctness and integrity on an execution model where replicas process
operations sequentially, according to the same total order; this quickly becomes
a performance bottleneck. Second, it complicates deployment. The need for all
replicas store the full body of data stored in the blockchain is not only
resource intensive, but can be legally problematic: GDPR laws, for instance,
severely restrict where personally identifiable data (such as banking or medical
records) of European citizens can reside. This project overcomes these
limitations by implementing the blockchain abstraction on a novel foundation,
and, in so doing, demonstrates that efficient data processing and the
decentralization of trust can go hand-in-hand. At its core is a key insight
gained from prior research in databases – namely, that is possible to implement
the abstraction of a totally ordered sequence of transactions without requiring
all of their operations to be actually executed sequentially. To leverage the
opportunity for greater parallelism offered by this insight, this project will
develop the first geo-distributed database provably resilient to malicious
sabotage, whether from some of the computing nodes implementing the database or
from clients of the database. Today, there exists no rigorous specification of
what correctness would even mean in such a database; this project will introduce
such correctness specification, based on the ethos of bounding the influence
that malicious actors (whether among the replicas implementing the database or
among its clients) can have on the outcome of transactions submitted by correct
clients. It will then develop new algorithmic techniques that, despite
adversarial attempts to the contrary, implement the blockchain abstraction while
provably enforcing these correctness conditions. To simplify deployment, this
project will focus on drastically reducing the degree of replication necessary
to support blockchains. Specifically, it will refine the blockchain’s current
threat model to decouple the degree of replication needed to ensure that no data
will be lost from what is required to guarantee the integrity of the blockchain
execution; this will make it possible to relax the requirement that all replicas
store the entire state of the blockchain, and thus lead to easier regulatory
compliance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tighter integration among mutually untrusted
parties can be transformative for a variety of applications, including
healthcare, financial services, and supply chain management. Databases are
natural candidates for supporting this integration, but currently lack a way to
express and efficiently enforce correctness when some actors behave maliciously.
This work builds that conceptual framework, leveraging a novel architecture that
makes it easier to comply with data use regulations, and instantiates it in
working prototypes that will be rigorously evaluated for performance and
robustness. The synergy between theory and engineering critical for the success
of this project is also crucial to the education of the next generation of
system engineers: they will have to negotiate issues of performance, fault-
tolerance, and trust in the ubiquitous large-scale distributed systems that
underpin most industries today. Proposed lecture and project materials will
prepare students to apply a principled approach to building trustworthy
distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.