* 2106786
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Thermal Computational Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Oliver Cossairt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Image sensors for thermal wavebands of light are usually noisy and subject to
nuisance variations. Yet, it is indisputable that thermal imaging has the
potential to spur numerous scientific and engineering applications that can
fundamentally transform our society. For example, autonomous vehicles equipped
with thermal cameras can navigate in the dark and through fog and rain. The
widespread availability of thermal imaging technology could usher in methods for
non-intrusive vital sign monitoring in public spaces, thereby providing a new
tool in our public health arsenal, as well as enable environmental and ecosystem
monitoring at both local and global scales. This project seeks to enable such
applications with inexpensive but noisy thermal sensors. The research advances
made in this progress will be integrated with an educational and outreach
program that includes creating new undergraduate and graduate courses, engaging
undergraduates in research, and engaging with K-12
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is to advance
thermal scene understanding by developing foundational tools for rendering,
modeling and imaging at thermal wavebands. The project will develop a physically
accurate rendering pipeline for thermal wavebands, that incorporates wavelength-
dependent thermal emissivity of complex surfaces, thermal propagation in
atmosphere, and accurate sensor modeling and noise characterization. This
modeling will be used to design and develop novel computational imaging systems
that allow capture of multi-dimensional thermal signals, such as multi-spectral
and polarization measurements. The research will also develop a differentiable
renderer and exploit it within an end-to-end learning framework for inverse
graphics. This will allow for significant improvements in problems such as
denoising, super-resolution, stereo, object detection and others. The advances
in research will be used to explore and advance autonomous navigation, remote
health monitoring and remote environmental monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.