* 2106927
* Catch a Fading Star: Using Transient Dimming to Explore the Planet-Forming Zones of Young Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Shappee, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 697,010.00

A population of low-mass stars, called ‘dipper stars,’ experience episodic
dimming events that might not arise due to planetary transits. The team will use
astrometric, imaging, and spectroscopic data to evaluate mechanisms other than
disk or planetesimal occultation for stellar dimming. They will test the model
of dust lofted by disk winds and exocomets on highly inclined and eccentric
orbits. They will also do multiple bandpass photometry to examine reddening of
the starlight and put constraints on the dust size distribution. They will
leverage prior experience with a supernova survey and use machine learning to
develop an automated system to identify stellar dimming and eliminate false
positives. The team will incorporate citizen scientists to expand the survey of
dimming stars using amateur equipment. They will use an existing program at
University of Hawaii at Manoa to bring the work to high school students from
under-represented groups, including Hawaiian natives. High schoolers will work
on this project with UH scientists and Professors on six-month
mentorships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this work is to examine the
structure, dynamics, and composition of the inner regions of primordial disks.
Inner disks exchange mass and angular momentum with the central star. These are
the regions where planets form and grow. This research will complement studies
of outer disk regions probed by other means, e.g. ALMA. A connection between
dips and winds would provide a new probe of photoevaporative and/or
magnetohydrodynamic winds that could control evolution of mass and angular
momentum in disks, which in turn are important factors in planet formation and
evolution. On the other hand, a link to planetesimals would provide a window on
a critical stage of planet formation in these systems. Detailed photometric and
spectroscopic investigations would allow studies of the composition of gases and
solids in these disks that may also be incorporated in planets. This project
will create a dipper “alerts” system that would usher studies of protoplanetary
disk into the realm of multi-wavelength transient astronomy and serve as the
basis for future time-series investigations using even more powerful
observational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.