* 2106213
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: QODED: Quantum codes Optimized for the Dynamics between Encoded Computation and Decoding using Classical Coding Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Arthur Calderbank, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 334,640.00

Leveraging quantum phenomena in nature for processing information promises
exciting gains and advantages in several tasks such as computing and
communications. At the minute scale where such phenomena occur, however, the
information carriers, such as atoms, are fragile and highly susceptible to
noise. In order to build scalable and reliable quantum systems, one needs to
mitigate noise through error-correction techniques. A quantum error correcting
code (QECC) encodes data in a larger mathematical space so that the redundancy
can be use to detect and correct errors. For quantum computation, one needs to
regularly do such error correction, which tries to preserve data as it is, while
also performing active computation to process the data, which keeps altering it.
In order to be fault-tolerant, such a quantum computer needs to find ways of
carefully balancing computation and decoding (error correction) while keeping
resource requirements at a minimum. This is a very challenging task, and this
project develops methods to study modern QECCs that are optimized for the
dynamics between encoded computation and decoding using techniques from
classical error-correction theory. The team will also nurture young talent in
these areas and inspire underrepresented groups to join the growing quantum
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The celebrated threshold theorem of QEC
established that quantum information can be protected indefinitely as long as
each hardware component meets a fidelity threshold that is a function of the
specific QECC. This project will provide a concrete understanding of desirable
code structure, motivated by practical constraints, and hence address both
thresholds and computational overhead as a function of this structure.
Specifically, the intellectual contributions of the proposed research plan can
be summarized as follows: (1) Recent results of investigators have produced
systematic methods to synthesize logical operations on stabilizer codes. The
team of researchers will begin by applying such methods to quantum low-density
parity-check (QLDPC) codes in order to understand their utility for logical
computation. (2) The team will explore strategies such as concatenation and
lifting algebraic protographs to combine the best aspects of QLDPC codes and
algebraic codes such as quantum Reed-Muller codes. (3) For QEC, it has been
observed that iterative decoders with symmetric message updates fail on QLDPC
codes due to cycles and "quantum" trapping sets related to error degeneracy. The
team will leverage their classical expertise to develop single-shot algorithms
based on message-passing with noisy syndromes, understand the effect of non-
linear message updates, and analyze error floors. (4) The investigators will
also determine how the desirable graph structure for such methods interplay with
realizing logical operations on these hybrid QECCs. Finally, the team will
combine these insights with other promising approaches such as measurement-based
quantum computation, which will make the results apply across a wide array of
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.