* 2106410
* SBIR Phase I:  Composing Digital-Twins from Disparate Data Sources
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* John Blackwell, DIAMOND AGE TECHNOLOGY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project relates to the creation of a "digital twin," a
real-world system projected into spatially-computed environment such as virtual
and augmented reality. This technology creates the infrastructure necessary for
the application of virtual and augmented reality in industrial workplaces, at
scale. By making the full-scale roll out of these technologies possible, the
technology seeks to impact human health and safety, operational efficiencies,
and environmental risk reduction for process operations facilities, such as oil
refineries and chemical plants. The long term impacts of the technology may also
enable automation and optimization, improving their efficiency, security, and
safety. Such facilities are critical infrastructure and play a significant role
in the national economy. The availability of this product may also enhance
market opportunities for other businesses in the scanning, spatial computing,
and training markets. The impact may be further broadened by adapting the
process for digital twin production to new domains unrelated to the industrial
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is advancing knowledge and understanding in both machine
learning and spatial computing. This project focuses on a method for digitizing
a complex, real-world system, in an efficient manner, sufficient to recreate the
captured reality as an interactive digital twin. The primary technical hurdle is
the combining of different data sources that describe aspects of a particular
real-world system into a single complete description. The initial physical
systems being modelled are industrial process operations, but the core methods
could apply to other types of systems, including natural systems, such as a
rainforest. For industrial process operations, the goal is to encode the entire
process operations facilities at the component level, with sub-cm accuracy, at
10% of the current time and cost requirements. To achieve this, this project
will combine physical scans with engineering documentation and relational
probabilities. Once combined, the model will be used as the basis for a digital
twin of the real-world system projected into spatial computed environments, such
as virtual and augmented reality. These techniques replace a tedious and
impractical static scan and human labor workflow with rapid scans, computer
vision, and a combination of procedural and trained
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.