* 2106879
* Catalyst Project: Promoting STEM Career Readiness Through Active Learning in Cell Biology
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kari Debbink, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Bowie
State University seeks to enhance the quality of STEM education for
undergraduate students enrolled in the biology curriculum by incorporating
research-based educational approaches. Specifically, the proposal outlines
strategies to implement constructivist learning theory and situated learning
theory to increase student engagement with discipline-specific content. The
project aims to increase the persistence of STEM majors, who ultimately enter
the STEM workforce or pursue graduate STEM degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the project are (1) to redesign Cell Biology and part of
Microbiology I courses, so that all active class time are devoted to hands-on
laboratory experiences and real-world applications of cell biology; (2) divide
laboratory activities by themes/modules with each one approached within the
context of a relatable problem that is explored through inquiry-based self-
contained laboratory mini-projects (such as the emergence of cancer cells)
lasting a 3-6 weeks; (3) immerse students in authentic cell biology research
experiences where they will experience scientific process, and refine in their
problem-solving, self-efficacy and professional communication/presentation
skills; (4) hold a two-week, summer Cell Biology Boot Camp that will serve
incoming STEM freshmen, a cohort that will be mentored over the course of the
grant period. The effect of these interventions on student performance will be
assessed periodically and the data analyses will contribute to understanding how
research-intensive educational experiences impact science self-efficacy, STEM
career interest, and retention in STEM majors for underrepresented students. The
project will also be externally evaluated for fidelity of implementation as well
as outputs and intended outcomes for efficiency and efficacy. These data will
provide ongoing feedback, support and guidelines for the implementation of
similar instructional approaches at other HBCUs and
MSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.