* 2106575
* Baryon Cycles in the Biggest Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* G. Mark Voit, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 526,588.00

In order to fully understand galaxy evolution one must identify the major
processes that shape them over time. One such process is the “baryon cycle”,
analogous to the Water and Carbon cycles on Earth, whereby gas cycles between a
galaxy’s interstellar (ISM) and circum-galactic media (CGM) as determined by
various heating (e.g., supernovae and radio jets) and cooling mechanisms, in the
process forming a complex and dynamic galactic “atmosphere”. The details of this
process regulates gas flows into or out of the galaxy and thus star formation
and chemical enrichment of a galaxy’s environment. This research will use
detailed numerical simulations to understand the dynamics of galactic
atmospheres. The investigators will support public education through a dual-
purpose website: one featuring visualizations of computer simulations and a
second featuring interactive e-text to introduce students to the physics of
galaxy atmospheres. One postdoc will be supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will investigate the dynamics of galaxy atmospheres – i.e., the
combined ISM and CGM – by determining its relaxed quasi-hydrostatic equilibrium
states and the departures from these states due to energy input (e.g.,
supernovae and active galactic nuclei) and mass accretion. Three broad groups of
numerical simulations will attempt to: (1) better understand how the
condensation and subsequent “precipitation” of cool gas from the CGM to the ISM
depends on (e.g.) the local gas turbulence, large-scale entropy gradients,
perturbations, buoyancy, and the ratio of cooling and free-fall timescales; (2)
make the first high spatial resolution study of the ability of narrow (opening
angle &lt; 10o) radio jets to indirectly suppress star formation in the ISM by
heating the CGM and lowering the pressure and density of both on large scales.
Gas from the galaxy ISM may be subsequently pushed into the CGM by supernovae;
(3) better understand the ability of entropy gradients in the CGM produced by
active galactic nuclei inflated “bubbles” to influence galaxy wide star
formation, and how this process might depend on the galaxy’s halo mass (and the
CGM’s “cosmological” entropy content).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.