* 2106476
* HCC: Medium: Deterring objectionable behavior and fostering emergent norms in social media conversations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Drew Margolin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,197,740.00

This work seeks to develop a theoretical model for understanding the emergence
and maintenance of norms to deter objectionable behavior in self-organized
social media spaces where rules are not set by any authority. Objectionable
speech, such as misinformation, hate speech, and harassment, is prevalent in
these online environments, which raises the question how individuals can foster
norms to discourage objectionable speech. Yet while researchers note the
influence of social norms within social media and online communities, existing
theoretical work on the mechanisms through which such norms emerge focuses on
norms promoting cooperation as opposed to norms that deter unwanted
contributions. This project will benefit public discourse in online spaces, as
well as research and educational outcomes, by: (1) Developing interventions that
help citizens become effective objectors to the misinformation, hate speech and
harassment they are likely to encounter on social media; (2) Developing a novel
research tool for bridging individual and collective experimentation; (3)
Providing and disseminating theoretical models of how individual and collective
audiences respond to objections to problematic content in different domains, and
(4) Raising awareness of the potential for objections, even if well-intentioned,
to backfire in particular audience conditions. The result of this research will
be a theoretical advancement in the understanding of emergent norms for the
deterrence of unwanted behaviors as well as an internally and externally
validated multi-level model recommending concrete strategies to be deployed in
the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to achieve these goals
through a multi-level, multi-method inquiry. It will test the impact of
different ways of objecting to misinformation, hate speech, and harassment under
different collective conditions in the audience and different social media
affordances. The project proceeds in four research phases: real world
observation, individual-level experimentation, agent-based simulation, and
collective-level experimentation. These are followed by a field implementation
phase. In the observation phase, it will obtain real-world objections to
offensive speech from social media and map these into a theoretical space. In
the individual-level experimentation phase, it will use a novel simulated social
media environment to test whether effects observed in the observational phase
have causal influence at the individual level. The agent-based simulation phase
will use the individual-level mechanisms to build simulations of interactions
between objectors and audience members at scale. In the collective
experimentation phase, the research will test whether the collective dynamics of
interaction among real people match those produced by the agent-based
simulation. Finally, in the field implementation phase, the evidence-based
strategies derived from the research will build scalable online learning modules
to train social media users on how to be effective objectors when encountering a
discursive offense in social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.