* 2106139
* IRES Track II: Systems-based transdisciplinary approaches to coral reef science and conservation
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Tyler Cyronak, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2023
* USD 369,340.00

Coral reefs are iconic ecosystems that provide goods and services to millions of
people worldwide and support tremendous biodiversity. Modern coral reef science
encompasses broad scientific fields, including biology, geology, chemistry, and
physics, necessitating a cross-disciplinary effort to understand these complex
ecosystems and how they will respond to local and global anthropogenic change.
Our goal is to inspire the next generation of scientists to bridge diverse
scientific disciplines to gain a transdisciplinary understanding of coral reef
ecosystems. To reach this goal, we will offer a series of three Advanced Science
Institutes (ASI) in Australia that will foster the collaborative environment
necessary to address the existing and emergent needs of the coral reef
scientific and conservation communities. We will model these graduate-level
courses after approaches developed for Earth Systems science, which combine
traditional disciplines to build a holistic understanding of Earth as a complex
and adaptive system. By incorporating a team of domestic and international
experts from various disciplines in coral reef science, these ASIs will help to
address the current shortage in transdisciplinary researchers equipped to deal
with the complex problems facing coral reefs and other marine ecosystems.
Training through these ASIs will address specific and measurable societal needs
by improving the quality of STEM education for U.S.-based, marine science
graduate students, ultimately enhancing the science and technology available to
inform public environmental policy. A key priority will be to recruit U.S.-based
graduate students from traditionally underrepresented groups (women, persons
with disabilities, and minorities) to promote diversity and equity in STEM
research fields. By meeting these goals, we will increase the competitiveness of
American STEM education programs in the international market, foster
international partnerships in research and education between the U.S. and
Australia, and enhance the American workforce in STEM industry, agency, and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the unprecedented pressure from climate
change and other anthropogenic stressors that coral reefs and the communities
that depend on them face, proactive management and novel techniques at the
margins of terrestrial and marine ecosystems are urgently needed to counteract
the degradation of these ecosystems. As a response to the shortage of broadly
trained, transdisciplinary coral reef scientists, these ASI workshops in far-
north Queensland, Australia will develop a systems-based approach to target
student training in a range of disciplines related to coral reef science and
conservation. Students will have the unique opportunity to interact with experts
in a range of fields, including, but not limited to, ecology, biogeochemistry,
physiology, animal behavior, molecular biology, and environmental social
science. Students will first learn about socio-ecological resilience and
anthropogenic impacts on natural systems at the School for Field Studies (SFS),
Centre for Rainforest Studies (CRS) in the Atherton Tablelands (7 days), the
only place in the world where land and ocean-based UNESCO World Heritage Sites
meet (Daintree Rainforest and Great Barrier Reef). The group will then travel to
the Lizard Island Research Station (LIRS), a state-of-the-art, island-based
research facility in the northern Great Barrier Reef (14 days), where students
will learn from and be guided through independent research projects by a diverse
group of American and Australian coral reef scientists. Through lectures, class
work, field immersions, and independent projects, these ASIs will engage
students in hands-on research that fosters a transdisciplinary understanding of
coral reef ecosystems. This pioneering program will teach students how holistic
approaches are critical to addressing human impacts on ecosystems while
preparing them to address the next big-picture scientific problems. The
international location will provide students with valuable networking and
professional development, broadening the studentsÂ´ career
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.