* 2106617
* Collaborative Research: RUI: IRES - Track I: US-Australia collaboration on a new class of lead-free copper alloys to meet international health demands
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Lori Bassman, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 09/30/2024
* USD 201,193.00

U.S. undergraduate students from Harvey Mudd College (HMC) and University of
California (UC) Merced will collaborate with researchers at University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia to develop a new class of non-toxic, commercially
viable, brass-type alloys. Due to the severe health impacts of environmental
lead, legislation to eliminate it from infrastructure and products is rapidly
being implemented, with particular focus on the lead-containing brass alloys
used in municipal and residential plumbing. The alloys developed through this
project will be a critical contribution toward meeting the global challenge of
eliminating lead-containing brasses within the next decade. The project will
provide international research mentoring for a diverse group of undergraduates
(15 total over three years), including engineering, chemistry, and physics
majors at HMC and UC Merced. Students underrepresented in science and
engineering, and especially first-generation college students, will be
encouraged to take advantage of this opportunity. In the School of Materials
Science and Engineering and the Electron Microscope Unit at UNSW, the students
will have extensive access to laboratories, microscope facilities, training, and
physical metallurgy expertise. This project will contribute to the maturation of
students into confident, enthusiastic researchers who are prepared for science
and engineering careers in international research environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current alternatives for leaded brass have manufacturing,
material property and cost limitations. This project will utilize the
performance/cost benefits and flexibility of a compositionally-complex brass
alloy system developed previously through IRES-supported collaboration with UNSW
researchers as the base for a new family of alloys that will fill the materials
gap left by the exit of leaded brasses. With the guidance of their UNSW mentors,
students will develop the proposed alloys by incorporating new cost-effective,
non-toxic candidates to perform the lubricating and chip breaking functions of
lead during machining. They will conduct experimental and computational projects
to investigate key mechanisms responsible for desirable mechanical properties
and workability, and to optimize the alloy family for these properties and
machinability. These projects will engage students in thermodynamic modeling,
first principles atomic-scale computational modeling, experimental alloy
fabrication, and mechanical and microstructural characterization. The goal is
for the proposed alloy family to provide a commercially viable replacement for
leaded brasses to meet emerging legislation aimed at major health and
environmental benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.