* 2106909
* IRES Track 1: The long-term impacts of extreme climate events on the behavioral ecology, fitness and population viability in wild bottlenose dolphins, Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Janet Mann, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,599.00

This International Research Experience for Students program will support at
least three U.S. undergraduate and two U.S. graduate students each year (15
students in total) to collaborate with researchers in Australia to investigate
the long-term impacts of an extreme marine heat wave on a population of Indo-
Pacific bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops aduncus) that has been studied since 1984.
Students will conduct field work in Shark Bay, Western Australia (a UNESCO World
Heritage Site with the highest vulnerability rating according to the Climate
Change Vulnerability Index), and then wet-lab work at the University of the
Sunshine Coast (Queensland, Australia). Students will use behavioral and genetic
data to answer three questions regarding the dolphin population: 1) how does
individual dolphin behavior change when their habitat is disrupted? 2) how does
the individualâ€™s social environment and foraging strategies affect their ability
to respond to environmental change? and 3) how does habitat fragmentation affect
genetic and social connectivity throughout the population? Students will gain
computational, field and wet-lab skills from addressing these research topics,
as well as policy skills and broad socio-cultural and biological perspectives on
wildlife management from their collaborations with local stakeholders and
government researchers. In this program students will be afforded a unique
opportunity to study genotype-environment interactions in the wild, and bring
back tools to apply to local conservation issues and wildlife management in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this program students will be afforded a unique
opportunity to study genotype-environment interactions among wild dolphins,
studied since 1984, and their responses to an extreme climatic event in a global
biodiversity hotspot. In 2011, the most extreme marine heat wave on record
devastated the Shark Bay ecosystem, leading to a 90% reduction in foundational
seagrass coverage, the collapse of local fisheries, and significant changes to
the abundance and distribution of marine megafauna, including bottlenose
dolphins. Shark Bay dolphins exhibit a diverse behavioral repertoire including
tool use, multiple foraging tactics, highly differentiated social bonds, and
distinct social and ecological phenotypes. This behavioral heterogeneity allows
us to investigate the adaptive value of such traits in the decade before and
after exposure to an extreme climate event. Student-led research will
investigate the widespread impacts on the dolphin population, focusing on three
areas of inquiry including fine-scale population structure, individual social
and foraging behavior, and individual variation in reproductive success after
the heatwave. Our long-term 37+ year database of behavioral, ecological,
genetic, and demographic data will allow students to analyze baseline population
dynamics, parameterize simulations, and develop hypotheses. Next, while in the
field, undergraduate and graduate students will work together to collect data
continuing a decade-plus assessment of the behavioral and fitness consequences
of environmental disturbance. Participants will be trained by expert Australian
collaborators in genetic data analysis and the study of genotype-environment
interactions. Students will analyze population changes in the context of their
impact on inbreeding potential, resource competition, social networks, and
ultimate fitness consequences. The proposed integration of animal behavior and
landscape genetics will advance our understanding of ecological and evolutionary
principles by leveraging a natural experiment in rapid environmental change.
This program affords a diverse group of students from the DC-metro area
international research experience in meeting some of the biggest environmental
challenges we currently face. By contrasting local systems with international
systems facing different environmental conditions, managed by different
governments, with distinct regional complexity, students will gain extensive
insight into pressing conservation problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.