* 2106448
* Collaborative Research: FET: Medium: Robust Quantum Networks via Efficient Entanglement Distribution
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Iman Marvian, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

Quantum Computing has the potential, if realized, to significantly alter the
computing landscape. However, building large-scale quantum computers is a key
challenge. Quantum Networks (QNs) enable the construction of large, robust, and
more capable quantum-computing platforms by connecting smaller quantum
computers. Networked quantum systems have the potential to significantly alter
various activities in society by leading to faster development in medicine and
engineering; more secure and privacy-preserving communication; and hitherto
infeasible optimizations that leverage the immense computational power to
identify efficiencies in manufacturing, logistics, finance, etc. This project is
also using the potential and attractiveness of QNs to design and offer a variety
of educational programs, including a flexible post-baccalaureate program in
quantum computing and networking to cater to non-traditional students, improve
the diversity of undergraduate and graduate student body, and develop a quantum
capable workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building QNs that support robust
communication across nodes requires several fundamental scientific and
technological advances, especially since classical techniques cannot be directly
used in the quantum regime. QNs can be used to build quantum computing systems
that are more capable and more resilient than stand-alone quantum computers.
This project is examining the design and implementation of QNs from the ground
up by developing an infrastructure for efficient communication and management of
quantum entanglements in the network. In addition, the project is addressing
specific challenges in two key applications of QNs: (i) Distributed quantum
algorithms, and (ii) Quantum sensor networks. The project is evaluating the
developed techniques using large-scale simulations and over a 6-node QN testbed
spread across Long Island, NY. The testbed is providing a high-fidelity platform
to evaluate the effectiveness of our developed techniques. Overall, the project
has three research thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;In the first thrust, the project is
developing an infrastructure to facilitate efficient communication and
entanglement management. In particular, it is developing optimization techniques
for (i) efficient generation of long-distance entanglement using multiple paths,
and (ii) efficient distribution of pre-distributed entanglements. In addition,
the project is developing efficient entanglement-distillation strategies in
practical settings, and protocols for multicast primitives. In the second
thrust, the project is addressing challenges in the context of two key QN
applications to corroborate and validate the developed techniques. In
particular, the project is developing optimization techniques for efficient
distributed implementation of centralized quantum circuits; efficient
distributed implementations are important for QNâ€™s computational success. In the
context of quantum sensor networks, it is designing efficient protocols for the
estimation of binary parameter functions and investigating the benefit of
entanglements in these settings. In the third thrust, the project is evaluating
the above techniques using large-scale simulations and a small QN testbed. To
evaluate QN performance effectively, the project is formulating novel
performance metrics for QNs; this requires non-trivial generalization of the
classical network metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.