* 2106696
* Collaborative Research: FET: Medium: Biological production and enzymatic processing for defect-free, scalable nucleic-acid circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2021,10/31/2023
* William Shih, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 10/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The development of “chemical central processing units” will make possible
computation in bio-chemical contexts that can sense from the environment,
process information, and actuate a physical response. Necessary to this goal are
fast, robust and composable molecular components that can implement logic
behavior with physical molecules, much like electronic components have been
successfully used to process information. One attractive candidate is DNA Strand
Displacement (DSD) circuits. Despite the promise of DSD circuits, there are a
number of perceived barriers to their widespread adoption as a technology: (i)
DSD circuits are slow &amp; error-prone, (ii) preparation of DSD circuit
components is difficult and does not easily scale, (iii) DSD circuit components,
even when purified, contain defects, and (iv) measuring &amp; controlling the
concentration of DSD circuit components is problematic. Recent breakthroughs in
“leakless” DSD systems have seen the first barrier fall. The project includes
plans for training students at all level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
are addressing the three remaining barriers to widespread adoption of DSD
circuit technology. The team of researchers is combining robust nucleic-acid
circuit architectures, methods of producing long, high-fidelity single-stranded
DNA, additional enzymatic methods, and new experimental protocols in order to
simultaneously address all four of the identified barriers. The project intends
to demonstrate that biologically amplified, enzymatically prepared DSD
components lead to superior nucleic-acid logic circuits leading to entirely new
applications of this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.