* 2106192
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Career Education Program to Increase Engineering Identity for Students from Low-Income High Schools
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Allison Godwin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 19,998.00

STEM occupations are expected to grow in the next decade with much of the
projected job growth predicted in architectural, engineering, and construction
(AEC) occupations. With current rates of college matriculation in engineering,
the increase in engineering jobs along with the retirement of the aging
engineering workforce is expected to result in a shortfall unless more young
people can be recruited to fill the void. The underrepresentation of women,
Black, Latinx, and Indigenous students in STEM provides an opportunity for
diversifying and growing engineering. Additionally, these pathways provide
economic and social capital for learners. For these reasons, it is imperative
that young students, particularly in middle school, become aware of and
interested in careers in engineering. This research has two primary goals (1) to
conduct research related to engineering identity development by studying the
impact of an innovative middle school outreach program to support identity
development and career pathways in engineering and architecture for students in
low-income, racially diverse schools and (2) to increase the community of
engineering education researchers through the mentored development of the PI in
the area of engineering identity development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will bring the Identity-Based Motivation framework to K-12 education outreach
efforts. As such, it will provide new, evidence-based ways to support students’
pathways into STEM. The study uses a multimethod approach to answer the research
question: How do the combination of problem-based learning, exposure to industry
role models, and career planning, focused on building industry applications,
increase identity-based motivation of students from low-income households and
marginalized students in pursuing STEM careers? Answering this question will
inform future work developing interventions that target similar goals and will
validate and expand the Identity-Based Motivation framework into pre-college
education. By leveraging The Pennsylvania State University (Penn State) Talent
Search Program, the pilot year of the intervention will be delivered to over 40
7th and 8th grade students in a pilot program and then be expanded to over 500
students in the second year of the project. This project focuses on broadening
middle school students’ conceptions of what it means to be an engineer by
introducing students to diverse AEC role models and engaging students in the
kinds of work done by engineers. There are several short- and long-term broader
impacts expected to result from this grant. By expanding the understanding of
the varied engineering careers and people that make up the AEC industry, middle
school students can begin to see engineering identities congruent with their
other identities. Identity congruence is motivating and consistent with higher
academic achievement. This effort is particularly important in the low-income,
racially and ethnically diverse Talent Search Program. Because middle school is
a time of blossoming independence, activities to engage the student’s perception
of their future self as an engineer can be fruitful. The proposed activities may
inspire longer-term strategic change that makes an engineering career possible
for several students who may otherwise have self-selected out of this
possibility. The results of this effort can affect over 500 students in the
short term and thousands in the long term through the development of the Talent
Search Handbook that will be distributed to counselors in the program and the
larger engineering education community. Additionally, this effort develops the
capacity of the PI in engineering education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.