* 2106633
* I-Corps: A modeling-simulation-visualization framework for decision making in  agricultural systems using data analytics and visualization
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2021
* Peter Sforza, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology for improving the efficiency and productivity of
agricultural systems through data analytics. The technology and framework
addresses issues relevant to smart farming including the use of digital data and
technology to improve decisions and reduce risk throughout the entire
agricultural value chain. The project focuses on high value specialty crops
including grapes, hops, hemp, and medicinal herbs, through modeling and
simulation of site selection and site geodesign. The operations of the farm
through the creation of a digital twin of the agricultural system for alignment
and harmonization of the management of physical and digital assets and processes
will also be considered. The technology reduces risk of site and variety
selection in the US through assimilation of data related to soil, climate, and
topography alongside algorithms that evaluate specific grape varietal fit to the
site based on historic and future environmental conditions. The platform has the
potential to integrate disparate activities on-farm and off-farm (e.g.,
marketing and supply chain). The project will greatly enhance the commercial
potential for this research to make an impact in high value, specialty crops in
the US and worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of software infrastructure for on-line decision support tools for
wine makers, grape growers and vineyard consultants. Historic, real-time, and
forecast weather data is utilized in the application to provide a climatological
and environmental analysis of a site, as well as pest and disease model outputs
to evaluate risk for the grape varieties in the vineyard. In addition, a site
assessment and evaluation is produced based on soils, topography and derived
information in the form of maps, graphs and statistical summary information.
While numerous pest and disease models exist from various researchers,
government agencies and commercial sources, there are few applications that
integrate winemaking and vineyard site assessment, geodesign and management into
a coherent and automated platform. The scientific basis for the multi-criteria
decision analysis included in the applications provide a robust foundation for
scaling the application to new features, new crops, and new geographic areas.
The proposed technology solution incorporates multiple disciplinary expertise to
produce start-of-the-art data driven digital tools for planning and decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.