* 2106944
* FET: Medium: Latch Ising Machines (LIM)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Jaijeet Roychowdhury, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Difficult computational (NP-complete) problems abound in today’s world, in areas
as diverse as secure communications, protein folding, neural networks and
healthcare. Large classes of these hard problems can be reduced to a form known
as the Ising problem, which is closely related to the physics of ferromagnetic
materials. The project team has devised a novel way of solving the Ising problem
quickly and effectively in hardware, using networks of small, simple circuits,
specifically, ``static'' memory cells, widely used in electronic devices of
every kind. The concept significantly broadens the overall understanding of
Ising machine schemes and their operational mechanisms. This project is
developing this method (termed LIM) to practical fruition, including
demonstration on real-world problems from communications. Being able to solve
such real-world problems much more quickly and accurately than is currently
practical can lead to broad benefits to society. The project's activities
include a focus on students from traditionally disadvantaged backgrounds, as
well as workshops for dissemination and interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
precisely, the team is showing that Ising machines, which have previously been
realized using quantum/optical schemes as well as oscillator networks, can also
be implemented using bi-stable elements such as CMOS-based latches. Unlike
previous Ising machine approaches, which are large, expensive and ill-suited to
low-cost mass production, the proposed approach is a purely classical scheme
that does not rely on quantum phenomena or novel nano-devices. Using
conventional CMOS electronics has many advantages: scalability/miniaturizability
(i.e., very large numbers of spins in a physically small system), well-
established design processes and tools that essentially guarantee first-time
working hardware, very low power operation, seamless integration with control
and I/O logic, easy programmability via standard interfaces like USB, and low
cost mass production. &lt;br/&gt;Another key potential advantage stems from the
continuous/analog nature of LIM (as contrasted with purely digital algorithms).
The researchers are developing LIM theoretically and computationally,
implementing it in hardware, and demonstrating it on benchmark Ising problems as
well as Ising forms of difficult communications-related
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.