* 2106670
* Broadening Participation Research Project: The Development of a Multidimensional STEM Identity Measure to Increase the Retention and Success of African American Students at an HBCU
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nicholas Luke, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,893.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Broadening Participation Research (BPR) in STEM Education projects
supports the development, implementation, and study of new theory-driven models
and innovations related to the participation and success of underrepresented
groups in STEM undergraduate education. It is expected that the award will
further the faculty member's research capability, as well as improve the
recruitment, retention, and success of underrepresented groups in STEM education
and the workforce. The project at North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical
State University seeks to collect and analyze data for the purpose of developing
a new measure of STEM identity. Specifically, the instrument will be developed
utilizing a critical race theory framework to ascertain the influences of racial
identity and academic identity in African American students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop an instrument that
conceptualizes the multidimensional nature of STEM identity in African American
college students attending historically Black colleges and universities (HBCUs).
With a focus on social identity (race) and academic identity (STEM), the project
also seeks to determine whether this instrument of STEM identity for African
American students is effective in predicting participation in STEM-related
activities or careers. This project will use an Exploratory Sequential Mixed
Methods (qual-&gt;QUAN) design. This design will consist of two phases where
qualitative data will be collected and analyzed to inform the development of
items for the measurement. An expert panel will provide feedback throughout the
qualitative aspect of the study to support content validity, as well as to
solidify and refine items. Cognitive interviews will be conducted to investigate
overt and covert processes that are not typically observable. The relationship
between Multidimensional African American STEM Identity (MAASI) and STEM
outcomes (i.e. STEM achievement and STEM participation) will be explored using
Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) with latent variables in Mplus. A small pilot
implementation study will be conducted in the last year of the study to explore
how leveraging and targeting the information from the MASSI promotes the STEM
achievement, identity, and involvement of African American students. Baseline
scores on the MASSI will be captured for a small sample of students enrolled an
eight-week African American STEM Identity development program to administer the
MASSI at the conclusion of the program and assess changes in their STEM
identity. This project has the potential to make a significant theoretical
contribution, in that it will contribute to the development of a
multidimensional Model of African American STEM Identity. The existing theories
and models of STEM-related identities (specifically science, mathematics, and
engineering) are based on Eurocentric frameworks and samples; however, using
Critical Race Theory as a guiding framework will allow for a more culturally
appropriate model. This instrument will be the first quantitative tool to
measure the STEM identity of African American students while accounting for
their racial identity. The project also aims to demonstrate that psychometric
tools developed to measure the non-cognitive STEM attributes of African American
students must account for their racial identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.