* 2106404
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Reinventing Fuzz Testing for Data and Compute Intensive Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Miryung Kim, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 576,018.00

The importance of emerging data-intensive and compute-intensive software
applications continues to grow at an increasing rate. Cloud-computing frameworks
make it easier to develop and run big data applications by providing readily
available resources. Recent trends in computer architectures incorporate
heterogeneity and specialization to improve performance, such as hardware
accelerators built on FPGAs. While fuzz testing has emerged as an effective
technique for detecting correctness and performance defects in traditional
software applications, it is not easily applicable to data-intensive and
compute-intensive applications due to their long latency. Now that such data-
and compute-intensive applications are being integrated into mission-critical
systems, their robustness and correctness are of the highest
priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research brings the success of automated
fuzz testing to the domain of big data applications and heterogeneous
applications. This research is producing a suite of open-source testing tools to
improve overall application quality, translating into resource, time, and cost
savings. It has three innovative components: (1) new input-mutation techniques
and testing latency reduction methods for data-intensive applications, (2)
effective guidance metrics and feedback-monitoring methods for heterogeneous
computing applications, and (3) new performance-aware fuzzing strategies to
induce data skews, compute skews, and memory skews. This research aims to
benefit software engineers, data scientists, and quantitative analysts who write
software in data-intensive and compute-intensive
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.