* 2106707
* SHF: Medium: Program Synthesis for Weak Supervision
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Aws Albarghouthi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2025
* USD 916,000.00

Artificial intelligence, in the form of machine learning, has been
transformative in automating difficult tasks and extracting insights in numerous
problem domains, including language, vision, and recommendations, and offers
many further possibilities. For instance, machine learning holds the promise of
automatically analyzing medical images, a task previously reserved for human
specialists. However, machine-learning algorithms typically require learning
from large amounts of hand-labeled data. Manually labeling data is an expensive
and human-intensive process. This project seeks to radically minimize the amount
of labeled data needed for machine learning, with the goal of enabling cheap and
rapid application of machine learning to new and important
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leverages program synthesis and weak
supervision technology to minimize the amount of labeled data needed to build
performant models. Weak supervision replaces hand labels with a number of
imprecise sources providing a rough signal for supervised training. Such sources
are expressed by labeling functions: small, rough programs that encode knowledge
about the task at hand. The goal of this project is to have labeling functions
be generated automatically using program synthesis, eliminating the manual
writing of labeling functions and the need for programming expertise. The
project develops a generic language of labeling functions, and explores
efficient re-use of synthesized functions and richer means of user interaction
to further reduce label requirements. The project is training a diverse group of
students. Additionally, the PIs are designing a novel course on machine learning
with less labeled data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.