* 2106015
* MRA: Resolving the multi-scale drivers of tree mortality from field and remote sensing data on co-located ForestGEO-NEON sites
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* James Lutz, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2026
* USD 658,777.00

Tree mortality is on the rise globally. However, patterns and causes of
mortality are poorly understood. Because forests are key locations for
terrestrial biodiversity and contribute significantly to terrestrial carbon
storage, a better understanding of tree mortality is important. A forest can
lose biomass, and thus carbon, quickly through tree death, but typically gain
carbon only slowly through growth. Thus, understanding the causes of tree
mortality will contribute to a better understanding of carbon cycling. Big
disturbances like fires or insect outbreaks can kill many trees at once, but
most trees do not die from big disturbances. In contrast, most trees die alone,
slowly over years for reasons that are not always obvious. The goal of this work
is to determine the rate at which trees are dying annually, and most importantly
for what reasons. Using these data tools to better detect future trends in tree
mortality and forest dynamics will be built. This information will be conveyed
to forest managers, policy makers, and other stakeholders. The data and products
from this project will be broadly disseminated and integrated within grade 4-12
education modules. The project will also engage undergraduate researchers in all
aspects of the research including introducing them to participants of national
and international research networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from two
national research networks will be combined to answer questions regarding how,
where, and why trees are dying. The researchers will perform annual mortality
surveys on tens of thousands of trees at five large-area forest research plots
that are part of the Smithsonian Institutionâ€™s ForestGEO network
(https://forestgeo.si.edu/). All these ForestGEO plots are located on National
Ecological Observation Network (NEON) sites (https://www.neonscience.org/) where
a suite of ecological data, including air-borne remote sensing, is collected on
a regular schedule. Detailed ground-truth data from the ForestGEO plots will be
combined with high-resolution hyperspectral and lidar drone-based remote sensing
data collected at each site. These data will be used to model causes and factors
associated with tree mortality. Using NEON remote sensing data, the model of
tree mortality will be upscaled to the NEON domain. Lidar and imagery will be
used to identify structural changes in forests that indicate tree death. Models
will then be up-scaled further using satellite data collected by NASA to make
mortality estimates across the larger landscape. The results of these data
collection efforts will advance understanding of tree mortality, the pace of
forest change, and the dynamics of terrestrial carbon storage. The project will
help advance macrosystems biology by pinpointing how the patterns of tree
mortality scale from an individual tree to the entire
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.