* 2106457
* IRES Track I: RUI: Involving US undergraduates in interdisciplinary research at specialized EU nanotechnology and glass science sites on development of novel amorphous materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Carrie Brennan, Austin Peay State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,979.00

Every year, six U.S. undergraduate IRES trainees will participate in research
and training programs at Austin Peay State University in Clarksville, Tennessee,
related to the development, properties and application of amorphous materials.
Trainees will be chosen from the full-time students in the Physics, Engineering
Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Geology programs at APSU. This student
opportunity will culminate in a seven week summer research experience at
recognized European universities in France, Czech Republic and Poland. Amorphous
materials are key to future advancements in fields from lasers and fiber optics
to the aerospace and automobile industries. Devices based on these materials can
be found in the hardware that forms the backbone of our modern telecommunication
infrastructure, including the internet. They are used in numerous advanced STEM
areas including linear and non-linear infrared optics and photonics, chemical
and bio-sensing, phase-change memory devices, nanolithography, and nano- and
bio-engineering. US undergraduate students interested in careers in the science
and technology of materials will acquire comprehensive theoretical and
experimental training under faculty and staff with world-class expertise.
Advanced professional preparation such as this is critical for students at
public primarily undergraduate universities like APSU. These international
collaborations will result in joint publications and conference presentations.
Additionally, trainees will have new cultural and social experiences because of
the interaction with the international student population at the host
institutions. Students from minority and underrepresented groups, first
generation and low-income students, as well as military-affiliated students
(near 25% of the APSU student body) will be strongly encouraged to participate.
The project is also of vital importance to the outreach and promotion of STEM
education in Middle Tennessee. It will support the diverse intellectual and
research environment at APSU and will help to train globally oriented and
innovative future scientists, engineers, and educators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project funds an international interdisciplinary
undergraduate summer research program focused on development of novel amorphous
materials by a diverse group of APSU students in partnership with collaborators
at three European institutions (University of Rennes I, France; University of
Pardubice, Czech Republic; University of Rzeszow, Poland); each research group
specializing in a distinct aspect of glass science and technology. These groups,
when taken together, cover the complete material research and development cycle,
starting with synthesis, followed by characterization, and ending with
application. The project will expand upon the current long-term international
scientific collaboration between APSU and these European institutions. The
students' research will include advanced topics such as new functionality of
amorphous materials doped with nanoparticles, nanostructuring of amorphous thin
films, optimization of bioglasses, and developing a nanoscale insight into the
molecular structure of amorphous solids. Nano-engineering of chalcogenide
glasses is especially intriguing and may allow for the design of hybrid
materials combining two or more useful properties in one functional medium.
Undergraduate students will develop innovative research skills in modeling,
synthesis, macro- and nanoscale characterization, and structural and functional
modification of novel amorphous materials for cutting-edge applications. Results
from this work will impact the development of novel amorphous materials as well
as new hybrid nano-modified media for applications in photonics, electronics,
even quantum computing. These efforts will contribute to deeper understanding of
nanoscale phenomena in amorphous solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.