* 2107939
* Research in Classical and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gary Horowitz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,440,000.00

This awards supports research in gravitational physics at the University of
California, Santa Barbara. Many of the deepest problems in theoretical physics
revolve around combining Einstein's theory of general relativity with quantum
theory. The resulting theory is called "quantum gravity" and is needed to better
understand the origin of the universe, the nature of space and time on small
scales, and what happens inside black holes. The research supported by this
grant will use the latest techniques and tools to try to answer some of these
fundamental problems. An essential part of the work is the training of graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers in the knowledge and techniques that are
central to understanding and discovery in gravitational physics. Through a range
of forums from public lectures, to informing media reporters, the Principal
Investigators will disseminate the directions and results of their research to a
broad audience. Society at large will benefit by increasing their understanding
of science and the world they live in.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
involves three inter-related programs of research. The first works to understand
what sort of spacetimes are needed to describe gravity at the quantum level,
taking into account the quantum fluctuations that may range far beyond familiar
classical solutions. In particular, the light-cone structure of such spacetimes
may be far from classical, and may even be singular. We will investigate the
implications of such effects for distant observers, focusing on properties
called unitarity and boundary causality. And while it is now understood to be
consistent to include fluctuations that cause the spacetime to change topology,
the investigators will study whether fluctuations at this level are in fact
required by fundamental principles. A second part of the project further
investigates the physical consequences of fluctuating topology and the
associated processes by which a large universe may interact with a physically-
separate closed universe (often called a baby universe). It was shown recently
that this at least partially resolves the nearly 50-year-old black hole
information problem, but the actual physics experienced by an observer inside an
old evaporating black hole remains to be fully understood. The project will also
study associated implications for the above-mentioned closed universes, and thus
for cosmology and for our universe as a whole. The final part probes the
50-year-old cosmic censorship hypothesis and the structure of singularities in
classical gravity. Known violations of certain versions of cosmic censorship
with AdS boundary conditions will be analyzed in more detail with an eye toward
1) connections to the so-called weak gravity conjecture of high energy physics
and 2) developing possible further counter-examples in asymptotically flat
spacetimes. The fact that certain black hole singularities show strong
sensitivity to parameters will also be explored. The methods employed in all
three programs of research will be primarily analytic, though these will be
supplemented with numerical calculations on desktop
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.