* 2107942
* CDS&amp;E: Harnessing Self-Organizing Maps for the Discovery of Star Formation in Molecular Clouds
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stella Offner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 295,075.00

Stars like our Sun are born in large clouds of dust and gas that make thousands
of stars at once. Astronomers observe these gas clouds to study young stars and
learn how stars and planets form. These clouds are complex, and the observations
are difficult to interpret. This project uses machine learning to address an
important mystery in astronomy: Why do stars have a great variety of total mass?
Stars are found to have a mass between a tenth the mass of our Sun and up to 100
times the mass of the Sun. The Investigators will use computer models of forming
stars to test their method and will apply it to recent observations of star-
forming regions. The team will develop presentations for the public and train
undergraduates in the Texas Astronomy Undergraduate Research experience for
Under-represented Students (TAURUS) summer program in machine learning methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators plan to combine state-of-the-art
numerical simulations, unsupervised machine learning, and molecular line
observations to study the gas engaged in the earliest stages of star formation
within molecular clouds. The team will apply an unsupervised neural network
algorithm, known as a Self-Organizing Map (SOM), to identify clusters comprising
star-forming structures and the gas that forms them in observational data. As
gas structures within molecular clouds are complex and do not have well-defined
boundaries, this necessitates new techniques for SOM cluster inference.
Molecular line “synthetic observations” will be produced and compared to the
observational data to aid in interpretation and exaction of physical properties.
This work will build bridges between astronomy, statistics and computer science
and thereby advance new approaches for data segmentation and clustering that
will be of broader use to the astronomy community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.