* 2107046
* IRES Track 1: Sources and solutions of nonpoint source pollution
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Alandra Kahl, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 10/31/2024
* USD 298,682.00

Despite long-term investments in managing sources of water pollution, both the
US and Australia struggle to see water quality improvement in water bodies like
the Chesapeake Bay and Great Barrier Reef. This International Research
Experience for Students (IRES) program will allow US students to engage in water
quality research in Australia. Students will contribute to new solutions for
managing pollution, thanks to a partnership between Pennsylvania State
University and Monash University in Melbourne, Australia. Six students per year
will be recruited from across Penn State’s 24 campuses, which serve a wide range
of communities. These students will be trained in a variety of research methods.
Each student will develop an independent project and learn about approaches to
water management. Participants will learn new techniques to identify sources of
pollutants using low-cost sensors and best management practices. This unique
global experience will give the next generation of engineers and scientists
critical tools for helping solve the most difficult water resource
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This partnership between Monash University in
Melbourne, Australia and Pennsylvania State University will provide an
opportunity for US students to conduct state-of-the-art field and laboratory
research and learn about Australian approaches to managing water pollution in a
watershed with different hydro-climatic conditions. Six total students (graduate
and undergraduate) per year, recruited from across Penn State’s 24 campuses,
will embark on projects as a cohort for each of three years for this project.
The program will last a total of ten weeks each year, including two weeks of
remote training and planning sessions, seven weeks of in-person research in
Australia during June and July, and a final week of conclusion and presentations
at Penn State. The research has multiple areas of interest, including nutrient
cycling, emerging contaminants, contaminant source tracking, best management
practices, and novel water quality sensor application. While Monash faculty and
staff will lead the research and field experience in Australia, each student
will be co-mentored by faculty from Monash and Penn State. Having multiple
students doing research projects at the same time within the watershed will
allow for a uniquely intensive and integrative dataset on pollutant sources,
sinks and transformations, as well as helping to better understand how to manage
and improve the area. The results will be presented in both Australia and the
US, and developed into written products for both academic and practitioner
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.