* 2107434
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: A Unified Framework for Geometric and Topological Signature-Based Shape Comparison
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Carola Wenk, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2025
* USD 383,903.00

A fundamental aspect for data analysis is the ability to compare data sets, in
order to measure (dis)similarity and quantify patterns present in the data.
However, data is often too large and complex to analyze in its entirety, and
therefore different techniques are used to summarize the data in order to work
with smaller, more manageable representations of it. This project studies the
data-comparison problem through the lens of mathematics, using geometric and
topological signatures to represent these shapes concisely. This project will
consider a variety of different kinds of shape data which live in some larger
geometric or topological space (e.g., GIS trajectories, point sets, meshes, 3d
scans, or graphs), and consider classes of algebraic, geometric, and graphical
signatures which can be used to represent these shapes concisely. The project
draws primarily upon the nascent yet rapidly developing area of topological data
analysis, where tools from topology like homology or homotopy are combined with
geometric measures to create robust analysis tools for analyzing the shape of
data. Graduate and undergraduate students will be tightly integrated into the
project, and special efforts will be made to involve students from
underrepresented groups. Additional efforts by the research team include
planning a workshop focused on women in this field, as well as broadening
diversity and inclusion efforts in their own
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on shapes that have some
common underlying annotation framework on top of the signature, which is usually
additional structural or geometric information from the original embedding. The
research consists of two major components. In the first, the investigators are
initiating a principled study of algorithms and approaches to develop a unified
framework which leverages multiple signatures for shape comparison. The goal of
this phase is to provide theoretical results as well as empirical evaluations on
a variety of data sets and signatures. The second major component of the project
studies inverse problems, which aim to reconstruct shapes from a combination of
signatures. Such problems are notoriously difficult for geometric or topological
signatures, as they are necessarily lossy and remove certain types of
information. During the course of the project, the investigators are also
developing a shape signatures toolkit that enables computation of a range of
signatures and distances, adding to the software both existing notions of
distance and new ones developed over the course of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Algorithmic
Foundations Core Program and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.