* 2107062
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Data-Centric Networks for Distributed Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Edmund Yeh, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 417,454.00

Machine learning algorithms have revolutionized many fields by giving them the
ability to use historical data for making predictions or detecting patterns that
can then be used to automate various tasks and create new applications for
users. The data that many of today’s machine learning applications require,
however, is often collected by a network of multiple sensors. For example, data
from environmental sensors in smart cities can be used to predict air pollution
or traffic at different locations in the city. Analyzing this data with machine
learning algorithms then requires these devices to cooperate with each other,
exchanging data and models. This project designs mechanisms for devices to
efficiently cooperate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributing machine learning
algorithms is particularly challenging when devices are heterogeneously
resource-constrained, e.g., with varying compute, power, or bandwidth
limitations, as is often the case in today’s networks. Traditional learning
algorithms either bring all data to a single location for analysis, or entirely
distribute the learning algorithm to the data sources. A more flexible approach
that instead intelligently brings data to the computing components of the
learning algorithms, and conversely brings computing to data sources, can better
harness these devices’ resources, but raises a natural question of how data and
model components should be moved through the network. This project develops a
data-centric approach to distributed learning that utilizes advances in Named
Data Networking (NDN) to simplify the process of exchanging information,
enabling new types of distributed learning algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of this project may improve the distributed learning in a vast number
of potential applications, ranging from smart cities to satellite data analysis
to augmented reality. The project also supports ongoing efforts in education and
broadening participation in computing to underrepresented communities. These
efforts include (i) development of new course materials that teach students
about the challenges of realistic machine learning deployments, (ii) recruitment
of high school and undergraduate students to work on suitably scoped projects
that will contribute to the research vision, and (iii) presentations and
mentoring sessions aimed at increasing the participation of underrepresented
minorities in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative
effort between Carnegie Mellon University and Northeastern University. Results,
including algorithm implementations, technical reports, and measurement
datasets, will be made publicly available on a repository hosted by CMU. These
will remain available for at least two years after the conclusion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.