* 2107701
* Mathematical Questions in Relativistic Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Marcelo Disconzi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 215,000.00

The general theory of relativity is currently the best description of
gravitational phenomena and their interactions with matter. Proposed by Einstein
in 1915, it has been overwhelmingly confirmed by experiments and is today an
essential part of the toolbox employed by physicists studying astrophysics and
cosmology. Mathematically, the theory is rich, and the topic of mathematical
general relativity is now an exciting and active field of research among
mathematicians. This project deals with mathematical properties of relativistic
fluids, and in particular with the mathematical structure of theories describing
the motion of fluids under conditions in which the laws of relativity cannot be
neglected. Examples include accretion disks near black holes, the dynamics of
the quark-gluon plasma that forms in collisions of heavy-ions in particle
accelerators, and the study of fine properties of star evolution. The
mathematical advances and techniques brought about by this project will be
important for applications, particularly for the study of viscous effects on
mergers of neutron stars. In terms of broader impact, the research has a strong
interdisciplinary component and will continue a fruitful interaction between
mathematics and physics. This project will also contribute to the education of
young scientists, continuing the PI's efforts to disseminate some of the most
recent findings in relativistic fluid dynamics to graduate students and post-
docs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will investigate: (a)
local well-posedness of the Einstein-Euler system with a physical vacuum
boundary; (b) shock formation for the relativistic Euler equations; (c)
causality and local well-posedness of theories of relativistic viscous fluids;
and (d) formulations of the equations of relativistic viscous fluids coupled to
the Einstein equations that are suitable for the numerical simulations of
neutron star mergers. A unifying feature of all the partial differential
equations (PDEs) studied in this project is that they form a system with
multiple characteristic speeds. Understanding systems of this type in more than
one spatial dimension is currently one of the main challenges in hyperbolic
PDEs. All problems will be studied under realistic physical assumptions. This
involves, in particular, considering relativistic fluids in three spatial
dimensions, with vorticity, and without symmetry assumptions. Not only is such
treatment essential for applications, but it also involves a great deal of rich
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.