* 2107877
* Boron Dipyrromethene Photocages for Mild and Selective Light-Driven Polymer Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Zachariah Page, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Zachariah A. Page of the University of Texas
at Austin is developing light-selective boron containing dyes as catalysts for
the synthesis of recyclable polymers. The structure and reactivity of these dyes
will first be optimized through systematic studies in order to understand their
electronic and chemical properties. Successful candidates will then be used to
prepare dynamic poly(urethane) networks using light. Poly(urethanes) are an
important class of plastics which is extensively used to make coatings,
adhesives and sealants. The light that will connect individual building units
into long polymer chains will also be used to disconnect them one at a time by
simple changing its wavelength and intensity. Hence, this light-toggling will
lead to recyclability. Studies associated with this research have the potential
to provide fundamental chemistry knowledge associated with light controlled
polymerization and how it can be used to efficiently prepare recyclable
polymeric materials. As such, chemistry emphasized in the proposed work also
addresses the current and ongoing global issue of plastic waste accumulation.
This research will provide new opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
student training in polymer chemistry. Diversity seminars will be initiated, as
well as development of a new course in undergraduate peer mentoring for organic
chemistry. Moreover, the work will also positively support public education and
outreach. Dr. Page will create an interdisciplinary polymer teaching module on
light as a tool in science to engage middle and high school students from
institutions with disproportionate populations of minorities in STEM fields.
Outreach activities involving intercollegiate student interactions with North
Carolina State University will also be established. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research will focus on development of wavelength-selective boron dipyrromethene
(BODIPY) photocages bearing benzyl sulfides as catalysts for controlled anionic
photoredox polymerization. The underlying strategy uses mild reaction conditions
and visible-to-NIR (near infrared) light to reversibly cleave BODIPY derivatives
and generate strong nucleophiles (thiolate anions) that can initiate
polymerization. Specifically, the preparation of recyclable dynamic polymer
networks bearing (di)thiourethane and imine/hydrazone/oxime functionality will
be emphasized as soft materials that remain largely unexamined using light-
driven approaches. Strong emphasis will be placed on the optimization of
reactivities and kinetics through structural modification of BODIPY-based dyes
in order to understand their electronic properties and responses to light with
different wavelengths and intensities. Proposed structure-reactivity studies
could provide fundamental chemistry knowledge associated with the synthesis of
recyclable polymers using photoredox initiated polymerization. The proposed
ability to control the polymerization by different light intensities and
wavelengths has the potential to permit the precise 2D-patterning and
3D-printing of polymeric materials, with long-term potential scientific impact
upon tissue engineering, robotics, optical coatings and image
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.