* 2107716
* CAS: Enhancing the Reactivity and Photoreactivity of Metal Oxide Surfaces through Fluorination
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Melissa Hines, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Melissa Hines of Cornell University
will investigate the reactivity and photoreactivity of fluorinated and fluorine-
doped titanium dioxide using scanning tunneling microscopy, x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, and density functional theory. The resulting atomic-scale
understanding of these surfaces is expected to contribute to the development of
sustainable, non-toxic, earth-abundant nanocatalysts and photocatalysts. Dr.
Hines and the research team are advancing discovery in nanocatalysis,
sustainable chemistry, and surface science. This research is also training the
next generation of scientists in a field that is important to maintaining US
economic competitiveness. To increase the number and diversity of students
entering science and technology fields, they are developing modules for middle
school students that focus on quantitative measurements and scientific
experiments that engage both students and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research involves the development of chemical reactions and an ultraclean
reactor to study the solution-phase chemistry and photochemistry of fluorinated
titanium dioxide. This includes the determination of the primary mechanisms that
lead to fluorine-functionalized titanium dioxide surfaces and the role of
photogenerated charge carriers in these mechanisms, identification of new
fluorination agents for preparing atomically flat fluorinated titanium dioxide
surfaces, and assessment of the impact of fluorination on the photoreactivity of
titanium dioxide. This research will also address the photo-fluorination of
organic acids in aqueous solution. Developing an atomic-scale understanding of
these surfaces and their reactivity has the potential to enable the production
of passivated, contamination-resistant metal oxide surfaces and high reactivity
photofluorination catalysts that operate under more environmentally friendly
conditions than current catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.