* 2107715
* Multi-Spectral Digital Holography for Aerosol Material Characterization
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Matthew Berg, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 399,196.00

Aerosols are small particles of solid or liquid material dispersed in a gas and
they are common in everyday life. Familiar examples include the water-droplets
forming clouds, the dust and combustion particles forming haze, and pollen
particles emitted by plants. When in the atmosphere, aerosols affect the Earth’s
energy budget by absorbing and scattering sunlight, which can lead to cooling or
heating effects on the climate. The amount of light absorbed or scattered is
determined by the shape, size, and composition of a particle. Consequently, it
is of interest to develop methods to determine these properties of aerosol
particles, whether that be to better understand their impact on the climate or
as a way to study what types of particles are present in a given environment.
This project develops a new way to characterize aerosols where images of free-
flowing particles are obtained without the need to collect or immobilize the
particles. The core of the approach involves digital holography (DH), which is
functionally analogous to microscopy, except no lenses are needed and particle
images are focused post-measurement in computational manner. The images obtained
thus reveal the shape and size of the particles under investigation. In the
conventional approach, however, the images are gray-scale in nature, and so,
there is little sensitivity to the particle’s material. By extending DH to
operate at three wavelengths (colors) simultaneously, this project brings color
to the particle images. This presents the possibility of gaining particle-
material information in a non-contact manner. Systematic studies of particles of
different shapes and materials will be conducted to determine the quality of the
color images. By applying a color analysis to such images, the project will test
the ability to merge shape, size, and color information to differentiate between
particle types. The outcome of this work could significantly advance the ability
to characterize aerosols across multiple domains of scientific and applied
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With conventional DH, gray-scale
images of individual aerosol particles can be obtained in a contact-free manner.
This capability has been adopted by numerous scientists and has advanced our
understanding for the size and shape of particles in the atmosphere. What is
missing in DH, however, is information about the particle material. By extending
the principles of DH across the spectral domain, this project will bring color
to images of free-flowing aerosol particles. The project applies chromaticity
analysis to the images as a quantitative way to describe the colors exhibited.
Because particles of different material absorb and reflect colors differently,
this analysis has the potential to distinguish between categories of material.
For example, mineral dust (MD) particles with radiatively absorbing components
like iron oxides could be distinguished from particles with strongly scattering
components like silicates. Biological particles could be distinguished from MD.
The work will focus on the coarse mode aerosol (CMA), i.e., particles larger
than one micrometer. Such particles are ubiquitous and include, e.g., wind-blown
MD and biological particles. Not only is a particle’s size and shape revealed
with DH, but the interference nature of the method allows the particle’s
extinction cross section to be measured as well. The project will assemble a
collection of CMA particles, characterize their material composition with X-ray
diffraction and other analytical techniques, and perform chromaticity analysis
on stationary particles from the collection. By aerosolizing these samples and
capturing color DH images of the free-flowing particles, the study can test the
ability of the analysis to associate observed particles with categories of known
materials. The outcomes of the work will establish the feasibility and utility
of color DH for aerosol characterization, from which future efforts could
develop instruments for field studies of the atmospheric CMA at an unprecedented
level of detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.