* 2107916
* Suppression of New Particle Formation by Isoprene in Non-Pristine Mixed Forest Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bernhard Vogler, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,725.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry at NSF, Shanhu Lee and Bernhard Vogler at the University of Alabama in
Huntsville (UAH) and their graduate students will conduct laboratory kinetics
studies to investigate chemical mechanisms related to the suppression of new
particle formation (NPF) by isoprene, a very important biogenic hydrocarbon, in
the atmosphere in forested areas. NPF contributes significantly to global cloud
condensation nuclei production, impacting clouds and climate. Recent laboratory
studies have demonstrated that isoprene suppresses biogenic new particle
formation, but these studies were mostly limited to the conditions that mimic
pristine forest conditions. This study focuses on conditions that are closely
relevant to the mixed deciduous forests in the United States and include both
biogenic terpenes and various pollutants. The scientific findings will be
incorporated into outreach programs at UAH to communicate climate and
environmental issues to multiple age groups ranging from K-12 to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ a dual-flow tube system
known as the TANGENT (Tandem Aerosol Nucleation and Growth ENvironment Tubes)
system developed by the Lee and Vogler team to conduct multi-component
nucleation and growth involving terpene-produced HOMs (highly oxygenated organic
molecules), sulfuric acid, ammonia, amines, and NOx. The TANGENT system will
allow the team to study nucleation and the subsequent growth of new particles
independently under controlled experimental conditions. Gas-phase nucleation
precursors, aerosol size, and particle-phase chemical composition will be
measured with a series of state-of-the art chemical and aerosol instruments.
These studies are will represent one of the most comprehensive laboratory
observations yet made to study the role of isoprene on nucleation vs. growth of
new particles under conditions representative of non-pristine mixed deciduous
forests and at a wide range of temperature and relative humidity conditions.
This fundamental research is expected to provide new insight into the role of
this important biogenic volatile organic compound-isoprene-upon particle
formation relevant to cloud condensation and hence climate
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.