* 2107401
* IRES Track I: A U.S.-Ireland Partnership for an International Graduate Research Experience in Biopharmaceutical Processing
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Parviz Ayazi-Shamlou, Thomas Jefferson University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 11/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The U.S. economy is faced with unprecedented challenges in numerous industry
sectors. These challenges underscore a compelling opportunity to prepare the
next generation of biopharmaceutical scientists who are specially trained in a
field that our world desperately needs. Despite the fact that international
partnerships between U.S. and non-U.S.-based sites are often challenging to
arrange, especially in the area of biomanufacturing, we have a unique
opportunity to execute a Track 1 International Research Experience (IRES) that
capitalizes on our existing collaboration between Thomas Jefferson University
and Ireland’s National Institute for Bioprocessing Research and Training
(NIBRT), a non-academic research enterprise. The program will provide a unique
training and educational research experience in a world class facility, engage
underrepresented minorities, and provide assistance to transition the
participants to industry or advanced degree
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thomas Jefferson University proposes to engage
its international training partner, the National Institute for Bioprocessing
Research and Training (NIBRT) to enable global research in methodologies of
bioanalytics and biomonitoring with the following goals: (1) Offer a specially
selected cohort of students (N=6 each year) the opportunity to develop agile,
analytical skills in biopharmaceutical process engineering with a prominent
global leader so that they emerge as distinctively prepared. (2) Increase the
inclusion of underrepresented minorities (URMs) in the life sciences and
engineering through participation in biopharmaceutical process engineering and
recruitment efforts. (3) Train and transition exceptionally prepared, highly
competitive students into industry positions or advanced degree programs. Our
long-term goals are to increase the workforce pipeline for the biopharmaceutical
and vaccine industries, and foster U.S. manufacturing competitiveness in an area
critically important to human health and national security. The
biopharmaceutical industry is highly regulated and research and training
opportunities at relevant sites are both difficult and costly. The meaningful
relationship already in place between Philadelphia/Jefferson and NIBRT offers a
powerful convergence of two thought leaders in establishing a novel and
potentially transformative research training experience that capitalizes on our
international exchange, existing curriculum, and world-class researchers and
capabilities unmatched anywhere else on the globe. Furthermore, continued
targeted efforts to engage URMs are critical to the evolution of the U.S.’s STEM
workforce as the diversity of U.S. populations increase and we attempt to remain
competitive in STEM fields. Finally, we intend to build this nascent
international opportunity into a sustainable and long-term exchange in which
U.S. and NIBRT trainees have global opportunities on either continent. In
return, by securing this type of training and experiential learning, we will
contribute significantly to a workforce that is desperately needed in the
biomanufacturing industry and our findings will bolster the existing literature
on the advantages of international STEM student training
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.