* 2107027
* Collaborative Research: CNS CORE: Medium: The Case for Blended Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Asaf Cidon, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 06/30/2024
* USD 375,000.00

In recent years, data storage technology has been designed for one of two
objectives: either improved performance or a lower cost per bit. Consequently,
significant effort has gone into building new storage systems that are organized
either to be very fast (but expensive) or very cheap (but slow). This proposal
takes a different approach: it makes the case for blended storage systems, i.e.,
software systems that combine multiple different storage technologies, to
achieve both high performance and low cost per bit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widely-
used storage data structures and algorithms are designed for a single storage
medium in mind, which leads to poor performance when they are run on multiple
different storage technologies with different characteristics. Therefore, the
proposal rethinks the fundamental data structures and algorithms that underpin
modern storage systems for blended storage, including: indexing, data placement,
logging, caching, prefetching and approximate membership structures. The
proposal will design and implement these data structures and algorithms in a
prototype key-value store that is designed specifically for blended
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will redesign widely-used
data structures and algorithms for key-value stores to take advantage of blended
storage technologies for fast data access at a low cost. Since key-value stores
underpin many cloud data systems, the immediate benefits will include high
performing data systems at a reduced cost. These will in turn translate to cost-
effective cloud services for end users. The PIs will release the software
artifacts under open-source licenses to enable other researchers and will work
with hardware and cloud providers to transition the research into practice. The
education plan will elevate storage-centric systems design as an integral part
of systems education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be hosted
on Github at https://github.com/princeton-sns and maintained
indefinitely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.