* 2107244
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Spatial Multi-Tenant Neural Acceleration for Next Generation Datacenters
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Saman Amarasinghe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Recent advances in Artificial Intelligence are transforming many aspects of
human life such as e-commerce, medicine, transportation, and beyond. Datacenter
networks are the foundation of modern online services. As the world is
recovering from COVID-19, society is witnessing an increased reliance on online
services and machine learning. This explosive growth has created an enormous
demand for computation resources in datacenters. However, today's approaches are
extremely costly and energy-inefficient. In fact, if the current systems
continue to grow, datacenters will account for 14% of the total worldwide carbon
emissions by 2040. This project aims to address this challenge using advanced
resource-sharing techniques tailored for machine learning workloads. In
particular, this award enables the network operators to maximize the utilization
of network resources while achieving high quality of service experience for the
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work sets out to explore the timely requirement
of multi-tenancy for machine-learning acceleration through a new paradigm called
dynamic architecture fission. There is a significant degree of underutilization
when it comes to machine-learning accelerators that stem from the rigidity of
architectures and their single-tenant nature. As such, there is an imminent need
to rethink custom accelerator design and adoption in datacenters where cost-
effective resource utilization replaces unnecessary resource cloning. Similar to
the case of microprocessors, multi-tenant acceleration can open up a pathway
that remedies resource replication and underutilization. Nonetheless, multi-
tenancy has not been a primary factor in the design of machine-learning
accelerators because of the race for higher speed, the recency of accelerator
adoption in datacenters, and challenges associated with accelerator multi-
tenancy. To that end, this project aims to explore spatial multi-tenancy as a
new dimension in accelerator design to tackle resource underutilization in
datacenters and bring forth cost-effective deployment of machine learning
accelerators. This new dimension will significantly help reduce the slope of
over-provisioning in datacenters to pave the way towards greener cloud
computing. The proposed spatial multi-tenant acceleration of deep learning at
scale can substantially improve the cost-effectiveness of next-generation
datacenters. Given the increasing demand for deep-learning services and the
carbon footprint of training and inference, this proposal will have a
significant socioeconomic and environmental impact. The researchers are also
strongly committed to broadening participation in computing and have
comprehensive plans to engage the underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.