* 2107577
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Fair Recommendation Through Social Choice
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Robin Burke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 938,381.00

Recommender systems are machine learning systems that provide personalized
access to information, media and e-commerce catalogs. These systems are widely
used and are central to Americans' experience of the Internet. However, concern
has grown that these systems can have negative impacts on both individuals and
society more generally, by propagating biases, excluding minoritized sub-groups
from recommendation results, and offering less optimal performance to
individuals with non-mainstream viewpoints. These issues, as well as other
potential harms, have been the topic of recent research attention. However, the
practical success of this work has been limited because fairness has generally
been conceived in simple, narrow ways, e.g. fairness relative to a single group,
and because it has remained largely divorced from real-world organizational
practices. In this research, the investigators will overcome both of these
limitations. They will conduct a detailed contextual analysis of fairness within
a non-profit organization, ensuring that their fairness concepts are grounded in
real organizational needs. The ensuing implementation of fair recommendation
will reflect the complexities of practice by representing and balancing the
viewpoints of different stakeholders. The work will enhance our understanding of
algorithmic fairness as a situated and complex concept and of the development
challenges arising throughout the full life-cycle of fair machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary team on this project includes
experts in recommender systems, computational social choice, and philanthropic
informatics. The team will create new fairness-aware recommendation algorithms
that are fundamentally multi-agent in nature and based on algorithmic game
theory. From this novel vantage point, the project will reformulate
recommendation fairness as a combination of social choice allocation and
aggregation problems, which integrate both fairness concerns and personalized
recommendation provisions, and derive new recommendation techniques based on
this formulation. Working with their non-profit partner, the researchers will
conduct interviews and focus groups with diverse stakeholders, building models
of the different ways that fairness is operationalized within this
organizational context, and generalize these techniques to apply to other
organizations. The project will create a model deployment of their multi-
stakeholder fairness solution and use both quantitative and qualitative
techniques to evaluate it from the perspective of both users and internal
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.