* 2107218
* Collaborative Research: Spectral and Radiation Hydrodynamic Models of Photospheric Radius Expansion X-ray Bursts
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Nevin Weinberg, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2025
* USD 67,745.00

Neutron stars (NS) are the most compact known stellar objects, apart from black
holes. When a neutron star is in a binary orbit with another star, and material
flows from the star to the neutron star, the NS can undergo an explosive
outburst, which often includes the emission of X rays. Type I X-ray bursts are
powered by unstable thermonuclear burning of freshly accreted hydrogen- and/or
helium-rich material on the surface of a NS in a low-mass X-ray binary. About
20% of bursts are photospheric radius expansion (PRE) bursts, in which the
luminosity of the burst is so high that radiation forces drive an optically
thick wind that lifts the photosphere (outer shell from which light is radiated)
off the NS surface. A research collaboration between the University of Virginia
(UVa) and the University of Texas at Arlington will study the physics of PRE
X-ray bursts, using a combination of sophisticated computer models to simulate
X-ray bursts in 1D spherical symmetry and 2D axisymmetery, both in the Newtonian
and general relativistic limits. They will compare the results of their
simulations directly with observations. This work will allow astronomers to
better understand neutron stars, how they interact with matter, and what is the
balance of pressure, volume and temperature within neutron stars. The project
will also facilitate STEM research among a number of groups. Two graduate
students will be given training in state-of-the-art computational tools. The PIs
will incorporate the research into their mentoring of undergraduate researchers
from underrepresented groups in STEM fields through one principle investigator’s
participation in the VA-NC alliance and Spelman College-UVa Exchange summer
research programs and the other’s participation in the Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation Summer Research Academy. The investigators will also draw
on the research as part of their public outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research would leverage state-of-the-art
numerical simulation tools, combining MESA and Athena++ codes, to provide the
most sophisticated simulation of PRE bursts to date. This includes generation of
synthetic spectra at different points in the burst to calibrate assumptions
commonly used to infer neutron star masses and radii from burst observations.
This work is timely due to the wealth of new observations from NASA’s NICER
mission, which provide better spectral coverage for later stages of burst
evolution and have identified spectral lines in the burst spectra. Spectral
modelling will be able to characterize constraints from continuum emission but
also aid in the interpretation of these spectral features. These would be among
the first calculations to self-consistently solve for the time-dependent
solution in full general relativity while exploring the possible inclination
dependence through non-spherical calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.