* 2107911
* Collaborative Research: Nucleobase-Modified PNA for Sequence Selective Triple-Helical Recognition of Non-Coding RNA
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* James MacKay, Elizabethtown College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors Eriks Rozners of SUNY Binghamton and James A.
MacKay of Elizabethtown College are studying new methods for molecular
recognition of biologically significant non-coding ribonucleic acid (RNA). With
the onset of biochemical technologies such as CRISPR-Cas9 for DNA-editing, and
the challenges associated with emerging pathogens such as the SARS-CoV-2 virus
(novel coronavirus), RNA (ribonucleic acid) chemistry and biochemistry is at the
forefront of research. We know that less than 2% of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
encodes for functional proteins, while over 70% of DNA is transcribed into RNA.
The non-coding RNAs play important yet not fully understood roles in regulation
of biological processes. Selective recognition, imaging, and functional
regulation of such RNAs will be highly useful for fundamental science and
practical applications in biotechnology. This project aims to establish new ways
of targeting double-stranded RNA, which has been a long-standing problem and
practical limitation in RNA biochemistry. Importantly, the project will be
broader in its impact through expanding interdisciplinary collaborative research
across traditional institutional boundaries and fostering the training and
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) workforce through research and mentoring
activities. The collaboration continues a 5 year partnership that has
established a bridge for Elizabethtown College (a primarily undergraduate
institution) students, especially women, minorities, and first generation
college students for transitioning from undergraduate studies to advanced
graduate studies at a research university. Work will contine toward improving
STEM education of undergraduate and graduate students, and offer unique training
for post-graduate students interested in exploring careers at a primarily
undergraduate institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of sequence-
selective RNA binders is important for understanding the biochemistry of non-
coding RNAs and may strongly impact fundamental RNA biology and practical
applications in biotechnology and synthetic biology. This collaborative study
will develop new derivatives of peptide nucleic acid (PNA) that are potentially
capable of recognizing the entire Hoogsteen face of Watson-Crick base pairs of
double-stranded RNA. This is to be achieved by development of new nucleobases
and binding modes that place two anti-parallel PNA strands in the major groove,
each hydrogen-bonding to their respective RNA strand. The properties of the new
PNAs will be optimized using synthetic organic chemistry to promote recognition
of diverse sequences of double-stranded RNA, which has the potential to solve a
long-standing problem in molecular recognition of RNA. If successful, this
research will enable a variety of applications, such as, imaging and functional
control of regulatory RNA, designer riboswitches for synthetic biology, and
inhibition of biologically important RNA for fundamental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.