* 2107938
* Analytical and Numerical Methods in Collisionless Kinetic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stephen Pankavich, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This project develops analytic and computational methods to answer mathematical
questions in the kinetic theory of plasma dynamics. Plasmas are charged gases,
often referred to as the fourth state of matter, that account for more than 99%
of all material in the universe and are of significant practical interest since
they serve as excellent conductors of electricity. Plasma engines have been
developed by space agencies around the world and were recently employed to power
selected spacecraft. The use of plasmas within nuclear fusion reactors is also
being explored as a source of clean energy. Other notable examples of plasmas
occurring in natural phenomena are the solar wind, the Earth's ionosphere,
galactic nebulae, and the tails of comets. A full understanding of the dynamics
of the solar wind is of practical importance, as it dictates the intensity of
space weather, which is often responsible for expensive damage to satellites
orbiting the Earth. The motion of a plasma can be modeled by a system of partial
differential equations, and among the goals of this project are to demonstrate
that these equations possess realistic solutions, to determine their qualitative
behavior, to compute their sensitivity with respect to model parameters, such as
masses, charges, and temperature, and to approximate them computationally to
predict future behavior with precision. The project provides graduate research
training opportunities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A plasma is a fully ionized gas in
which electromagnetic forces are often strong enough to dominate collisional
effects. The motion of a high temperature, low density collisionless plasma is
described by the Vlasov-Maxwell equations, a nonlinear system of hyperbolic
partial differential equations. In this setting, collisions are neglected while
the charge and current densities, which drive the Maxwell system, are determined
in a self-consistent manner from velocity averages of the distribution of ions
in the system, which satisfies the Vlasov equation. A major question this
project addresses is if there are shocks in a collisionless plasma, that is, if
a singularity can develop from smooth initial data as time progresses. In some
cases, such as in lower dimensional relativistic formulations, smooth global
solutions are known to exist. Additional questions concern the large time
limiting behavior of the particle positions and momenta, charge and current
densities, electromagnetic fields, and particle distribution functions within
the system. More specifically, the project determines whether dispersive effects
in the equations cause these quantities to decay over time, or if there is
sufficient interaction to sustain their strength even in the time asymptotic
limit. Finally, the sensitivity of the fields and densities with respect to
model input parameters are computed using global sensitivity metrics,
corresponding dispersion relations, and particle-in-cell
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.