* 2107086
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: FROOT: Future-Proof, Trustworthy Telemetry on Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Zaoxing Liu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the growth of the Internet and its importance in supporting the US economy,
business, health, education and other services, it is critical to ensure both
high performance and high availability of the networks underlying it.
Increasingly, such networks include a heterogeneous set of network switches and
other devices which must be monitored and controlled in a coordinated manner.
Emerging networked applications, such as cloud gaming or cloud streamed
augmented reality, are expected to further stress both control systems and
network monitoring by requiring real-time response to rapid changes in traffic
workloads. This project aims to address the needs of future network control by
enabling a network telemetry infrastructure that can provide timely, accurate,
and trusted information about ongoing activities in the
network&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes FROOT, a future-
proof, trustworthy telemetry infrastructure for networks of heterogeneous
programmable devices (e.g., programmable switch, SmartNIC, CPU, and DPU). The
project takes an interdisciplinary approach spanning algorithms, systems, and
security to inform the design and implementation of next generation telemetry
systems through the following: (1) universal sketch-based algorithmic design and
implementation for current and new measurement tasks and network devices; (2)
novel network-wide resource optimization for handling network dynamics; and (3)
trustworthy sketch deployment into heterogeneous devices to obtain critical
telemetry information. The researchers also plan to deploy their network
telemetry system at Mass Open Cloud testbed, an open public cloud project led by
Boston University and other institutions in Massachusetts. The project will
result in the development of open-source tools, algorithms, and prototype
implementations that will reduce the time to deploy sketch-based telemetry in
real-world scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.