* 2107926
* Structures, Composites, and Inhomogeneous Bodies
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Graeme Milton, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2026
* USD 431,359.00

This project is focused on the mathematical modeling of materials and mechanical
systems. The work aims to advance the mathematical underpinnings of several
systems that have applications at the leading edge of technological development.
Part of the project concerns seismic isolators, mechanical structures tailored
to protect structures from the destructive shearing and vertical motions of
earthquakes. The goal of this part of the work is to guide the design of
isolators with improved performance under large displacements. Other parts of
the project concern composite materials and metamaterials. Composite materials
are important in applications throughout modern technology and manufacturing.
Metamaterials, which are engineered composite materials where dissimilar
materials are combined to produce a structure with properties unlike those of
the components, can have properties not found in naturally occurring materials
and among other uses can serve important functions in guiding waves. The goals
of these parts of the project are to guide the design of dynamic metamaterials
and to enhance understanding of the mathematical underpinnings for composite
materials, as well as understanding inherent limits on their properties and
behavior. Parts of this work have potential application to medical imaging and
other noninvasive testing. The project includes the interdisciplinary training
of a postdoctoral research associate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research consists
of five parts: (1) work on earthquake isolators utilizes mechanisms of plate-
hinge linkages to develop a new conceptional approach to the construction of
structural units that insulate a building from horizontal or vertical movement
of the ground during seismic events; (2) design of space-time metamaterial
microstructures in which energy is locally conserved, eliminating the need of
current space-time microstructures to couple with outside systems, or employ
supplementary pumping waves, to generate or absorb energy as demanded; (3)
search for fundamental understanding of exact relations and links in the theory
of composites, which could help in the discovery of new relations applicable to
media where the local tensor field of material moduli take values on a manifold
that is not rotationally invariant; (4) obtaining estimates of the range of
possible behaviors in the time domain for viscoelastic two-phase composites or
bodies, which could help in design of materials with desired temporal responses
and in estimation of the volume fractions occupied by the phases; and (5) work
on determining the range that the complex dielectric tensor can take in an
anisotropic composite of two anisotropic phases, which could facilitate design
of structures that absorb a maximum amount of electromagnetic energy or that
guide electric and electric displacement fields in desired
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.