* 2107901
* Plasma Breakdown and Instabilities in the Multiphase Plasma-Gas Bubble-Liquid System
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Igor Bolotnov, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 560,456.00

This research project will study the interaction of air bubbles in water with
atmospheric pressure plasma – the fourth state of matter composed of charged
ions and electrons, neutral atoms and molecules, and a variety of reactive
species. Gas/liquid systems with steep property changes consisting of plasma,
gas, and liquid have incredible promise for many applications ranging from water
cleaning to agriculture applications and plasma-activated liquids for medical
use. Although much progress has been made in understanding plasma-liquid
interactions - including the development of the first upscaled devices for the
degradation of fluorinated organic compounds known as "forever molecules" - to
date there have been only a few detailed investigations on plasma breakdown
mechanisms in the multiphase plasma-bubble-liquid system. The multiphase system
itself and the electrical breakdown mechanisms in such systems are not well
understood, hampering efficient use of plasma-bubble-liquid systems. Exploration
of such systems conducted within this project will benefit society, potentially
leading to new emerging applications to solve problems like groundwater
contamination, bacterial contamination of hospital wastewater, providing
fertilizer on-farm, and reducing the amount of water needed for irrigation in
times when water is becoming increasingly
precious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although extensive research has been performed on
plasma-liquid interactions, this multidisciplinary topic still challenges the
scientific community. The introduction of gas bubbles is of great interest
because it opens another degree of freedom in this multiphase system that
influences the plasma behavior. Furthermore, bubbles are ubiquitous in liquids,
and additional bubbles can be produced throughout the liquid by energy transport
at the plasma-liquid interface. Thus, the behavior of bubbles and the impact of
bubbles on the formation of plasma are of great interest for the whole plasma-
liquid scientific community. This project addresses the critical need for
developing a fundamental quantitative understanding of the bubble – from bubble
formation, the interaction of the gas bubbles with the electric field, plasma
interaction, to its impact on the electrical breakdown by combining multiphase
modeling and experiments. Interface instabilities after electrical breakdown
have been observed in previous research, but no fundamental explanation for this
behavior has been found. The multiphase plasma-bubble-liquid simulations will
comprehensively address this complex system. This project will explore the
electrical breakdown in the multiphase plasma-bubble-liquid system, correlate
the bubble properties to electrical breakdown conditions, and explore the
gas/liquid interface instabilities after electrical breakdown. The combination
of experiments and simulations will enable fundamental understanding of the
breakdown and instabilities in the multiphase plasma-bubble-liquid
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.