* 2107127
* IRES Track I Investigating the demographic consequences of species interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Orou Gaoue, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants and insects develop mutually beneficial
relationships. These mutualistic relationships are important for the maintenance
of biological diversity. However, mutualistic relationships are increasingly
threatened by expanding human activities including farming, species invasion and
forest overharvest. This International Research Experience for Students (IRES)
grant will support 3 cohorts of 5 US students over a 3 years period to spend 6
weeks/year in Benin conducting collaborative research with mentors and students
from three Benin universities. This project will broaden participation in STEM
by recruiting from a strong pool of underrepresented minority students via an
integrated recruitment strategy. These US students will gain research skills
investigating the causes and consequences of the disruption of mutualistic
relationships between African mahogany and weaver ants with a focus on
statistical analysis of real data they collect by themselves. By studying the
mechanistic influence of human activities on mutualism disruption, this project
will advance our knowledge of how ecological interactions can persist in human-
modified landscapes. From an educational perspective, this IRES project will
advance our understanding of the role that learning from peers in multicultural
environment plays in alleviating students’ fear of statistics, one of the major
issues limiting the recruitment of minorities in ecology programs. This IRES
project will facilitate international research collaboration and provide
evidence for the importance of field research experience in training a diverse
globally engaged workforce. A foundational outcome of this IRES project is the
training of 3 cohorts of 5 US students, while sequentially building on each
cohort’s work, advancing global collaboration through global science, training
the next generation of scientists, and support workforce development in ecology,
statistical methods, field research and scientific communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will investigate the causes and consequences
of mutualism disruption by chronic anthropogenic disturbance via an
international field research experience designed to address statistics anxiety
among college students. Ecological interactions are important for the
conservation of biodiversity. However, the role of mutualism, the beneficial
interaction between species, has long been ignored as compared to negative
interactions such as competition and predation. Mutualistic relationships are
increasingly threatened by chronic anthropogenic disturbance and this poses a
global threat to biodiversity. To uncover the causes and understand the
ecological consequences of mutualism disruption requires not just observational
or experimental studies but also statistical and mathematical modeling. However,
the development of these skills in life science students is challenged by
statistics and mathematics anxiety, the discomfort or apprehension students
experience when taking statistics tests or doing statistical analysis. Research
show statistics anxiety can be alleviated via teamwork where students take
ownership of their data analysis. This project will provide opportunity to 3
cohorts of 5 US students over a 3 years period to spend 6 weeks/year in Benin
conducting collaborative research with mentors and students from three Benin
universities. To broaden participation, we will recruit a diverse pool of
underrepresented minorities students, particularly Black and women students.
Prior to departure to Benin, students will receive instructional scaffolding on
how to analyze biological data, how to develop peer-teaching plan, individual
professional development plan, how to do research and in scientific
communication. Students will then design their own lesson plan and teach the
statistical data analysis techniques they previously learned to peer Benin
students. In-country research will be based on multicultural teams of paired
Benin and US students who, for six weeks, will pursue field demographic studies,
manipulative experiments and mathematical modeling to investigate how
traditional tree branch harvesting by local people disrupts facultative plant-
ant mutualism and measure its ecological consequences. This research, which is
an integral part of the PI research program, will culminate in a final research
symposium. Students will continue their post-travel engagements by preparing
manuscripts for publication. These IRES research sites in Benin represent one of
the longest running and detailed plant demographic studies in Africa established
by the PI over two decades. Conducting this research while training students not
only leverages a global team approach, but it will also provide scaffolding that
can limit student’s statistics anxiety by building confidence and reducing
cognitive avoidance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.