* 2107993
* Collaborative Research: Magellanic dwarfs as a key laboratory for dwarf galaxy formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Laura Sales, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 302,015.00

The standard cosmological Dark Matter (DM) scenario predicts that all galaxies
are surrounded by DM in a variety of shapes. The investigators seek to
understand star formation processes in dwarf galaxies, which is influenced by
the shape of DM structures around these ultra-faint galaxies. The Large
Magellanic Cloud (LMC) is the most important dwarf galaxy that orbits our Milky
Way, and many of the discoveries of new ultra-faint galaxies over the last few
years have been near the LMC. The investigators will numerically model the
formation of dwarf galaxies, and they will compare their model predictions to.
This research will involve students at both institutions, who will assist in the
research and learn computer programming skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will generate and analyze new ultra-high-resolution cosmological
zoom-in hydrodynamical simulations from the FIRE project to study the formation
and evolution of 5 LMC-like halos, to sample different assembly histories and
cosmological scatter. By understanding the satellite population of the LMC and
LMC-like galaxies, the investigators will constrain the physics of galaxy
formation at the smallest scales. The team will run several variations in
reionization time, early-universe star formation, and increased resolution, to
study their impact on the predicted population of ultra-faint satellites today.
This effort will extend the suite of high-resolution zoom-in simulations into
the lowest-mass regime of galaxy formation. The investigators address 3
fundamental questions: (1) the counts and masses of ultra-faint satellite
galaxies around LMC-like galaxies; (2) the star-formation histories of ultra-
faint dwarf galaxies and the impact of internal (e.g. stellar feedback) versus
external (e.g. reionization, environmental effects) processes; and (3) the
expected stellar halo component around LMC-mass galaxies. They will involve
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.