* 2107902
* The Role of Tetrel Bonding in the Reaction Mechanism of Methyltransferases
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Raymond Trievel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 519,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Drs. Raymond Trievel of the University of Michigan - Ann
Arbor and Allison Stelling of UT-Dallas are studying an important category of
enzymes known as methyltransferases. Methyltransferases are ubiquitous enzymes
that play fundamental roles in the metabolism of numerous biological molecules,
as well as in cell signaling and gene regulation through methylation of
proteins, DNA, and RNA. In addition, methyltransferases have been implicated in
numerous diseases, rendering them important targets for the design of new
modulators to study their functional significance and signaling roles in biology
and their dysfunction in abnormal biology or disease (relevant to cancer,
cardiovascular disease, some neurological disorders, and microbial viral
infections including COVID-19). Recent studies have revealed that the methyl
transfer reaction catalyzed by these enzymes occurs through an unconventional
type of interaction called a tetrel bond. The existence of tetrel bonds in
biological macromolecules has only recently been discovered, and the
contributions of these interactions to biological processes, particularly methyl
transfer, remain poorly understood. The goal of this project is to characterize
the functions of the tetrel bonds in methyltransferases using experimental and
computational approaches. The knowledge derived from these studies will
potentially inform the development of new methyltransferase linhibitors. This
project will engage both undergraduate and graduate students in research in the
fields of biochemistry, biophysics, structural biology and spectroscopy,
affording multi-disciplinary training at the chemistry-biology
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methylation is a ubiquitous reaction in biology
that plays a central role in the metabolism of many biological molecules,
including amino acids, carbohydrates, lipids, hormones, and metabolites. In
addition, methylation represents a prominent covalent modification in proteins,
DNA, and RNA, which has been implicated in signal transduction and gene
regulation. Most methylation reactions are catalyzed by S-adenosylmethionine
(AdoMet)-dependent methyltransferases via an SN2 transfer of the AdoMet methyl
group to the acceptor substrate. A recent survey of crystal structures of
methyltransferases bound to AdoMet and various ligands has revealed that the
AdoMet methyl group engages in tetrel bonding, a type of sigma antibonding
orbital interaction similar to halogen bonding. Prior computational studies
utilizing small molecule models have demonstrated that tetrel bonding between
the methyl carbon atom and the nucleophilic atom represents an intermediate
preceding the transition state in the SN2 reaction pathway. The discovery of
tetrel bonding between the AdoMet methyl carbon atom and various ligands in
methyltransferase active sites implies that this interaction is fundamental to
the catalytic mechanism of these enzymes. Building on these observations, the
aims of this proposal are to: 1) determine the functions of AdoMet methyl tetrel
bonding in catalysis and 2) characterize the effects of methyl tetrel bonding on
the AdoMet methyl vibrational modes. The functional importance of these
interactions will be investigated in detail using a model methyltransferase and
an interdisciplinary approach combining biochemistry, spectroscopy,
crystallography, and computational chemistry. Taken together, these studies aim
to elucidate the mechanism by which tetrel bonding between the AdoMet methyl
group and the nucleophile facilitates methyl transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.