* 2107545
* IRES Track 1: Nature-Based Solutions Research in Urban Latin America: International Research Experience for Students (NBS-RULA-IRES)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mathieu Feagan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 292,312.00

Cities all over the world are looking for innovative ways of envisioning and
implementing nature-based solutions to complex urban development challenges in
the context of global climate change. Latin American cities offer unique
opportunities for North American students to build critical skills for working
across diverse social and political cultures while learning from scientists and
professionals about ways of advancing more resilient and sustainable cities. In
collaboration with the NATURA (NATure-based solutions for Urban Resilience in
the Anthropocene) project, this International Research Experience for Students
(IRES) project supports the training and development of 15 students in cross-
cultural and international research approaches that advance a scientific and
cultural understanding of the benefits of nature-based solutions in urban areas.
For three years, this program will bring together a cohort of five U.S.
undergraduate and graduate students annually to spend ten weeks learning from
host city professionals and scientists about creative solutions that respond to
local needs in Guayaquil (Ecuador, 2022), Santiago (Chile, 2023), and Hermosillo
(México, 2024). Furthermore, students will participate in an interdisciplinary,
bilingual, online spring-semester course co-taught with faculty from their host
country, to develop their research proposals and become familiar with the local
context prior to departure. Training a new generation of students capable of
tackling climate change and urbanization requires crucial social competencies
not traditionally taught in universities, such as collaboration skills and the
ability to communicate and navigate across different disciplines and sectors in
society. Students in this IRES project are developing these skills through
direct field experience with a collaborative research team to understand and
intervene in the environmental and social challenges of urbanization and climate
change across diverse cultural contexts in Latin American cities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In Latin America, where many cities face climatic and other
environmental threats compounded by rapid urbanization and growth, the
deployment of Nature-Based Solutions (NBS) offers an alternative development
pathway with the potential to satisfy social, ecological, and infrastructural
needs. Despite their promise, NBS have not been broadly incorporated into
academic research nor into regional planning agendas. We propose an
International Research Experience for Students (IRES) program that will be
linked to the NATURA (NATure-based solutions for Urban Resilience in the
Anthropocene) project, focusing on working with local practitioners and
scientists in Latin American cities to study, envision, and develop innovative
NBS to urban challenges. The main objective of the proposed program is to help
students learn to work across diverse social and political cultures so that they
may be effective change agents in the Anthropocene. This IRES program will bring
a cohort of five undergraduate and graduate students each year for ten weeks to
Guayaquil (Ecuador, 2022), Santiago (Chile, 2023), and Hermosillo (México,
2024), with Bogotá (Colombia) and San José (Costa Rica) as alternates. As part
of their training, US graduate students will participate in an
interdisciplinary, bilingual, online spring-semester course co-taught with
faculty from their host country, which will help them to develop their research
proposals and become familiar with the local context prior to departure. Mentors
at the host institutions, Escuela Superior Politécnica del Litoral in Guayaquil
(ESPOL), Universidad Mayor in Santiago (UM), Instituto Tecnológico de Sonora in
Hermosillo (ITSON), Universidad de LaSalle in Bogotá (ULS), and Universidad de
Costa Rica in San José (UCR) are, or will become, collaborators of NATURA and
are already leading research on NBS in these cities. In this proposal, we
emphasize student creativity and fit with the local context; hence, each year
potential research topics will change in response to specific needs. Graduate
students will write research proposals as part of their applications and further
refine them in the course; undergraduate students will develop small projects
within the context of graduate student or host research during their stay. As
part of the IRES program, all students will have experience with
transdisciplinary, collaborative research on environmental and social challenges
in Latin American cities. Ancillary benefits to U.S. students will include
cultural understanding and language learning, and projects that potentially
integrate with their dissertation or honors research and contribute to the
overall knowledge-to-action efforts in the host city, all of which will
contribute to the development of a globally engaged U.S. workforce in climate
sciences research and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.