* 2107753
* Assembly and Peptide Cross Talk in Amyloid Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Bowers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 531,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Michael T. Bowers from the University of
California at Santa Barbara to study how proteins and peptides assemble and
“talk” to each other. The assembly of peptides or proteins into clumps or
aggregates are associated with a number of human diseases, including the
neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Alzheimer’s
disease (AD), and type-2 diabetes (T2D). This project will very accurately
determine the specific sizes of these aggregates by a method called ion mobility
based mass spectrometry and visualize their shapes using a method call atomic
force microscopy. When combined with computational simulations, these studies
will provide detailed information on how these peptides assemble into aggregates
and what these aggregates look like at the molecular level. In addition, the
studies will show how the peptide aggregates from these different diseases
interact or “talk” with each other. This study will provide graduate and
undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented minority groups
with training in experimental and computational chemistry, as well as instrument
development. Furthermore, the project will allow graduate students to engage
high school students on their pathway to STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding peptide assembly in solution and in vivo is
difficult because traditional methods of study only yield ensemble averaged
results, not results on the structure and distribution of oligomers as a
function of oligomer number. Here methods are described that allow these
measurements to be made, including ion mobility spectrometry and atomic force
microscopy. Prior results have demonstrated these methods are robust and when
coupled with high level molecular dynamics simulations yield oligomer structures
as a functions of size, and how oligomer distributions change with solution
parameters. In this proposal these methods are directed to key fragments of
proteins responsible for ALS, specifically superoxide dismutase-1 and
transactive response DNA binding protein 43. Oligomer structures and
distributions are obtained along with variations in response to key disease-
oriented mutations. These key ALS peptide systems are then mixed with fragments
of A-beta-42, the peptide primarily responsible for AD, as well as hormone islet
amyloid polypeptide, the peptide responsible for islet amyloid T2D. The assembly
of both systems in the mixtures will be monitored to observe whether potential
catalytic acceleration of the assembly process occurs. The goal is to understand
the epidemiological observation that these diseases interact and to do so at the
molecular level. Taking the potential for cross-talk between the disease related
aggregates into account could provide a strategy for the development of new
therapeutics to treat these aggregate dependent
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.