* 2107613
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Adaptive Smart Surfaces for Wireless Channel Morphing to Enable Full  Multiplexing and Multi-user Gains
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Dinesh Bharadia, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 329,998.00

The connectivity solutions need to scale up massively to support unprecedented
exponential growth in data rates and the number of devices. The primary approach
to meet the demands has been to upgrade the infrastructure, such as adding base
stations with multiple antennas and/or upgrading clients. Unfortunately, these
approaches have fallen short of their goal as in practice, the channels between
users and base stations have limited scattering or richness to enable spatial
multiplexing, and users are not sufficiently separated in the spatial domain.
This proposal will shape the channel to unlock the full potential of wireless
networks without requiring updating the base station or user device at a low
cost in terms of power and expense. The proposed research aims to adaptively
modify and morph the wireless medium using smart passive reflector surfaces to
materialize the spatial multiplexing gains. The underlying idea is to use smart
reflectors to create additional channel diversity to manipulate the received
signal before reflecting it to minimize interference at the receivers. The
research brings together PIs and techniques from communications theory,
networked system design, and antenna design to build scalable and low-cost
wireless networks. The project also proposes a synergistic educational and
outreach plan that leverages the technical work to build exciting demos for
undergraduate and K-12 classrooms. For example, a smart surface-based demo,
which increases the data rate and coverage of current Wi-Fi devices, will
introduce students to the wonders of engineering in a pragmatic yet compelling
way, with the hope of increasing diversity in STEM-related education
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal would develop smart surface
designs capable of morphing the channel, and develop the hardware prototype and
algorithms to provide coverage and multiplexing gains to support massive numbers
of users and the exponential increase in data rates. The designed smart surface
with fine-grained control would allow us to morph the wireless channel or
environment to increase the diversity and multiplexing gains as deemed necessary
during optimization. We further establish smart surface placement theory and
algorithms and quantify the performance-size trade-offs. We develop low-overhead
channel estimation and low-latency optimization algorithms for the base station
to support temporal channel changes and improve the data rate and connectivity.
The proposed effort would develop the theory and algorithms for multi-user
setups to ensure scalability with smart surfaces. The proposed work would enable
the first low-cost, practical smart surface and algorithms supporting high-
mobility users with significant data-rate
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.