* 2107931
* I-Corps: Spheroidal engineered tissues for more efficient drug discovery
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Lipke, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a drug testing model that enables pharmaceutical companies to
eliminate ineffective drug candidates at much earlier stages in the research and
development (R&amp;D) process. For the past 10 years, pharmaceutical companies
have been experiencing a decrease in R&amp;D returns on drug development. One of
the reasons for the decrease, is that most of the drugs entering clinical trials
fail in this final and most costly stage. Currently, screening begins with
2-Dimensional (2D) cell cultures and progresses to animal models. Both systems
have inherent deficiencies in replicating human disease. The proposed technology
uses more effective 3D tissue models for drug screening by providing a more
physiologically-relevant drug response while being compatible with currently
available, high-throughput screening platforms. This technology has the
potential to increase the work efficiency of researchers and other end-users,
reduce false positive drug candidates at early stages to increase R&amp;D
returns for the pharmaceutical companies, and reduce healthcare costs for
patients. In addition, the proposed technology may enable faster development of
new therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of advanced 3D cell-laden hydrogel microspheroids for drug
screening. Currently used models for pre-clinical drug testing have inherent
deficiencies in replicating human disease. 3D spheroidal cell aggregates have
been established as more effective models for cancer drug screening; However,
existing systems lack the homogeneity, cellular microenvironmental control, and
total cell numbers needed to perform high fidelity endpoint screening assays and
obtain the quality and types of information that researchers require. In
addition, many types of cancer cells do not consistently form 3D aggregates.
Therefore, there is a need for more advanced 3D spheroidal models that can
support high cell density, multiple cell types, and modulation of cellular
microenvironment. Using a custom-developed microfluidic encapsualtion platform,
cell-laden microspheroids may be produced at an extremely fast speed using
photocrosslinkable hydrogel materials. Compared to self-aggregation and other
competing technologies, the proposed technology may provide greater flexibility
to manipulate the cellular microenvironment, such as stiffness, and may include
multiple supporting cell types, such as highly important stromal and immune
cells. Additionally, higher numbers of cells may be included per well compared
to cell aggregates, making highly sensitive endpoint analyses feasible on a per
well basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.