* 2107037
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Analytics and Online Optimization at Scale for Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sanjay Shakkottai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 799,991.00

Cellular networks have become one of the critical infrastructures for society,
with users expecting reliable connectivity and performance. Behind the scenes,
operating these networks require updating hundreds of parameters at time scales
ranging from hours to weeks, which is extremely costly and inefficient for
engineers at the network operations center. Further, when failures or
inefficient performance occurs, detecting and isolating the root causes is again
a challenging, but critical task. This proposal focuses on efficiently operating
these networks and developing tools to detect anomalies, both using machine
learning techniques. The goal of this proposal is to develop algorithms based on
online learning, Bayesian optimization and deep learning for parameter tuning
and anomaly detection. Building on partnerships with major cellular providers
and the use of real data-traces and testbeds, our algorithms and approaches have
real-world impact. The research outcomes are incorporated into the graduate and
undergraduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using domain knowledge in
wireless theory and systems and machine learning, this project develops sample-
efficient online learning methods to optimize multi-dimensional tuning
parameters in a single cellular base station, and then apply transfer learning
to further support distributed and cooperative parameter tuning for multiple
base stations. Moreover, it designs deep compressive sensing for anomaly
detection and diagnosis in cellular networks. These thrusts are complementary to
each other: anomaly detection helps to provide safety checking during parameter
tuning while insights gained from parameter tuning also helps disambiguate and
diagnose anomalies. A combination of real traces from a major US cellular
network, simulation, and testbed experiments is used to validate the
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.