* 2107764
* WoU-MMA: Tuning In to the Echoes of Black Hole Seeds
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jillian Bellovary, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 278,532.00

The lives of galaxies and their central super-massive black holes (SMBH) are
inextricably intertwined, and have evolved together over cosmic time.
Intermediate-mass black holes (IMBH; 100 – 1-million solar masses) are
presumably the “seeds” of the SMBH, though the mechanism(s) connecting the
former to the latter are poorly understood and very difficult to observe using
electromagnetic radiation. This research program will use computer simulations
to model three distinct IMBH formation mechanisms in order to predict the
redshifts, masses and rates of IMBH mergers. These gravitational wave signatures
will be detectable with the next generation of gravitational wave telescopes
like ESA/NASA’s Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA). The principal
investigator will also increase the recruitment and retention of students from
under-served communities in STEM fields through a new community college research
and mentoring program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
research is the prediction of gravitational wave signals of IMBH mergers from
the early universe to the current epoch. To accomplish this objective state-of-
the-art cosmological hydrodynamical simulations will be used to study their
formation and evolution in the early universe. The primary data will consist of
a large sample of high-resolution simulated galaxies that incorporate a full
suite of black hole physics. These simulations will consider three different
IMBH formation mechanisms: the collapse of individual massive Population III
stars, clusters of stars, and entire molecular cloud complexes, and will
additionally include the effects of gravitational recoil in a self-consistent
manner for the first time. The principal investigator will then deduce the
rates, masses, and mass ratios of black hole mergers in each simulation, track
the overall growth of IMBHs into SMBHs within their host galaxies, and calculate
the contribution of each type of IMBH to the gravitational wave signal
observable by LISA. These merger events are unlikely to emit any light, and thus
their discovery will be an extraordinary view into the formation and growth of
SMBHs. The contribution of IMBHs to the gravitational wave signal has not been
modeled in detail because there are so many unanswered questions about their
formation and evolution. The proposed research will be foundational to making
theoretical predictions involving early IMBH formation in the context of galaxy
evolution and for correctly interpreting LISA detections. This project thus
advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.