* 2107455
* CIF: Medium: Learning, refining, and understanding models through relational feedback
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Christopher Rozell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Most machine intelligence systems require cooperation between a learning
algorithm and an oracle expert providing supervision. There are many rich
learning scenarios in which data from the oracle consists of relational
feedback, either in terms of partial orders or preferences among items, labels
indicating the perception of similarity or differences between items, or rich
combinations thereof when the oracle executes a sequence of decisions to
optimize her own utility. In all of these settings, there is a data space that
is implicit to the oracle, and the investigators wish to exploit structure in
this space (i.e., learn), to judiciously elicit and combine knowledge from a
variety of data sources to accelerate this process (i.e., refine), and to
transfer aspects of this structure into other learned models (i.e., understand).
The investigators propose a collaborative research agenda that will transform
the ability to learn, refine, and understand models through relational feedback
in two distinct ways: (a) by exploiting latent space representations to build
better models and algorithms, and (b) by exploiting new relational query
paradigms for more efficient, effective, and interpretable information
extraction from oracles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are involving
students at all levels and across multiple departments in this highly
interdisciplinary research effort that is expected to have broad applications,
including (but not limited to) information-retrieval systems, (inverse)
reinforcement learning, and psychophysical experimental design. The results of
the proposed research are intended to improve the understanding of ranking
systems impacting how content is displayed on news and social media sites, and
even how hiring and college admissions is conducted. The researchers also intend
to develop new tools for aggregating subjective human preferences that use
relational queries to align AI systems with human values. Additionally, the PIs
are devoting resources from this project to broaden participation among
traditionally under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.