* 2107448
* Implementation Project: STEM Center for the Advancement of Learning, Achievement and Research (SCALAR III)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Desmond Stephens, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,091,906.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) provide support to design, implement, study, and
assess comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students
and the quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation
project at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University seeks to strengthen
the STEM Center for the Advancement of Learning, Achievement, and Research
(SCALAR III), a STEM educational research center, by establishing a
comprehensive, campus-wide approach to improving teaching and learning. The
project is grounded in evidence-based practices. STEM students and faculty
across the entire university will participate in the project, bolstering efforts
to broaden participation of persons traditionally underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the SCALAR III project is to
significantly increase student success rates in the core STEM programs and
courses offered at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University. The impact of
the project among faculty and students will be measured by qualitative and
quantitative analysis to include (1) pre-post diagnostic results; (2) level of
participation in the project's activities, (3) retention, persistence, and
graduation rates; (4) GPA; and (5) level of satisfaction on crucial aspects of
the program via surveys. Successful completion of this project has the potential
to result in improved student success outcomes for Florida Agricultural and
Mechanical University STEM students and increased scholarly output for the
universityâ€™s STEM faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.