* 2107111
* HCC: Medium: Cultural Differences in Driving Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Wendy Ju, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 816,000.00

This research will work to capture and understand the ways that drivers
communicate and coordinate with others on the road, and to assess how these
driving interactions differ across cultures. Drivers communicate and negotiate
with other drivers and road users through the movement of their cars, as well as
through honking, verbal communication, body language, and eye-gaze. By using a
multi-person virtual-reality driving simulator to conduct driving interaction
studies in different countries, the research team will gather data to understand
how drivers interact with one another in different driving situations. The
research is expected to contribute to improving driving safety and reducing on-
road accidents, particularly involving autonomous vehicles, by helping to
identify mismatches in perception, understanding, and action among road users.
It is expected to benefit society by considering different cultures in the
development of advanced technologies to reduce risks associated with poor
design, cultural bias, and unnecessary on-road testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goal of this research is to develop new models of driving interaction
that characterize the implicit and explicit communication and negotiation
patterns that occur between road users. The research team will conduct
controlled experiments using a multi-person virtual-reality driving simulator--
in the US, in Israel, and in China--to study how drivers from different
locations and cultures interact in different on-road driving situations. The
instrumented virtual reality driving simulation environment will enable capture,
replay and both qualitative and quantitative analysis of vehicle movement and
signaling, as well as driver gaze, head orientation and body movement. The
experimental design will also enable contextualized deployment of surveys to
capture insight into each driver’s situation awareness. Data from the studies
and subsequent analysis will be used to train models to elucidate parametric
similarities and differences in driving interactions. By capturing how
participants communicate with other drivers to coordinate joint action,
implicitly through the movements of their virtual car or bodily movement, as
well as explicitly through verbal or gestural exchange, this project is expected
to develop new understandings of how driving interactions are likely to unfold
differently across diverse situations and cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.