* 2107325
* IRES Track 1: Innovative Macromolecular &amp; Polymer Research Experience in San Sebastian (IMPRESS)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Christoffer Turner, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

________________________________________________________________________________
____________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES Site (Track 1)
proposal will recruit seven undergraduate students pear year for three years (21
students total) from The University of Alabama (UA) to participate in an 8-week
summer research experience focused on polymers and macromolecules at the POLYMAT
Institute at the Universidad de Pais Vasco (University of the Basque Country,
POLYMAT/UPV) in San Sebastian, Spain. With the advent and proliferation of
synthetic polymers in the mid-20th Century, these materials have impacted all
aspects of modern life and will continue to be critically important in nearly
every scientific discipline in the future, ranging from batteries and fuel cells
to tissue engineering and drug delivery. Additionally, managing plastic waste
through improved recycling and/or “upcycling” (i.e., value-added) processes is a
critical environmental need for improving sustainability. Although ubiquitous in
daily life, only a fraction of undergraduate science and engineering students
become directly acquainted with polymer science (outside of perhaps a senior-
level elective course), and it is uncommon for students to be exposed to
advanced applications of polymers beyond general principles introduced in
chemistry courses. We will introduce undergraduate researchers to polymers early
in their careers and provide these students with opportunities to work on the
use of polymers in batteries, corrosion prevention, catalysis, and biological
applications. The chosen host location (POLYMAT/UPV) is uniquely suited to host
this IRES Site based on its high level of polymer research activity within the
EU and the concentration of leading international researchers in polymers at
their institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will provide training and
hands-on international research experiences for undergraduate students in the
field of macromolecular and polymer materials at POLYMAT/UPV in San Sebastian,
Spain. These students will be mentored by international researchers who are
leaders in their fields, their research contributions will support the various
ongoing projects within POLYMAT/UPV, and they will be introduced to the efforts
and coordination necessary for a large, international research center. The
technical skills and experience with POLYMAT/UPV could serve as the catalyst to
increase further research and national collaborations on these topics and ensure
that the U.S. remains in a leadership position in polymer research bolstered by
IRES participants. This program will: i) increase the number of underrepresented
STEM students participating in research; ii) strengthen the international
collaborative research network between researchers in the US and Spain; iii)
increase the students’ intercultural maturity through interactions with
international faculty and participation in Spanish/Basque social &amp; cultural
activities; and iv) increase student understanding of graduate studies to
encourage student pursuit of STEM graduate degrees. A combination of a semester-
long elective course in polymers, followed by a concentrated interim course at
UA will help provide the technical background and preparatory steps to help
students quickly adapt and succeed once they arrive at POLYMAT/UPV. In addition
to their research, students will participate in three professional development
workshops while in Spain and have opportunities to present and publish their
research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
International Research Experience for Students program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.