* 2107798
* RUI: Development of Fluorescent Free-Radical Tags for N-Glycan Quantitation and Characterization using UPLC-MS/MS
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jinshan Gao, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Jinshan Gao and his students at Montclair State University are
pursuing research that seeks improved capabilities for simultaneous
characterization and quantitation of an important class of biomolecules known as
glycans â€“ the carbohydrate-modifications that decorate so many proteins in
biological systems and that are of great significance in biomedical science. Dr.
Gao's approach uses mass spectrometry (MS), one of the most widely used and
powerful tools of chemical analysis. Specifically, he is developing ways to
label glycan molecules with fluorescent chemical "tags" to achieve absolute
quantitation and to facilitate their structural characterization. The impact of
proposed research is expected to be enhanced by the involvement of undergraduate
students, including first-generation college students and members of
underrepresented groups in science - Montclair State University is a Hispanic-
Serving Institution and Primarily Undergraduate Institution. Elements of the
research are integrated into Dr. Gao's undergraduate and graduate courses,
enabling students to become familiar with modern analytical techniques and
helping them to develop long-term interests for possible careers in the STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gao group is developing novel fluorescent free-
radical tags for simultaneous glycan quantitation and characterization, and
novel multiplexed, isobaric fluorescent free-radical tags for simultaneous
characterization and quantitation of each glycan from multiple samples. The tags
contain four equally important chemical characteristics: 1) the fluorophore
facilitates highly sensitive and reliable quantitation; 2) the free-radical
precursor is expected to induce systematic, efficient, and predictable
fragmentation for structure characterization; 3) a hydrazide or oxyamine group
selectively targets the reducing terminus of the glycan; and 4) a pyridine or
tertiary amine group is expected to significantly enhance the MS signal. These
tailored tags are designed to enable systematic, efficient, and predictable
free-radical-mediated glycan dissociation, allowing efficient and accurate
glycan characterization via one-step dissociation. Fluorescence detection
enables quantitation with high sensitivity independent of the glycan
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.