* 2107177
* IRES Track I: Rapid, Integrated Geotechnical and Geochemical Characterization of Mine Waste for Phytoremediation and Biofuel/Bioenergy Production
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Samuel Mutiti, Georgia College
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2024
* USD 165,987.00

The transition to renewable energies requires mining raw materials to develop
and sustain these sources of energy. Unfortunately, mining has historically
created a legacy of heavy metal contamination all over the world. Heavy metal
pollution is a serious global challenge that threatens human life and food
security. In recent years, simultaneous clean-up of old, legacy mine sites using
phytoremediation and valuable metal production from the harvested plants has
generated increased interest in the scientific community. There is further
interest in investigating the integration of remediation with the production of
bioenergy and other bio-based products for a more sustainable approach to plant-
based remediation approaches. This project will foster research collaboration
between Colorado School of Mines, Georgia College &amp; State University, and
foreign collaborators at the University of Zambia. Each year, a diverse group of
four undergraduate and two graduate students will work with US and Zambian
mentors to conduct six weeks of international field work on the legacy impacts
of mining, phytoremediation, and the integration of phytoremediation with
bioenergy production. This project aims to a) provide US students with
international research experiences that develop global competence skills and
awareness, b) increase knowledge and understanding of simultaneous use of plants
for phytoremediation and clean energy production, and c) improve human health
and provide alternative sources of energy for Zambians. Participating US
students will acquire critical industry and societal skills such as critical
thinking, logical reasoning, problem solving, data analysis and interpretation,
writing, and presentation of results. In addition, the skills and knowledge
acquired by US students will be transferable to the US, where the need for more
renewable and clean energies are in high demand. Recruitment efforts will focus
on attracting students from underrepresented groups in the Earth and environment
science fields to increase their representation. The project will expose
students to hands-on multidisciplinary research (i.e. soil science, plant
science, mining engineering, environmental engineering, geochemistry) and
mentoring from experts in multi-disciplinary fields. The US students will gain
knowledge on how responsible extraction of raw material is beneficial and
crucial to national economic well-being. Through faculty mentoring, US students
will gain high quality international research experience, global awareness and
cultural experiences to broaden their world views. The increase in energy
sources would help the authorities in Zambia and other developing countries
supply clean energy and help meet the ever-increasing demand.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective is to identify geochemical and
geotechnical parameters that control the effectiveness of integrated
phytoremediation and biofuel production. The hypothesis to be tested is that
extraction rates and biofuel potential of hyper accumulator native plant species
are a function of climate and the natural variation in the composition and
geotechnical properties of mine waste dumps. A secondary objective is to
investigate the feasibility of rapid, integrated geotechnical and geochemical
characterization of mine waste for phytoremediation and biofuel/bioenergy (i.e.,
bioethanol, biodiesel biogas/CNG and bioelectricity) production at old mine
sites. The study aims to rapidly characterize the properties of old mine waste
dumps at selected target sites using advanced geotechnical engineering
techniques, identify local metallophyte and pseudometallophyte plant species
that can colonize sites that have been highly polluted with heavy metals,
identify and compare the most efficient local hyperaccumulator plants, and
investigate the biofuel/bioenergy potential of the identified hyperaccumulators.
Results from this project will advance knowledge in phytoremediation and the
utilization of locally available plants to mitigate adverse health effects of
heavy metal pollution while converting biomass to energy, and thereby reducing
pressure on fossil fuels and hydroelectricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.