* 2107256
* RI: Medium: Learning MDP abstractions for Autonomous Systems using Variational Methods and Symmetry Groups
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Robert Platt, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,199,890.00

Autonomous systems such as self-driving vehicles, hospital platforms, and
household robots have great potential social and economic benefits, with the
ability to transform the future of work, healthcare, and our daily routines.
However, successful autonomy requires the robot to be able to make its own
decisions and learn from its own experiences. This can be challenging because
the real world is rich and complex and autonomous robotic systems can become
confused by the details. It is sometimes the case that an autonomous system will
not generalize properly: it will perceive two very similar situations to be
fundamentally different. This project aims to develop new methods for learning
task- and domain-appropriate abstractions that will help autonomous systems
generalize to new situations more effectively. Better abstraction will allow
autonomous systems to make decisions more efficiently leading to improved
learning and effective control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the
problem of abstraction within the decision-theoretic framework of Markov
decision processes and reinforcement learning, which have been widely used as a
framework for automated decision making. Recent advances in reinforcement
learning have enabled autonomous agents and robots to accomplish challenging
tasks, sometimes even surpassing human experts. However, this comes at an
extremely high cost, both in sample and computational complexity; millions of
training steps and days of training time are typical, even in game-like
environments. This project will develop approaches for making this process much
more efficient, by explicitly encoding objectives for learning good abstractions
into the agent's cost function. Specifically, the PIs will study and develop
approaches for compressing large continuous decision-making problems into small
discrete ones, as well as approaches that incorporate explicit symmetry
constraints that encode irrelevances in the problem. These methods will be
evaluated on a variety of domains of varying complexity, including tasks on
autonomous systems involving mobile navigation and robot manipulation. The
overall objective is to develop approaches that improve learning efficiency,
abstraction quality, and generalization to new tasks and
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.