* 2107014
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Data Augmentation and Adaptive Learning for Next Generation Wireless Spectrum Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Slobodan Vucetic, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 719,989.00

Deep learning has shown great promise in solving many open challenges in
wireless networking research and applications. Deep learning is data hungry, and
one of the critical obstacles towards fulfilling its promise is facilitating the
acquisition of sufficient amounts of data to train and validate deep learning
models. The primary goal of this project is to devise innovative approaches that
enable wireless researchers and practitioners to acquire data more efficiently
at reduced cost and to utilize existing data more effectively. Findings from
this project are expected to fuel future breakthroughs in wireless research by
making deep learning models more widely applicable. By integrating research and
education, the proposed work will provide excellent hands-on exercises,
research, and educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
at the three collaborating universities. The project will leverage the existing
diversity-related outreach programs at the three institutions to broaden
participation from under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of
four investigators with complementary expertise from Auburn University, Temple
University, and California State University, Sacramento will carry out a
coherent research agenda consisting of the following four thrusts: (1) Spectrum
data synthesis and augmentation aided by generative adversarial networks; (2)
Exploiting historical and synthetic wireless networking data through novel
transfer learning algorithms; (3) Characterizing the relationship between
dataset size and performance; (4) Integrate, validate and apply approaches
developed in the first three thrusts on spectrum database construction, RF
spectrum anomaly detection, and transmitter classification. Thrusts 1-3 are
application-agnostic and focused on studying fundamental concepts and techniques
that facilitate the acquisition of sufficient amounts of wireless data, enable
more effective utilization of existing data, and enable the prediction of how
much data is needed to meet desired performance. Thrust 4 is application-
specific and focused on specific wireless applications where deep learning has
been applied and demonstrated great potential. The data, software and education
materials developed from this project will be widely disseminated. The project
will engage industry stakeholders on project-related issues, with the aim to
disseminate ideas and learn relevant challenges faced by the industry when
applying deep learning to wireless applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.