* 2107307
* CNS Core: Medium: Secure Hardware Virtualization Contexts for Ephemeral Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Todd Mowry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2024
* USD 616,000.00

Lightweight virtualization technologies such as containers have enabled emerging
computing paradigms of microservices and serverless computing with thousands of
concurrent users sharing each server. Unfortunately, current compiler, hardware,
and operating systems were optimized for the steady state of long running
applications instead of the very short-lived execution of functions. Especially
in the current era of multi-core processors, existing context management
mechanisms impose significant performance overheads. Furthermore, serverless
environments are dominated by ephemeral state (e.g., intermediate computations)
and containers that are discarded after function invocation is complete.
Nevertheless, existing system stacks do not take into account the ephemeral
nature of serverless computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to design new hardware and operating system execution contexts in synergy
with compiler optimizations to match the needs of function computation. This
work will build new compiler techniques for function analysis to identify the
data needs of ephemeral execution. In addition, this project will explore a new
cross-stack interface that allows the communication and ephemeral state tracking
at the operating system and hardware layers. Finally, this work will explore the
design of hardware support for managing compiler-identified ephemeral data
through novel hardware contexts purposefully built for function execution that
will aim to minimize data movement and energy
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.