* 2107692
* The Influence of Primary Coordination Sphere in Aromatic C-C Ring Scission: Mechanistic Studies of 3-His Coordinated Non-heme Iron Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rupal Gupta, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Rupal Gupta from the College of Staten Island, City
University of New York will investigate the biological degradation of aromatic
organic molecules by iron enzymes. The focal point of chemical reactions
responsible for the decomposition of these compounds is an iron center that is
tethered to the protein via a scaffold ubiquitously found in most iron enzymes.
However, several novel iron-binding scaffolds have been recently identified. The
influence of these atypical binding sites on enzymatic reactivity, efficiency
and selectivity is not clear. The proposed studies will evaluate the role of
metal binding scaffolds toward enzymatic function in a systematic manner.
Findings from these studies will inform the design of artificial catalysts and
offer insights into the challenging chemical reactions performed by Nature. This
project will also contribute to the rigorous training of undergraduates and high
school students, who will be introduced to concepts of biochemistry, enzymology
and spectroscopy through outreach programs and will be offered opportunities to
conduct curriculum-based research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-heme iron enzymes
that catalyze a myriad of chemical reactions typically bear a metal-binding
motif composed of two histidine and one carboxylate residues
(2-His-1-carboxylate). Recently, several atypical metal binding motifs such as
3-His, 3-His-1-carboxylate and 4-His, have been identified. Such variations in
the primary coordination sphere that clearly alter the ligand field at the metal
center are expected to influence the catalysis carried out by the iron center.
The overall goal of this project is to gain a systematic understanding of the
influence of the primary coordination sphere on the reactivity and catalysis of
non-heme iron enzymes performing C-C ring scission. By utilizing a combination
of biochemical and spectroscopic methodologies, reaction mechanisms of 3-His
aromatic ring cleaving enzymes will be investigated with a focus on identifying
the influence of the primary coordination sphere on reaction kinetics and,
electronic and magnetic properties of the reaction intermediates. These studies
will help evaluate the properties of atypical metal binding motifs and their
impact on the reactivity and substrate selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.