* 2107050
* III : Medium: Collaborative Research: From Open Data to Open Data Curation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Fatemeh Nargesian, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 344,874.00

Motivated by societal trends that value institutional openness and transparency,
open data is being produced and shared at a speed that surpasses our ability to
process it. Many governmental and private institutions are adopting Open Data
Principles that state that the shared data is complete, accurate, and timely.
These properties make this data of great value to data scientists, journalists,
and the public. When Open Data is used effectively, data scientists can explore
and analyze open resources, which in turn allows them to investigate public
policy, create new scientific knowledge, and discover new (hidden) value useful
for social, scientific, or economic initiatives. Though the open data movement
has succeeded in its ambition of making data accessible, it has not succeed in
making this valuable data easy to use. The overarching goal of this project is
to address this shortcoming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we present a
vision for Open Data Curation - data curation that is open, transparent, and
explainable. Open Data Curation uses an on-demand integration paradigm that
spans data discovery, data cleaning and linking, and data integration. Our
vision is to enable users to query heterogeneous data stored in a data
repository with minimal up-front effort. Users can reference concepts and
attributes in their queries that do not exist in the data. An on-demand
integration system (ODIS) responds to such requests by automatically determining
what data could be transformed and integrated to provide data for a requested
concept. In terms of societal impact, the project will provide the algorithmic
innovations to make effective, intuitive on-demand integration over open data
lakes a reality. Our solutions will use real open data and will be robust to the
sometimes quirky, and always diverse, characteristics of open data. We believe a
profound shift in how people think about data integration and curation is needed
to fuel the data science revolution which is being held back by incoherent data
curation - a task that is still considered one of the most time consuming,
annoying, and error-prone in data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.