* 2107690
* Collaborative Research: Humidity and Temperature Effects on Phase Separation and Particle Morphology in Internally Mixed Organic-Inorganic Aerosol
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ryan Davis, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 137,185.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry at NSF, James Davies of the University of California-Riverside (UCR)
and Ryan Davis of Trinity University will study the phase state of mixed
organic-inorganic aerosol particles under environmental conditions. Aerosols
influence climate as they form the basis of clouds and are engaged in both the
scattering and the absorption of sunlight. Aerosols can also negatively affect
air quality and provide a vehicle for the spread of airborne disease. The
specific environmental impact associated with aerosols depends upon the chemical
composition and phase state of the aerosol particles. Inadequate knowledge of
the phase state of organic-inorganic aerosols, such as those found in the
environment, represents a source of uncertainty in climate and air quality
models. Mixed organic-inorganic particles can form a range of phase states
depending on environmental conditions; these include liquid and solid phases,
and amorphous phases, such as viscous liquids, glasses, and gels. This project
will explore the formation of amorphous phase states in aerosol particles and
characterizes the properties that determine their impacts in the environment.
This collaboration between UC Riverside and Trinity University will facilitate
undergraduate and graduate research across both institutions and seeks to
provide for an improved understanding of aerosol chemistry across a range of
scientific disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enhance knowledge of aerosol
particles in the environment, this project is a collaborative study between
teams at an R1 public university, UC-Riverside--the James Davies research group
--and at a predominantly undergraduate liberal arts and sciences university,
Trinity University--the Ryan Davis research group--will examine the role of
temperature and relative humidity on the phase state and associated properties
of internally mixed organic-inorganic aerosol particles. Aerosol particles
containing mixtures of organic and inorganic compounds exhibit complex phase
behavior in response to changes in relative humidity (RH) and temperature due to
hygroscopic interactions. The phase morphology of aerosol particles influences
their interactions with light, their response to chemical processing due to
changes in viscosity, and their ice and cloud nucleating potential. This
proposal will investigate the phase morphology and associated rheological
properties of internally mixed organic-inorganic aerosol particles exposed to
controlled RH and temperature conditions. The main objectives are: (1)
systematically characterize the hygroscopicity and viscosity of particles
containing atmospherically-relevant salts and oxygenated organics; (2) determine
the temperature and humidity conditions for the onset of phase separation and
correlate with molecular composition; and (3) explore the consequences of
viscosity and phase separation on the rate of molecular diffusion. To achieve
these goals, single particles of aqueous oxygenated organic compounds and
atmospherically-relevant mono- and divalent salts will be levitated using an
electrodynamic balance. Optical spectroscopy, microscopy and light scattering
methods will be used to identify phase separation while new and established
characterization methods will be applied to measure hygroscopic growth,
viscosity, and diffusive transport. The research will help to motivate the next
generation of scientists by exposing undergraduate and graduate researchers to
the physically rigorous study and characterization of aerosols in a project that
relates more generally to climate science research, an area of great societal
interest and importance today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.