* 2107443
* I-Corps: Securing the Machine Learning Lifecycle and Providing Artificial Intelligence Assurance
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Benjamin Harvey, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is the development of a framework to
securely develop Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML). As the
vulnerability of the AI/ML lifecycle becomes increasingly apparent,
organizations that rely on the consistency and integrity of their AI/ML are
faced with the difficult task of assuring AI/ML security. Along with challenges
involved with tailoring the concept of zero trust into such environments,
assuring security also needs to be accomplished quickly. The cost to develop and
implement a single AI/ML model can reach hundreds of thousands of dollars, and
the malicious alteration of AI/ML models, model features, and training data that
effectively poison AI/ML can negate the return on this substantial investment.
Such poisoning attacks are a nascent threat that is expected to become
widespread as malicious actors gain technical ability. This susceptibility of
AI/ML to poisoning attacks poses a severe national security concern as AI/ML has
become central to mission-critical defense and intelligence capacities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
lifecycle management tool utilizing blockchain technology. The proposed
innovation will enable users to store, train, and deploy data, AI/ML models, and
model features, with each transaction or attempted transaction. These
transactions will be immutably logged to provide an audit trail, ensuring that
nothing stored on the blockchain can be surreptitiously altered. These project
goals are to determine how the use of blockchain technology may enhance the
security of the AI/ML lifecycle. The technology may be used to analyze the AI/ML
lifecycle security concerns and foci of stakeholders including intelligence
agencies, academia, commercial businesses, and machine learning engineers. The
project will also help determine if practical solutions exist for engineers to
secure the machine learning lifecycle, examine economic models that inform the
tradeoff of security, cost efficiency, awareness of virtual structure as it
relates to the concept of “Zero AI Trust”, and test usability in machine
learning lifecycle management tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.