* 2107301
* Catalyst Project: Technically Speaking-Building Scientific Communication Self-efficacy
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Rhonda Porter, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,997.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Albany
State University intends to integrate science communication into the science
(biology and chemistry) academic programs. The proposed curricular enhancements
aim to bolster student scientific communication skills, which has the potential
to impact their STEM identity and long-term retention in the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the Technically Speaking: Building
Scientific Communication Self-Efficacy Program (TSP) is to offer empirically
based research, which may lead to an improvement of undergraduate STEM students’
academic competency in oral communication, as well as their scientific efficacy.
Specific objectives include: (1) establishing course-based learning communities,
(2) improve oral scientific communication (3) enhance scientific communication
self-efficacy and scientific identity and (4) improve critical-thinking skills.
Research is intended to lead to higher retention and graduation within STEM
fields. The project, over the span of 2 years, will enroll students into two
non-residential learning communities: ARC (Appreciating the Rhetoric of
Chemistry) which pairs a chemistry class with a public speaking class and
Raising the BAR (Biology and Rhetoric) which pairs a biology course with a
public speaking course. The outreach to the K12 community will contribute to the
development of scientific literacy among citizens of the community. The project
will improve students’ ability to orally communicate their scientific pursuits
to a broad audience through opportunities for reflection, sustained feedback,
and mastery experiences. The TSP has the potential to result in improved STEM
education and will help to develop a more competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.