* 2107253
* The H3 Spectroscopic Survey and the Origin of the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Charles Conroy, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 570,000.00

A main component of our Milky Way galaxy is its stellar halo, a spherical
distribution of stars extending 10 times further than the stellar disk. Galaxy
formation theories predict that our Milky Way's stellar halo was formed from
"shredding" of smaller galaxies. However, this theory has not yet been confirmed
observationally. In this project the investigators will measure the basic
stellar properties (velocities, distances, and "chemistry") of 300,000 stars in
the stellar halo. With these data they will provide a full inventory of the
building blocks that formed our stellar halo. Stellar ages, which are measured
as part of this project, will be used to deduce the timeline of star formation
and galaxy merger events. Finally, the investigators will use these observations
to predict the effect of the Milky Way's largest satellite companion, the Large
Magellanic Cloud, on the stellar halo. Such observations may provide unique
insight into the nature of dark matter and gravity. Educationally, this project
will support a graduate student who will be trained on the analysis of stellar
spectra and the application of dynamical models to the Galaxy. The project will
also support the training of summer undergraduates from under-represented
backgrounds as part of the Banneker Institute. The Banneker Institute has a
summer program aimed at developing students’ research skills and social justice
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The “Hectochelle in the Halo at High Resolution”
(H3) Survey will deliver high resolution spectra of stars in high Galactic
latitude fields in the Northern hemisphere to measure radial velocities,
spectrophotometric distances, [Fe/H], and [alpha/Fe] relative abundances.
Determining these parameters will be used to explain the origin of structures in
phase plus chemistry space. These observations will enable detailed constraints
on the assembly history of the Galaxy, measurements of the mass profile of the
outer Galaxy, the origin of the in-situ stellar halo, and will be sensitive to a
variety of interesting, rare populations such as chemically peculiar stars and
high velocity stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.