* 2107214
* IRES Track 1: International Collaborative Experiences to Track Arctic LaKe Systems (ICE TALKS)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ruth Varner, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,807.00

Numerous observations, taken across varied time scales, indicate climate and
environmental change are accelerating in the high latitudes resulting in
permafrost thaw. Documenting and quantifying these changes, particularly in lake
environments that form and evolve during the thaw process, are essential for
enhancing understanding and predictions of the impact of climate change on a
variety of processes ranging from microbial community development, nutrient
mobilization, release of trace gases and dissolved compounds to the atmosphere
and water systems. The IRES Site International Collaborative Experiences to
Track Arctic Lake Systems (ICE TALKS) program supports U.S. graduate and
undergraduate students to carry out field- and lab- based projects to quantify
these changes under the mentorship of scientists from Stockholm University and
its Bolin Centre for Climate Change. The overarching goal of the projects
enabled by the ICE TALKS program is to develop consistent sets of observations
of the physical/geological, chemical and biological responses of high latitude
systems under thawing conditions for the Earth and environmental science
community. Assemblage of such observations across a variety of thaw stages is
foundational for building the next generation of predictive models to infer how
these vulnerable ecosystems will respond to future climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our specific program objectives are to enable ICE TALKS
fellows to: (1) Conduct co-mentored research with international faculty and UNH
faculty which fosters the development of research independence; (2) Gain
experience leading a collaborative yet individualized research project; (3)
Build research skills critical for understanding systems changing rapidly in
response to climate forcing, and (4) Hone professional skills to support the
continued development of fellows s as scientists focused on communication and
mentoring. The ICE TALKS Fellows program will provide both research and
professional development for 9 undergraduate and 12 graduate students (21
students in total over the 3-year project) in a co-mentored international
research experience. Graduate students will be recruited from several UNH-based
M.S. and Ph.D. programs and through courses taught by the PIs, with a priority
on recruiting those UNH-based graduate fellows who plan to continue their ICE
TALKS research beyond the mentored field season. Undergraduate students will be
recruited through partnerships between the PIs and colleagues at Minority-
Serving-Institutes (MSIs). Participating undergraduates will receive post-trip
academic year follow-up support to prepare for and participate in UNH’s
undergraduate research conference the subsequent project year to share their
research findings. Undergraduates will be placed into teams with graduate
students in the field, as graduate students will be trained to be both mentors
and mentees. The ICE TALKS program is designed both to develop research skills
in field and laboratory settings and to develop the students’ abilities to work
collaboratively and communicate effectively. The proposed research activities
will strengthen research partnerships between the UNH and our MSI
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
International Research Experience for Students program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.