* 2107488
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: RUI: Do You Trust Me? Practical Approaches and Fundamental Limits for Keyless Authentication
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Allison Beemer, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 147,170.00

The last decade has witnessed a wide variety of emerging communication systems
that have revolutionized nearly every aspect of society. To support this
revolution, further technological advances are required to address ever-growing
security and privacy concerns, including combating attempts by adversarial
entities at tampering with communications. Despite recent advances in network
security, such as public-key cryptography and various security protocols, the
current design of security solutions is often governed by the assumption that an
adversary is present at all times. In practice, this assumption may waste
resources: even though adversaries may appear at any moment, they are not
present for a majority of the time. This project explores authentication as an
efficient, low-complexity approach to the security of communication systems.
Authenticated communication requires transmitting a message from one location to
another, so that whenever the receiver accepts a message, it can guarantee the
message has not been corrupted. The hallmark of this approach is that it does
not require any pre-shared secret knowledge between users, and it incurs little
extra cost when an adversary is not present while providing an immediate alarm
signal when one is. This research aims to foster interdisciplinary cooperation
across engineering and mathematics, and will actively engage both undergraduate
and graduate students across institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses information- and coding-theoretic questions related to both
fundamental performance limits and principles of optimal authentication code
design, along with the application of authentication to emerging areas such as
computing and machine learning. First, new fundamental limits for authentication
in point-to-point communication systems are being derived, building on the
research teamâ€™s preliminary work. This includes the study of Gaussian models as
well as myopic channels, where the adversary sees a noisy version of the
transmitted signal and may use this knowledge to inform its strategy. Next, the
project is studying canonical networks by considering a novel objective of
partial correction, which allows a receiver to decode a fraction of the
transmitted messages, even if it must reject the remainder. These theoretical
findings will also be translated into practical coding schemes for
authentication. In particular, new code constructions are being developed by
incorporating a controlled amount of non-linearity into existing linear coding
schemes. Finally, authentication is being interpreted in and applied to the
context of emerging applications such as distributed computing and dataset
integrity in supervised learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.