* 2107098
* IRES Track I:  Terrestrial and UAS-based remote sensing, photogrammetry, and digital modeling of ancient marble quarries in Greece
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Scott Pike, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,841.00

Recent substantial technological progress has been made in the manufacturing and
availability of unmanned aerial systems (UAS, also known as UAV or drones) and
the lightweight active and passive sensing devices that can be integrated into
their platform as payloads. The development of these integrated systems is
driving an emergent field of aerial applications in field-based research.
Researchers can now capture location-embedded visible light aerial photographs
with ease as well as remote sensing data at spectral, spatial, and temporal
resolutions not achievable from terrestrial or satellite-based systems. In
anticipation of the growth in aerial based research, this IRES project will
provide training and resources for 12 U.S. undergraduate students to learn and
operate UAS, become familiar with national UAS regulations and protocols, design
and implement aerial surveys, process aerial data using photogrammetric and GIS
software, and create products that integrate aerial and terrestrial datasets in
a meaningful and informative way. This IRES project centers on the
geoarchaeology of ancient marble producing quarries in Greece that span from the
Bronze Age through Early Byzantine period and will be conducted under the
auspices of the Wiener Laboratory for Archaeological Science at the American
School of Classical Studies at Athens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past few
decades, geoarchaeologists, physicists, and chemists have developed a
geochemical and stable isotope database to differentiate between the major
marble producing quarries utilized in antiquity. The database is used to assess
provenance of marble artifacts including statuary, architecture, and furniture.
However, very little effort has been given to the survey and recording of the
physical quarries themselves. A thorough aerial and terrestrial survey of
ancient marble quarry fields will provide improved assessment of the size and
extent of quarry fields, dimensions of individual quarry pits, and the
possibility of identifying previously unknown pits. Building from a review of
maps and archaeology reports, IRES participants will design and implement data
collecting missions with UAS platforms equipped with visual light cameras as
well as multispectral and LiDAR sensors. IRES participants will gain the skills
necessary to process the data with photogrammetric and GIS software to develop
accurate high-resolution three-dimensional point clouds. Participants will use
the point clouds to render accurate georectified digital terrain models that
include quarry boundaries, tailing piles, and slipways. Interpreted surface
features will be verified by groundtruthing. Participants will use the aerial
and terrestrial imagery to generate accurate three-dimensional models of the
quarry pits, allowing for the determination of quarry volumes and the
calculation of the amount of extracted marble. IRES participants will integrate
published geochemical and stable isotope datasets to each quarry model, and
develop kmz-based online resource for geologists, geomorphologists,
archaeologists, and others interested in ancient Greek marble
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.