* 2107163
* IRES: Track I: U.S.-France Program for INverter-based And Cybersecure Control and Communication for eLEctric power system (PINNACLE)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ali Mehrizi-Sani, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The current workforce market is globally oriented; therefore, it is imperative
that our students can compete for jobs not only within our borders, but also
internationally. This IRES program, PINNACLE, builds on the PIs' decade-long
history of collaboration with Grenoble Institute of Technology, whose electrical
engineering program is ranked first in France. PINNACLE trains and sends 18 U.S.
students (6 each year) for 8 weeks to Grenoble to engage in research and
extracurricular activities, including language instruction, several industry
visits, and integration with an existing international internship program. A
significant outcome of this program is producing well-rounded U.S. engineer-
researcher workforce who are globally competitive. Several industry partners of
Grenoble have a very visible presence in the United States, e.g., RTE, Schneider
Electric, and Siemens, which further helps with the workforce preparation of our
scholars. A result of this program will be broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups through our recruitment plan. We will disseminate our
research outcomes broadly by pursuing both technical publications (reporting the
research results) and educational publications (reporting the mechanics of the
IRES program: its distinguishing factors, students' feedback, institutional
impacts, support services, success measures, and demographics). Furthermore,
this work benefits our society and environment by (i) training the workforce
required for efficient integration of renewable energy resources, (ii)
increasing career interest in power system and the smart grid, and (iii)
improving the quality and quantity of power engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES program, PINNACLE, builds on the PIs'
decade-long history of collaboration with Grenoble Institute of Technology,
whose electrical engineering program is ranked first in France. PINNACLE trains
and sends 18 U.S. students (6 each year) for 8 weeks to Grenoble to engage in
research and extracurricular activities, including language instruction, several
industry visits, and integration with an existing international internship
program, in its G2Elab. We include a contingency plan for possible travel
restrictions. The overarching theme of students' research projects is to enable
a massively inverter-based electric power system while addressing their control,
communication, and cybersecurity requirements and challenges. As the power
system transitions to include a larger share of renewables and inverter-based
generation, it challenges conventional stability and control concepts.
Simultaneously, the electric power grid's growing dependency on information and
communication technology (ICT) significantly increases its vulnerability to
network unavailability and security issues. Therefore, ensuring timely and
secure delivery of data is central to guaranteeing the performance of control,
optimization, and supervisory systems. This work is expected to contribute to
(i) algorithms to study the feasibility of interconnection of renewables to the
power system, (ii) control and design of power systems, microgrids, and
inverters in 100% renewables setting, and (iii) inverter and microgrid
cybersecurity under communication-enabled strategies. This is an area in which
the U.S. PIs and French collaborators have complementary expertise. Under
Grenoble mentorship, the U.S. students work on these research challenges.
Students' exposure to these problems, especially in a European context, is
expected to help them think of innovative solutions to the similar challenges in
the United States. Additionally, G2Elab has active collaborations with several
industry partners, which facilitates industry tours and field trips. This
program is mutually beneficial and strengthens our existing collaboration by
providing a framework for conducting research projects of common interest. We
will recruit nationally for this program and expect that our program alumni will
be a cohort of individuals with highly desired skills for industry and graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.