* 2107883
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the limits of AGN feedback: a dedicated study of extremely high velocity outflows.
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Proga, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,006.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In less than one century, our knowledge about the
universe has shifted from thinking that we were in the one and only galaxy in
the universe to realizing that there are billions of galaxies beyond the Milky
Way; today we also know that most galaxies, if not all, harbor in their centers
a supermassive black hole. Black holes remain one of the most fascinating
objects in the universe, and while they are difficult to observe, one way to
learn from them is through the effects they cause in their environment. Whenever
there is gas around them, for example, these supermassive black holes can
"activate" one of the most energetic phenomena in the universe: active galactic
nuclei, of which quasars are the most luminous ones. In the past two decades, we
have also learned that the masses of these supermassive black holes and their
host galaxies correlate, but it is not known how the small central region and
the huge galaxy around "communicate" this information to each other. One
promising method is through outflows, material expelled from the environment of
the supermassive black hole that can reach the galactic environment. Outflows
can also provide crucial clues about the physical and chemical conditions of the
black holes' environment. This project will allow the researchers to continue
enlarging the sample of known extremely high-velocity quasars, study their
overall properties as well as the most extreme cases in depth by using state-of-
the-art tools, and use all of this information to advance the theoretical models
that aim to show how these outflows can be launched from the supermassive black
hole environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integral to the project is the goal to
increase access, retention, and graduation success for underrepresented
physics/astronomy students, to help diversify the future STEM workforce. To do
so, the team has carefully selected best practices in recruiting and supporting
students, providing paid research and outreach opportunities, and creating a
supportive community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
recently-discovered class of outflows, extremely high-velocity outflows (EHVO),
may be key to understanding feedback processes in galaxies as it is likely the
most powerful in terms of mass-energy: it seems to combine the large velocities
of ultra-fast outflows and the large column densities found in broad absorption
line quasars. If the preliminary results are confirmed, EHVO quasars might be
crucial to determine the upper limit of observed AGN feedback signatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will carry out a comprehensive study that
includes (1) enlarging the known cases of EHVO quasars by applying already
developed tools to a larger quasar sample, (2) studying the overall sample
properties and the most extreme cases by using state-of-the-art synthetic
modeling, and (3) computing synthetic spectra using disk wind models. They have
tailored all of these projects so they can be carried out by the team together
with 6 - 10 undergraduate students, helping train the future generation of
scientists in both observational and theoretical quasar
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.