* 2107400
* Collaborative Research: CNS Medium: Systems Foundations for Battery-free Body Area Intelligence and Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Nabil Alshurafa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2024
* USD 308,000.00

An exciting new paradigm for wearable health sensors is one where sensors and
batteries need not be integrated within the same device. This project seeks to
realize this vision by utilizing human tissue as a medium for transferring power
and data between different device pairs. The project objective is to develop
hardware and software mechanisms that allow heterogeneous networks of sensors
that are largely battery-free. The key working principle is the design of a
system where energy transmitters that include batteries, provide power to
relatively many battery-free sensors while simultaneously serving as an endpoint
for data collection from the sensors. The project has three thrusts: 1)
quantifying the performance and safety issues of the use of human tissue as a
propagation medium for power and communications; 2) the design of hardware and
software primitives needed to facilitate energy sharing between networks of
battery-free devices; 3) the operating system, run-time support, and tools
needed to coordinate devices that in turn enable higher level health
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technologies developed in this work will
impact a range of potential health applications including remote rehabilitation,
nutrition monitoring, and other real-time sensing tasks enabled by distributed
sensors worn for long time periods. The technologies developed as part of this
project have the potential to greatly optimize the design of the wearable health
sensors themselves. Additionally, the elimination of batteries in remotely
powered sensors will eliminate the growing waste stream that is a consequence of
battery wear out. Outcomes of this project will be integrated into a number of
ongoing outreach activities that expose K-12 and undergraduate students to the
potential benefits of wearable health technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.