* 2107603
* IRES Track-1: Sustainable Water Resource Management in Eastern Nile Basin Countries: What works? What needs to be improved?
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mekonnen Gebremichael, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,347.00

Although Africa is considered the future breadbasket of the world, it currently
remains a net food importer primarily due to inefficient agricultural water
management. The program will contribute to improving the efficiency of
agricultural water management through performance evaluation of current water
resource management projects, identifying critical bottlenecks and
opportunities, and proposing appropriate solutions. The program will use the
food-energy-water-livelihood nexus approach, which is the state-of-the-art
approach for water resource management that takes into account the co-benefits
and tradeoffs in managing interconnected resources (land, water, and energy).
The program will train U.S. students in multidisciplinary and community-based
research in water resources, agriculture and climate, and help advance their
understanding of agricultural water management issues in developing countries.
U.S. students, mentored by international researchers, will undertake practical
student-led projects in Gezira Irrigation Project (Sudan), Nyanza-23 Irrigation
Project (Rwanda), and Meila &amp; Haiba Irrigation Projects (Ethiopia). Students
will be trained in all aspects of research (from proposal preparation, to
implementation, and communication), and involved in co-academic activities, such
as, social activities with local communities and stakeholders, and visits to key
cultural, touristic, and educational sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. students
will study water resource management issues in the Eastern Nile Basin countries
from the food-energy-water-livelihood nexus perspective, using irrigation
projects as case studies. The proposed research examines the linkages, trade-
offs, and co-benefits among the nexus components, and propose nexus-based
solutions to improve agricultural water resource management. The program
represents a partnership between University of California Los Angeles (UCLA),
Hydraulic Research Center in Sudan, University of Rwanda, and Mekelle
University. Over three years, a total of 18 students (12 undergraduates and 6
graduates) from U.S. institutions, including underrepresented colleges and
universities, will participate in one-year of training structured around an
8-week Summer research in Sudan (year 1), Rwanda (year 2), and Ethiopia (year
3), with Spring preparation and Fall follow up. During Spring, students will
enroll in a seminar course jointly delivered by the participating faculty
mentors. During Summer, students will go to East Africa for eight weeks to
undertake student-led projects. Examples of student projects include:
understanding the dynamics between water supply and demand, characterizing water
footprint and productivity, quantifying the impact of access to irrigation water
on irrigator’s food and livelihood security, assessing water quality and
sedimentation, and developing pilot crowdsourcing project for data collection
and dissemination. During Fall, students will continue to do their research
culminating in undergraduate senior/Honors thesis or Master’s thesis. Then,
students will present their research work at an international scientific
conference, such as, American Geophysical Union (AGU) Fall Meeting. The
intellectual merit of this work lies in the integration of field data, remote
sensing, and modeling to understand relationships between the food, energy,
water, and livelihood nexus components. The project specifically addresses the
following science questions: (1) What are the nexus hotspots and key
interactions in the social and ecological dynamics of food, water, and
livelihood systems at multiple scales and levels? (2) In what ways can we extend
methodologies traditionally used to analyze water resource systems to nexus
systems? (3) What nexus-based solutions (technological, management, governance,
and marketing) are needed to improve current water productivity and to guide
future new developments? Results will be disseminated through pilot
crowdsourcing project, policy briefs, scientific presentations in the USA and
Eastern Nile basin countries, and peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.