* 2107685
* Cooperativity Driven Communication through Noncovalent Networks in Biomimetic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Marcey Waters, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Marcey Waters of the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill will develop biomimetic model systems that mimic the
complex behavior that regulates protein function. Many proteins function as
molecular machines that respond to stimuli with molecular on-off switches. This
research seeks to uncover the molecular features that are necessary to create
new stimulus-responsive molecules that mimic the behavior seen in proteins. The
findings from this work have the potential to provide better insight into
biomedically relevant protein behavior, but to also provide guidelines for how
to create new biomimetic "smart" materials. The broader impacts of this work
include broad interdisciplinary training for the students working on the
project, as well as the development of new program that connects chemistry
majors doing independent research with younger students to provide peer role
models and guidance on how to pursue research, with the goal of increasing the
number of students from underrepresented groups that engage in research in the
chemistry and chemical biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are complex
molecules that display a wide range of behaviors beyond binding and catalysis,
including stimulus response involving long-distance structural rearrangement as
in allostery, conformational signaling, and signal transduction. These behaviors
are accomplished via communication through a noncovalent network, but the
molecular mechanisms of such communication are poorly understood. This research
aims to develop predictive model systems with a responsive noncovalent network
to establish the molecular requirements for achieving communication through a
noncovalent network, including the role of both positive and negative
cooperativity. These model systems have the potential to bridge the gap between
minimalist models and complex proteins to gain molecular level insight into
these responsive systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.