* 2107022
* Implementation Project: A STEM Innovation Ecosystem to Enhance Persistence, Retention, and Graduation Rates in Underrepresented Minority Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Dawn McNair, Livingstone College
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 897,028.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) provide support to design, implement, study, and
assess comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students
and the quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation
project at Livingstone College seeks to expand the use of the Social Cognitive
Career Theory (SCCT) model and study its effect in retention, graduation, and
graduate school/career choice among underrepresented minority (URM) freshmen
students. The project is grounded in evidence-based practices and the extent to
which these endeavors are integrated on the campus of Livingstone College has
the potential to transform the STEM education and research capacity of the
institution, and advance knowledge in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to 1) enhance student engagement and research through an innovation
ecosystem, 2) mitigate barriers to baccalaureate critical transition points
through socially cognitive STEM course-based interventions and 3) establish a
STEM Entrepreneurship Learning Community. Through course-based undergraduate
research experiences, faculty professional development in pedagogical and
curricular practices associated with SCCT, holistic learning activities, and the
creation of a “Science Mastermind”, the project will investigate through a
quasi-experimental design to what extent and which combination of support
structures deepen URM students’ interests in math and science. Further, the
project will analyze to what extent do these deeper interests drive self-
efficacy and outcome expectations in ways that ultimately yield stronger
outcomes. Understanding these strategies will enable stakeholders to more
rigorously evaluate STEM programs that develop scientific entrepreneurship, the
efficacy of the support activities, and the correlation of these activities with
student retention and continuity in STEM Innovation and
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.