* 2107230
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Advancing Low-Power Computer Vision at the Edge
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Yung-Hsiang Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2024
* USD 258,000.00

This proposal enables low-power edge computers, such as mobile phones, drones,
and Internet-of-Things devices, to benefit society. Computer vision is the
technology to automatically analyze images and videos. Computer vision on these
devices can keep humans safe, for example by spotting dangers in a factory or at
a construction site. This project addresses two challenges that hamper practical
adoption of computer vision on edge devices. The first challenge is that current
computer vision approaches require powerful computers, but these computers are
too far away and have long response time. This project brings the computers to
the places where data is acquired. The project makes computer vision more
efficient, so that visual data can be analyzed by small edge devices like phones
and drones. The second challenge is that building complex software for computer
vision is difficult. This project provides software engineering support for
emerging computer vision technologies. As a result of addressing these two
challenges, computer vision on the edge can become
feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bringing computer vision (CV) to devices on the
network edge is an essential component of realizing NSF's goal of distributed
cyberinfrastructure. This project makes CV on the edge feasible and enables
scientific and engineering innovation through improved response time, reduced
need for network coverage, and decreased storage costs. This project solves two
critical challenges that hinder the transition of edge-based CV into practice.
(1) This project makes CV more efficient and edge-friendly. Current CV
techniques (e.g., deep neural networks) assume server-class resources (such as
graphics processing units, gigabytes of memory); these resources are not
available at the edge. This project reduces the resource requirements needed for
CV. The methods consider alternative neural network architectures and eliminate
redundancies while processing visual data. This project also develops CV-
specific distribution techniques to enable edge devices to collaborate on large
vision tasks. (2) This project provides software engineering support for CV
technologies. Solving real-world CV problems requires engineering new CV
applications, often by re-implementing research model architectures as
components in new designs. This project develops a library of exemplary CV model
implementations for low-power platforms. These exemplars can be used as high-
quality components in new CV applications. The project identifies factors that
promote and inhibit the reproducibility of CV models. This project also
identifies engineering best practices by surveying and interviewing experts in
low-power CV and by studying their errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.