* 2107592
* SHF:Medium: Studying and Exploiting the Bimodality of Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Aditya Thakur, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Software, as written, has two audiences: the machine(s) that run it, and the
human(s) who maintain it. Machines understand formal operational semantics;
humans, however, understand code via the informal, noisy information latent in
variable names, comments, coding styles etc. Human readers can certainly
mentally "simulate" code execution, but it’s not easy. Developers therefore
(while always striving to ensure that the code has the correct computational
semantics) try to write code  that  is easy to read and understand. Code is thus
bimodal, carrying information in two channels: 1) a precise, formal one that
carries the exact computational meaning to the execution platform, and 2) an
informal ``natural" one for human readers that is designed to facilitate the
fast, noisy process of human comprehension. This project aims to exploit these
two channels, and their synergies, to improve software tools, in several ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the formal channel will be used to generate the
training data for the informal channel in order to train tools to "leniently"
parse inchoate, erroneous code, as created by student developers or found on
StackOverflow and other informal documentation. Second, the formal channel
(e.g., a typechecker) will be used to train probabilistic learners to create
type annotations in a reinforcement-learning setting. Third, the use of learned
models will be studied using signals (e.g., variable names) on the informal
channel to help static analysis algorithms make precision-speed tradeoffs;
finally, the bimodality of code will be leveraged to create finely-tuned code
samples that preserve meaning (but are different in form) for pyscho-linguistics
studies aimed at improving human code comprehension and production. The project
will develop a new introductory programming curriculum that teaches beginning
programmers to learn to think "bimodally" about problems requiring IT solutions:
not just in terms of computational abstractions, but also more holistically,
about the impacts on society and the environment. The project is enabled by an
interdisciplinary team, consisting of scholars in Software Engineering, Psycho-
linguistics, and Science and Technology studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.