* 2107078
* CNS Core: Medium: Approximation and Randomization in the Programmable Data Plane
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Michael Mitzenmacher, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,216,000.00

The Internet is now a critical infrastructure underlying every aspect of the US
economy and enabling new applications in smart health, transportation, energy,
education, etc. The Internet is composed of many networks, which are constantly
evolving as new technologies develop. A key, recent development in networking is
the arrival of the programmable data plane (e.g., programmable network
switches). The programmable data plane enables a wide range of applications that
make networks more efficient, including not only traditional forwarding,
routing, and load-balancing of packets flowing through the network, but also new
methods for advanced network monitoring and troubleshooting. However, the
programmable data plane now and for the foreseeable future will be highly
constrained, due to memory and computational resource constraints of networked
devices. To reduce these constraints, this research leverages approximation and
randomization for various network problems. The goal of the project is for the
research to realize methods and technologies that can enable more efficient,
robust, and secure networks for the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximation
algorithms provide an answer that is only approximately correct, and randomized
algorithms may only be correct with high probability or introduce other
randomness in their performance, such as requiring a variable amount of latency.
However, utilizing approximate and randomized algorithms can greatly reduce
resource requirements while still providing suitably effective results for
handling many real-world problems. These will be leveraged towards the main
goals of this project: (1) Designing novel methods and algorithms for
distributed network applications, making use of the programmable data plane. In
particular, the project aims to improve network telemetry approaches, as well as
additional applications. (2) Providing libraries of utilities, from low-level
functions to higher-level data structures and algorithms, for approximation
algorithms and randomized algorithms in switch architectures. (3) Devising
theoretical formalizations that provide a framework for designing algorithms in
current and future switch architectures, with the goal of influencing the future
development of switches. Project contributions will therefore include new
algorithms and approaches for multiple network applications, tools and libraries
for others to use and adopt, and theoretical frameworks to spur additional
development. Indeed, these three focus areas can provide a synergistic virtuous
cycle, creating a positive feedback loop for this line of research. The project
will facilitate the interdisciplinary research between networking and theory.
The project will also engage underrepresented groups and undergraduates in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.