* 2107011
* Collaborative Research: FET: Medium: Neuroplane: Scalable Deep Learning through Gate-tunable MoS2 Crossbars
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Anand Raghunathan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,742.00

The increasing complexity of deep-learning systems has pushed conventional
computing technologies to their limits. While the memristor is one of the
prevailing technologies for deep-learning acceleration, it is only suited for
classical learning layers where two operands, namely weights and inputs, are
processed at a time. Meanwhile, to improve the computational efficiency of deep
learning for emerging applications, a variety of non-traditional layers,
requiring concurrent higher-order processing of many operands, are becoming
popular. For example, hypernetworks improve their predictive robustness by
simultaneously processing weights and inputs against the application context.
Two-electrode memristor grids cannot natively support such operations of
emerging layers. Addressing the unmet need, this research will develop
Neuroplane -- a novel deep-learning accelerator of gated memtransistor
crossbars. Exploiting crossbars' gate controllability, multiple operands can be
processed within the same crossbar unit in Neuroplane. Many advanced inference
architectures that can generalize beyond a typical passive crossbar will thus be
possible. Overall, the ultra-low-power, higher-order processing of Neuroplane
will harness high robustness and efficiency of emerging deep-learning layers
within area/power-constrained devices such as mobile, sensor, and embedded
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop fabrication methods
for nanometer node gate-tunable dual-gated crossbars of MoS2 memtransistors. A
self-aligned fabrication method with defect passivation and process variability
compensation will be created. Exploiting the gate-tunability of MoS2
memtransistors, a new generation of crossbar platforms with many runtime control
knobs will be developed, rendering the design a high elasticity and agile
computing space. For example, computing methods will be created for the gated
crossbars to utilize crossbar elements for product-sum digitization, thereby
preventing the critical overheads in current crossbar technologies. Similarly,
control-flow methods will be developed for gated crossbars to adapt their
inference paths depending on the input characteristics by dynamically
deactivating input/output neurons to conserve processing energy. A coherent
collection of software and hardware-based correction techniques is proposed to
minimize the impact of process variability. Unlike the current schemes, by
following the train-once-deploy-anywhere tenet, the proposed crossbar correction
methods can scale to millions of deployments without considerable overhead. An
annual workshop will be conducted at local high schools with substantial ethnic
and gender diversity to mentor underrepresented students. Undergraduate research
projects will be sponsored using paid summer internships and university-level
programs such as summer undergraduate fellowship. An inter-university senior-
design mentoring program will be created for students among participating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.