* 2107042
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Collaborative Automatic Parallelization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Simone Campanoni, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

In the context of the end of Moore's law, the greatest value of multicore is
ultimately in its potential to accelerate sequential codes. This potential can
only be realized with the reliable extraction of sufficient multicore-
appropriate thread-level parallelism (MATLP) from programs. Yet, despite many
new tools, languages, and libraries designed for multicore, difficulties in
MATLP extraction keep multicore grossly underutilized. The energy and
performance impact of this is nearly universal. To address this problem, this
project's novelties are in (i) redefining traditional abstractions used within
compilers to enable constructive and tight collaborations that aim to coordinate
the multiple code analyses and transformations required for MATLP extraction,
(ii) producing RAPPORT, the first publicly available compiler with full
collaboration support, a necessary element for robust automatic parallelization.
This project's impact is in making computing faster and more efficient with
reliable MATLP extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conventional compilers,
optimizations perform well greedily and independently, enabling easy compiler
modularity without much performance impact. However, in MATLP extraction, key
parallelization techniques may succeed only if other transformations clear the
path, sometimes by de-optimizing the code. Over the last decade, researchers
have made steady progress toward the goal of robust and routine automatic MATLP
with new MATLP parallelization patterns, stronger memory analyses, and more
efficient speculation techniques. This team believes these MATLP technologies
are sufficient but lack the coordination necessary to realize their full
potential. This work produces the technology necessary for reliable MATLP
extraction by redefining compiler abstractions to enable transformations and
analyses to work together actively without loss of modularity. This new
technology enables a globally beneficial behavior by centralizing, in a modular
way, the decentralized and greedy decision-making found in conventional
compilers. In this way, it makes the reliable and robust extraction of MATLP
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.