* 2107728
* Tailoring the Nanophotonic and Nanoelectronic Properties of Nanometals using Oxide-Directed Syntheses
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Svetlana Neretina, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,973.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Svetlana Neretina of the University of
Notre Dame will investigate how oxides can be used to control the growth of
metal nanoparticles on substrates with spatial registration. Improvements in the
understanding of metal nanoparticle growth mechanisms are expected to result in
new synthetic strategies for nanostructure templating that could be exploited
for applications in active plasmonics, nanoelectronics, and chiral plasmonics.
Dr. Neretina is actively involved in the Building Bridges Mentoring Program and
the Advancing Women Leaders Program as well several outreach initiatives that
focus on the development of in-lab high school research projects. These
activities open up opportunities for Dr. Neretina and her group to actively
engage students in areas that are not typically covered in standard
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the advancement of a
liquid-state seed-mediated chemistry for the syntheses of on-chip metal
nanostructures that are responsive to the synthetic controls imposed by an
impinging oxide. Oxides that steer horizontal Au nanowire growth trajectories
along deterministic pathways that self-terminate upon an encounter with an
electrode, confine plasmonic nanostructures within liquid-filled oxide capsules
where their resulting mobility makes them responsive to externally applied
stimuli, and selectively react in liquid media are exploited. This approach
builds on traditional chemical controls that are accessible through colloidal
syntheses and physical controls that are obtainable when a growing metal
encounters a chemically inert oxide barrier that is firmly affixed to the
substrate surface. By exploiting the synthetic inactivity and passive behavior
of oxides to impose steric barriers that act in opposition to or frustrate the
natural tendencies associated with nanometal syntheses, the research team seeks
to produce reaction products that are typically unobtainable. The work will
leverage existing capabilities stemming from a synthetic strategy in which seed-
mediated colloidal growth modes are practiced on periodic arrays of substrate
immobilized seeds. Overall, this research seeks to develop oxide-directed
solution-based chemistry that targets the formation of organized surfaces of
nanomaterials with tailored nanoelectronic and nanophotonic properties.
Reduction to practice of such an approach to constructing organized surfaces
with tailored properties would likely have broad scientific
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.