* 2107116
* Collaborative Research: IRES: Tropical Research Experience in Ecological Science (TREES): Regeneration dynamics in a hyper-diverse tropical forest
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Simon Queenborough, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 142,309.00

The number and severity of abnormal weather events, such as storms and droughts,
have increased in recent decades all over the world. In the tropical forests of
South America, two large drought events occurred in 2005 and 2010, and more will
likely happen in the future. Although most tropical forests have a regular and
predictable dry season that lasts several months, those that lie in the
northwestern corner of the Amazon region do not. Here, high rainfall occurs in
every month of the year, and researchers think that these forests may be hit
particularly hard by lower rainfall. No one knows if these trees have had any
previous experience of drought conditions. If they do grow poorly or die when
there is no rain, then the kinds of trees that make up these forests may be
quite different in future, leading to changes in how the forest works, as well
as in the availability of food for animals and resources for people. This
International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project will carry out
experiments to look at how tree seedlings of this area respond to drought, and
how drought affects the other animals that interact with trees. The award
addresses a critical scientific challenge while building capacity and experience
in field and lab techniques among U.S. graduate and undergraduate students. To
this end, we will mentor six U.S. students every year during the spring semester
before, and fall semester after, they embark on an overseas research experience
in Ecuador, working with long-term collaborators of PIs Queenborough and Metz at
Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Ecuador, as well as with Ecuadorian
students. Mastersâ€™ and undergraduate students from Yale University will be
paired with undergraduates from Lewis &amp; Clark College, a primarily
undergraduate institution, to develop and conduct ecological research in a
remote field station in the Amazon rain forest: Yasuni National
Park.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address a key knowledge gap in
forest ecology and climate change science: how do aseasonal ever-wet tropical
forests respond to drought and natural enemies? The answer has clear
implications for theoretical ecology (how infrequent disturbance, i.e., drought,
affects the dynamics and composition of diverse ecological communities), climate
change ecology (how forest structure, composition and distribution will likely
change in the future), and policy (whether tropical forests remain a net carbon
sink, or switch to a net carbon source thereby accelerating climate change).
Tropical aseasonal ever-wet rain forests are characterized by high rainfall and
no dry season, as well as high biological diversity and globally significant
carbon stocks. However, anthropogenic climate change is predicted to lead to
increases in the frequency and severity of droughts in South America. Drought is
expected to act synergistically with other abiotic and biotic factors such as
the pests and pathogens that drive the negative density-dependence that helps
maintain the high diversity found in the tropics. Recent work has focused on the
impacts of drought on tropical seasonal forests, yet virtually nothing is known
about how pest and pathogen pressure varies with water availability in the
aseasonal ever-wet tropics nor how increasing drying may change the structure
and function of these forests. This project, therefore, will investigate the
interaction between climate and natural enemies on the performance of trees in a
hyper-diverse, aseasonal tropical rain forest in the northwestern Amazon.
Specifically, the research team will use experiments to test the effect of
variation in water availability on pest and pathogen attack on young seedlings
and how these effects will likely alter the strength and direction of negative
density dependence; this information will transform current theoretical
understanding of how these two factors affect tree performance, diversity, and
distributions. Results will also provide key information on how these
economically and ecologically valuable, yet largely unknown, forests will change
in a future of increasing drought. The prime goal of this project is to build
capacity and experience in field and lab techniques among U.S. graduate and
undergraduate students. To this end, the PIs will mentor six U.S. students every
year during the spring semester before, and fall semester after, they embark on
an overseas research experience in Ecuador, working with long-term collaborators
of PIs Queenborough and Metz at Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Ecuador, as
well as with Ecuadorian students. Masters and undergraduate students from Yale
University will be paired with undergraduates from Lewis &amp; Clark College, a
primarily undergraduate institution, to develop and conduct ecological research
in a remote field station in the Amazon rain forest: Yasuni National Park.
Yasuni National Park and the associated Forest Dynamics Plot are unique
scientific resources. Exposing U.S. students to the incredible richness of the
most diverse forest in the world is an inspiring and humbling experience.
Students will be involved in meaningful research that is directly contributing
to a broad understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that structure ecosystems
and communities. Ensuring that students understand how such science is conducted
and how they can contribute is essential for how future generations decide to
manage the world they inherit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.