* 2107518
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Extracting and Linking AI Artifacts
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Robert Sloan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2024
* USD 547,992.00

The goal of this project is to create a framework for linking all salient
aspects of an AI workflow, including data, AI model, AI tool, task, and training
methodology. The investigators seek to create a framework that takes a holistic
view of the AI workflow, and thus, will provide a solution to one of the three
key problems identified in the Report of the Office of Science Roundtable on
Data for AI: “Address open questions in AI with frameworks for relating data,
models, and tasks.” One of the key provisions of federal funding agencies is the
creation and open dissemination of research artifacts (e.g., data, models).
Although publication-based knowledge is easily reused, data and models are not.
Data are the key ingredients to generate AI models. However, the relation
between an AI model and the data used to generate it or the task it solves, and
the data on which the AI model is tested on, is captured by neither the model
nor the data or task. Thus, the investigators seek to create a unified approach
to construct this relationship and annotate it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will contribute to the broad field of information retrieval and, in
particular, to the field of named entity recognition. In this project, the named
entities are the datasets, AI models, developing tools, and the names of various
methods, such as those employed in training. The investigators will employ a
holistic approach to the management of AI research artifacts, i.e., paper-task-
data-model-tool, which in turn will produce an innovative way to conceptualize
and execute data-AI model search and aggregation. The technical innovation of
this project is the creation of novel techniques for entity and relation
extraction as well as for entity linking. The project will also contribute to
the field of scientific literature mining. The investigators will create novel
technology to automatically identify and catalog public AI data and models that
increase their reusability. The key insight is that, without the research papers
themselves, the research AI artifacts lack the necessary context for reuse. For
example, papers describe the role of a dataset (e.g., training or testing) and
tell if a model is original or used as a baseline. By automatically inferring
task-data-model relations, this project will increase the ability of suggesting
artifacts to a new undertaking, thus shortening the time for relevant artifact
search. Educationally, this work will involve training of graduate and
undergraduate students, particularly encouraging the participation of women and
underrepresented groups in the research efforts, and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.