* 2107463
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Causal Performance Debugging for Highly-Configurable Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Pooyan Jamshidi Dermani, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 407,048.00

Software performance is critical for most software systems to achieve scale and
limit operating costs and energy consumption. As modern software systems, such
as big data and machine-learning systems, are increasingly built by composing
many reusable infrastructure components and deployed on distributed and
heterogeneous hardware, developers have powerful tools and abstractions at their
fingertips, and as a result face immense configuration complexity. Software and
hardware need to be selected and configured carefully to achieve high
performance for a given system and task. Unfortunately, in practice, performance
faults and misconfigurations are common, where a system performs much worse than
expected, not achieving its mission or simply wasting cost and energy. In large
configuration spaces, end-users and developers face severe challenges in
understanding and fixing performance faults by changing software configuration,
changing hardware deployment, or modifying the software's code itself. Current
approaches that model system performance by analyzing correlations among
performance measurements and options are slow and may produce misleading
results, obfuscating the actual causes of performance faults. Even if they can
fix the problem, most of them cannot explain why (1) the obtained configurations
are the real cause of the problem, and (2) a user/developer should consider the
proposed recommendations. In both cases, the lack of explainability is a big
issue. The project is intended to initiate a paradigm shift in today's testing
and debugging methodology for complex, highly configurable systems, thereby
positively impacting a broad range of industrial sectors relying on complex,
highly configurable systems. Specifically, the project contributes to
substantial energy savings and reduced carbon emissions, especially for the many
big-data and machine-learning systems that operate at a massive scale. Finally,
the research is providing valuable training for involved students from diverse
backgrounds in research and generating high-quality researchers and
practitioners for society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project develops and
evaluates foundations and tools for a causal approach to performance modeling
and performance debugging. This project introduces the new concept of causal
performance models that are learned using causal structure learning by
intervening over configuration options and observing system performance
regarding (multiple) performance objectives, rather than just analyzing
correlations. Causal models enable causal inference and counterfactual reasoning
for numerous tasks, including debugging performance faults and
misconfigurations. Based on a solid technical foundation of causal modeling and
extensive experience with performance modeling for configurable systems, this
project develops innovations in three thrusts: (1) It designs and refines a
causal modeling approach for software performance of systems composed of
multiple configurable components, using innovations in sampling strategies, code
analysis, compositional reasoning, and transfer learning to build accurate
causal models efficiently. (2) It develops and evaluates user-facing tool
support, based on causal models, to help users select well-performing
configurations for their specific tasks and hardware and resolve
misconfiguration faults with configuration changes, highlighting the (causal)
performance impact of configuration decisions and providing a Pareto analysis of
involved tradeoffs. (3) It develops and evaluates developer-facing tool support
to foster code-level debugging and documentation. Finally, all contributions are
being evaluated end-to-end with developers on real performance faults, showing
how both users and developers benefit from causal models and related
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.