* 2107130
* Catalyst Project: Transforming the Chemistry and Physics Programs at South Carolina State University
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Donald Walter, South Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. South
Carolina State University seeks to enhance the quality of STEM education for
undergraduate students enrolled in the chemistry and physics programs by
augmenting the delivery of instructional and research materials. Specifically,
the proposal outlines strategies to implement cyberlearning instructional
videos, building on a successful model piloted by departmental faculty. These
efforts will also be coupled with a partnership with the local Orangeburg
Country School District to bolster teacher-student engagement in discipline-
specific research. The project aims to enhance the recruitment, retention, and
persistence of underrepresented students, who may ultimately enter the STEM
workforce or pursue graduate STEM degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project include (1): transformation of the chemistry and physics curriculum
delivery methods and content; and (2): setting the stage for enrollment growth
in the two majors. Goal 1 will transform the method of delivery in many
chemistry and physics courses while also creating a significant library of
online material for use at South Carolina State University, as well as for
distribution to a wider academic community. Goal 2 will use a multifaceted
approach to address awareness, recruitment, retention, and persistence.
Activities include expanded use of social media, freshmen immersion in small
research projects, and engagement of high school teacher-student pairs in
conducting on-campus research. Overall, the project aims to develop a
recruitment and retention framework in chemistry and physics, that has the
potential to result in enrollment growth in each program, increases student
long-term persistence in STEM, and serve as a model for other institutional
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.