* 2107089
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Fast Tools for Complex Event Detection over Bipartite Graph Streams
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ahmet Erdem Sariyuce, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The goal of the project is to devise efficient and scalable methods and software
infrastructure for detecting complex events in bipartite graph streams.
Bipartite graphs are widely used in various domains to model real-world
relationships such as credit card transactions, web search and data mining,
computational advertising, bioinformatics, and folksonomy. There are significant
computational challenges in handling bipartite graph streams including
combinatorial explosion. Motifs and complex event detection and counting in
bipartite graph streams have many use cases including recommendation systems in
online shopping services and personalized music/movie streaming platforms, as
well as malicious activity detection in credit card transactions, product rating
data (i.e., spam reviews), client/server network interactions, and social
security and healthcare systems (e.g., suspicious bankrupt declarations and tax
fraud). The project will develop efficient tools and software infrastructure to
facilitate research and development in these areas. Through the infrastructure,
researchers and practitioners in various disciplines including computer
scientists, business researchers and economists, social scientists, and network
security engineers will be able to access and share datasets, and to use as well
as contribute to the tool repository and
documentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex events in a bipartite graph stream
typically cannot be detected by only looking at a single node/edge arrival in
isolation. Instead, detection requires monitoring the stream over a period of
time. The project has three main tasks: (1) considering motifs as basic complex
events or components in a larger complex event, the project will develop dynamic
and streaming algorithms for combinatorial and temporal motif detection and
counting in bipartite graph streams; (2) developing methods for detecting
complex events with a partial time order, as well as dense-subgraph events; (3)
devising graph embedding methods for complex events that specify high-order
similarity between entities in a bipartite graph stream and for predictive
complex events that can find and include the missing edges. The project will
contribute to the body of knowledge about graph algorithms and machine learning
through streaming and incremental algorithms for structural analysis, motif
analysis, and neural embedding of bipartite graphs. The project will draw a
parallel between the methods currently applied for batch analysis of static
bipartite graphs and incremental and temporal analysis of streaming bipartite
graphs. This work will provide foundational methods for the area of complex
event detection. The tools and software infrastructure will facilitate
researchers and practitioners in computer science, social sciences, finance and
business, and network security to conveniently access and share datasets, state-
of-the-art methods and tools, documentation, and evaluation
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.