* 2107318
* IRES Track 1: US-Japan Collaborative Research and Education Effort for Synthesis and Applications of Functional Nanomaterials
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Nezih Pala, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,972.00

International research collaboration and globally engaged workforce development
are essential to tackle the complex challenges of nanoscience and
nanotechnology. The goal of this project is to provide US student participants
with a global perspective and opportunities for professional growth through
international collaborative research training, networking and mentoring in the
field of functional nanomaterials. This project will provide high quality
educational and research experiences for 6 graduate and undergraduate students
annually at Florida International University (FIU) through active research
participation in collaboration with Kochi University of Technology (KUT) in
Japan. Each student will spend 10 weeks in summer to work in a KUT research
group. The project will impact total of 18 U.S. student participants, especially
underrepresented minority students, with a global perspective and research
opportunities for professional growth through international cooperative research
training in nanoscience and nanotechnology. It will contribute to development of
a diverse and globally engaged workforce with high quality research skills. The
project will also help broaden the participation and impact the recruitment and
retention of students from underrepresented groups through a series of well-
designed and structured recruitment, selection, pre-departure, post-travel,
research training and professional development activities. The participating
studentsâ€™ feedback and evaluation will provide guidelines for effective
involvement of the faculty and students in international research collaboration
and workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional nanomaterials have
been attracting much interest because of their unprecedented chemical and
physical properties as well as potential applications. In the last twenty years,
there is rapid development on synthesis of functional nanomaterials and control
of their specific properties which enable unique applications of nanomaterials
in nanoelectronics, energy, environmental, and biomedical applications. In
parallel to the materials synthesis and devices development, various
characterization tools such as high-resolution transmission electron microscopy,
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning probe microscopy, surface-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy, confocal microscope have allowed us to explore the
fundamental studies on the origin of the physiochemical properties of the
functional nanomaterials. However, there are several key challenges need to be
addressed before the nanomaterials can reach the full potential in the practical
applications. This project will address some of the critical need in
nanomaterials research field in an interdisciplinary and international
collaboration effort. The structure-performance relationship between the
nanomaterials and device applications will be studied and established. The
project will enable better control of crystallinity and surface functionality of
functional nanomaterials, better understanding the origin of the physiochemical
properties, and could further enable advanced electronic, photonic,
electrochemical, and sensing devices. The knowledge that will result from this
project is critically needed for breakthroughs required for the synthesis,
characterization, and application of nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.