* 2107631
* Catalyst Project: Investigating Adaptive Hybrid Learning in College Algebra to Improve STEM Engagement and Persistence for HBCU Students
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Lisa Gary, Stillman College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences.
Stillman College outlines an interdisciplinary approach to investigate the
combination of Self-Regulated Learning theory, Adaptive Learning Technology, and
Culturally Relevant Pedagogy to promote student success in college algebra.
Specifically, the major activities include the design of a theory-driven hybrid
adaptive college algebra course. The anticipated outcomes are to advance
persistence and success in STEM for underrepresented students as
HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is at the forefront of using
interdisciplinary research by combining 1) self-regulated learning theory from
educational psychology, 2) adaptive learning technology that leverages machine
learning and data analytics to produce personalized learning paths and 3)
culturally relevant pedagogy coupled with active learning to promote mathematics
mastery in college algebra. The research aims of this project are to develop and
examine the effectiveness of a novel, theory-driven, hybrid adaptive learning
model for college algebra in 3 main areas: 1) academic performance, 2)
motivation, self-efficacy, and success expectations, and 3) success in STEM for
HBCU students. The fourth aim is to explore the instructor experience with
piloting a theory-driven hybrid adaptive learning model in a college algebra
course at an HBCU. A sequential explanatory mixed methods study design will be
conducted, where the quantitative phase will include a single group, pretest-
posttest design to assess effectiveness of this novel teaching model on student
learning and student motivation broadly. In the follow-up qualitative phase,
semi-structured interviews will be conducted with students who are enrolled in
this novel college algebra course, as well as the course instructors. Data will
be analyzed to assess student learning outcomes and to gain insight on potential
barriers to a full-scale implementation at other HBCUs. This study seeks to make
a significant contribution in understanding how to innovate with teaching
methods at an HBCU and support student learning outcomes in STEM, as well as
contribute to the knowledge base by providing more data to improve the machine
learning algorithms for adaptive learning platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.