* 2107882
* High-Throughput Purification and Quantification of Bionanoparticles on Capillary-Channeled Fiber Stationary Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* R. Kenneth Marcus, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor R. Kenneth Marcus and his group at Clemson University
are working to prepare, characterize, and implement a unique format of fiber
capillary-channeled polymers (C-CP) to facilitate the isolation, purification
and quantification of biological and synthetic nanoparticles. Target systems
include exosomes, a class of extracellular vesicles (EVs) that are integral
components in intracellular communication, and thus are involved in normal
homeostatic function, but also in the the evolution of abnormal biological
function; thus there are long term implications of the studies being performed
herein for biomedical science. The applications under study employ a hydrophobic
interaction chromatography (HIC) protocol on polyester C-CP fiber columns, a
system designed to probe aspects of fundamental biochemistry. The overall goal
of the studies is to produce efficient, selective, and economical separations.
This work is interdisciplinary, involving collaborative efforts among research
groups in chemistry, bioengineering, mathematical, and materials sciences. If
successful, the project may result in new commercial ventures in the textile and
biopharmaceutical industries in South Carolina. Efforts related to developing a
diverse workforce include integration of research topics into relevant
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vast majority of separation/purification
strategies for biological and synthetic nanoparticles involve physical means
such as ultracentrifugation, ultrafiltration, and size-exclusion methods. Use of
C-CP fibers to affect these separations rests on the ability to differentiate
nanoparticles based upon chemical functionality, whose interaction strengths are
determined in part based on particle size. The C-CP fiber platform can be
implemented across a number of formats including spin-down micropipette tips and
microbore columns. As a result, relevant problems in fundamental biochemistry,
clinical analysis, and process analytical chemistry can be addressed. In-line
particle sizing via multi-angle light scattering (MALS) provides both
qualitative and quantitative information about eluted nanoparticles/vesicles.
Surface modifications employing immobilized ligands can target selective capture
of nanoparticles, complemented by selective immunolabelling strategies for
species-specific assays. Multidimensional separations offer another innovative
aspect for efficient characterization of nanoparticles from complex systems. In
all cases, performance metrics will be compared to those available from
commercial columns and standard methods. Development of practical methods will
be augmented with fundamental studies directed at understanding physico-chemical
processes at the microscopic level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.