* 2107290
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Fairness in Web Database Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Abolfazl Asudeh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2024
* USD 292,001.00

The Web has affected every corner of human life and society by providing the
cyber-infrastructure to remove physical barriers between people. Myriad web
database applications, including online recommendation systems, online shopping
sites, location-based websites, resource-sharing platforms, social media, and
service websites, have made people's lives unimaginably more connected,
convenient, and cost-effective. The internal models, algorithms, ranking
strategies, user profiling, and data resources shape the behavior of these web
database applications. Unfortunately, these can include unfair practices that
propagate, or even amplify, historical biases through their services, products,
and recommendations. &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to detect such unfairness and
to correct it where possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central question in
detecting and correcting unfairness is how much knowledge can be assumed about
these web systems' underlying data and algorithms. It is unrealistic to assume
full knowledge, and it is hard even to detect unfairness without such
assumptions. This project relies on making limited assumptions, such as the
existence of a back-end database. Based on these, the project will detect
unwarranted bias, develop responsible design tools one can use to avoid
inadvertent unfairness, and implement third-party tools to tailor responses to
reduce disparities between different demographic
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.