* 2107934
* Theoretical Guarantees of Machine Learning Methods for High Dimensional Partial Differential Equations: Numerical Analysis and Uncertainty Quantification
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yulong Lu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2024
* USD 205,000.00

Machine learning algorithms have achieved tremendous empirical successes in
providing practical answers to various applications in our everyday life, such
as face recognition and autonomous driving. This project will develop
theoretical foundations of machine learning methods for applied problems in
science and engineering. The research will play a principal role in determining
predictive power and quantifying the robustness and stability of the machine
learning methodology in applications. The investigator will mentor graduate and
undergraduate students to work on both theoretical and applied aspects of the
project. The investigator will provide outreach to high school students with an
introductory course on Data Science and develop new mathematical machine
learning courses at both graduate and advanced undergraduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a systematic mathematical
framework for analyzing neural network-based methods for solving partial
differential equations (PDEs), emphasizing their high-dimensional performance
and uncertainty quantification. The investigator will work on two projects. The
first is to derive new dimension-explicit convergence estimates on the
generalization error and training dynamics of neural network solutions. This
relies on establishing a new regularity theory for PDEs in new complexity-based
function spaces tied to neural networks. The second objective is to quantify the
uncertainty in the neural network prediction in a Bayesian framework. The
research will focus on studying the frequentist performance and the scalable
posterior computation of the Bayesian neural networks for solving high
dimensional PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.