* 2107237
* Mechanistic Discovery for Materials Synthesis Across Scales using Atomically Precise Cluster Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Brandi Cossairt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 465,556.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Brandi M. Cossairt of the University
of Washington is developing new nanoscale materials using cluster precursors.
The structure and surface chemistry of new and known clusters are first deduced.
Next, the mechanisms of cluster transformation are controlled by modulating
chemical environments, moving between clusters serving as sources of solute, as
seeds, and as discrete building blocks. Finally, site differentiation is used to
direct cluster and nanocrystal assembly to access new mesoscale structures
including wires, sheets, and crystals. This fundamental chemistry research opens
a new frontier in materials discovery and provides graduate and undergraduate
student training opportunities in materials chemistry. This training is
strengthened by coordination of the “Nanocrystals Northwest” biennial workshop,
which brings together nanocrystal researchers in the Pacific Northwest from R1
and PUI institutions as well as industry. In addition, graduate student
experiences in scholarship, mentorship, and broadening participation are
documented through a University of Washington graduate student oral histories
project. This project also sustains progress on the Chemistry Women Mentorship
Network, which has a demonstrated track record in supporting the academic
pipeline for women in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the
synthesis and assembly of novel nanoscale materials using atomically precise
semiconductor clusters as precursors. The inorganic core and surface chemical
structure of atomically precise clusters are used to encode structure across
length scales. In addition, new strategies to tune the mechanisms of cluster
conversion and nanocrystal assembly are being developed. This includes
elucidation of structure, symmetry, and surface chemistry of new and known
semiconductor clusters using a combination of single crystal X-ray diffraction,
pair distribution function analysis, and transmission electron microscopy.
Examination and control of cluster transformation mechanisms enable the
subsequent selection of clusters as solute, seeds, and discrete building blocks.
This is accomplished by controlling surface stoichiometry and ligand density
under prescribed reaction conditions. Finally, development of new mechanisms of
site differentiation are being pursued for the formation of desired mesoscale
structures including wires, sheets, and 3D crystals from isotropic cluster and
nanocrystal building blocks. This is accomplished by adjusting nanocrystal
valency using steric control. Success is expected to lead to change how
nanomaterial synthesis is approached and to open a vast and untapped parameter
space for materials discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.