* 2107572
* IRES Track I: Novel international student experiences in smart manufacturing and AI for industry 4.0
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Satish Bukkapatnam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,255.00

This project aims to establish an International Research Experience for Students
Site focused on Smart Manufacturing and AI for Industry 4.0 at Aix en Provence,
France. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Standards observes that Smart Manufacturing and
Artificial Intelligence (AI) are among the chief knowledge gaps of the entering
industrial workforce, and this skill gap can lead to $2.5 trillion economic
output loss in the next decade. This gap may also impede key scientific
discoveries and technological innovations necessary for realizing high-
performance and sustainable industrial practice. This project contributes to
addressing this critical gap to the nation’s economic sustainability by
imparting diverse groups of US engineering students world-class research skills
in smart manufacturing and AI through international cohort experiences. It would
provide the entering knowledge workforce with hands-on skills in the state-of-
the-art industry-scale machines and platforms. It would also instill the
abilities to transcend cultural barriers and harness transatlantic resources to
effectively deal with the emerging quality, sustainability, security, and
productivity challenges of the industry. The project will also broaden
professional networks, deepen relationships of a diverse student cohort with the
industry, and introduce students to international practices in innovation and
technology development. Taken together, the proposed research experiences will
contribute to the development of a diverse, globally-engaged US workforce with
world-class skills in the area of immense value to the nation’s
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be hosted at Arts et Métiers, the
Grande Ecole of Technology at Aix en Provence, France. The project offers a
seven weeks long research experience and internship program for a diverse cohort
of students for three years, focusing on Smart Manufacturing and Artificial
Intelligence (AI) for the emerging industrial era. The PI and the international
host currently co-lead a transatlantic partnership between Texas A&amp;M
Engineering and Arts et Métiers, and have initiated research collaborations and
a consortium with the industry in Europe focused on smart manufacturing and AI.
As part of this partnership, a total of 75 study abroad students and one summer
intern spent 8 weeks at Arts et Métiers as well as Henri Fabre Technocenter, a
unique public-private partnership consortium established in the South France
region. Leveraging these efforts, four broad project themes have been identified
to provide world-class research internship experiences to students. Every
project will require the student group to engage the industry partner (e.g.,
Airbus, Essilor, Sateco, Total) to advance the theory and methods of AI/data
science to address a specific challenge in an emerging manufacturing platform
(e.g., 3-D printing, rapid casting, sustainable machining). Besides providing
hands-on experiences with unique industry-scale testbeds at the host location,
the proposed project will feature a variety of innovative enrichment activities
(e.g., Invent for the Planet) and interactions with the European
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.