* 2107439
* IRES Track 1: Sensor Information Processing and Machine Learning for Wearable Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gregory Raupp, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,997.00

This IRES project brings together advances in sensor devices with machine
learning and digital signal processing (DSP) algorithms in an international
research endeavor that promises to elevate precision in mobile and wearable
technologies. Arizona State University (ASU) faculty and students will
collaborate with the Dublin City University (DCU) Insight Center for Data
Analytics, which has a synergistic relationship with ASU in several areas
including sensors, analytics, machine learning (ML), wearables and Internet of
Things (IoT). ASU brings expertise in flexible sensors, chemical and biosensors,
statistical signal processing, bio-informatics, and machine learning. DCU brings
expertise in data analytics, human activity monitoring, environmental
monitoring, artificial intelligence, sensor analytics and big data analysis.
IRES participating students will spend an immersive six-week summer program at
the DCU Insight Center to actively improve their ML and sensor research skills;
participants will produce and evaluate sensor analytics, and create algorithms
and software for IoT, wearables and mobile health monitoring. Programs and
workshops will be established to train IRES participants to skillfully and
effectively present their research in international settings. Weekly
presentations at the international site and guidance by international mentors
will enrich the cohort’s professional experience. Embedding students in the DCU
Insight center funded by European Union (EU) and Irish Science Foundation (ISF)
grants will provide knowledge on EU and international research practices,
ethics, standards and policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project
are to: a) advance the science of integrated design of sensors and machine
learning algorithms, b) train and enable a diverse cohort of students to make
research contributions in integrated sensing and ML for IoT systems, c) gain
knowledge on international policies/standards of deploying AI, big data systems,
and sensors, and d) provide experiences that broaden understanding of global
practices and career options. This project is motivated by the fact that
inexpensive sensors are required for IoT, mobile health and wearable systems; to
achieve the requisite precision, sensor design must be accompanied by corrective
ML and SP algorithms. IRES research therefore focuses on the overlap of new
sensor device design and novel ML algorithm development. In terms of ML, one of
the key objectives is to develop compact, low power algorithms adequate for
integration with sensors and mobile devices. IRES project areas include flexible
sensors, sensor information management, efficient deep learning, and big data
analysis. Example research project applications include biomarker detection, big
data processing, gait detection, and deep neural nets for sensor and IoT
systems. Work will be disseminated via collaborative publications and
presentations in international conferences and refereed journals. Industry
engagement at the ASU SenSIP and DCU Insight centers will provide ongoing
valuable feedback, and annual external evaluation will assess progress and
outcomes across all IRES activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.