* 2107363
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Information Freshness in Scalable and Energy Constrained Machine to Machine Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Chih-Chun Wang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 187,500.00

With the ever increasing importance of connected devices in smart home, digital
healthcare, precision agriculture, smart city, environment and natural disaster
monitoring, etc., it is of paramount interest to design the next generation
wireless network architecture that can simultaneously support better services
while accommodating sharply exponential growth rates of deployment far exceeding
the addition of newly available bandwidth. This project will design and analyze
new near-optimal machine-to-machine (M2M) network protocols based on the key
concept that the quality of service of the machine-based traffic is largely
determined by how timely or how fresh the information can be delivered to the
destination, instead of the sheer quantity of the delivered messages. With this
new shift of design paradigm to information freshness optimization, this project
develops novel tools and techniques to quantify and improve the information
freshness while meeting the practical requirements of wireless M2M networks,
especially on the scalability, energy efficiency, and low-complexity autonomous
distributed solutions. The results would significantly advance the state-of-the-
art knowledge on M2M wireless network architectures, and propel robust and
continuous development of M2M applications by minimizing the battery
consumption, increasing the network capacity, and improving the temporal
“connectedness” among the smart devices, a critical step forward when realizing
the societal impact of Internet-of-Things. To further broaden the participation
in network science and computing, the project will implement multiple inclusive
mechanisms that increase leadership and participation from women and under-
represented groups in a national high-profile annual research workshop (IMACCS)
that is being held at the Ohio State University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Several
important technical challenges of M2M information freshness optimization will be
addressed in this project, including (i) Optimal network coordination when any
back and forth message always experiences some random delay, which results in
delayed command-&amp;-response in every aspect of the network operations. (ii)
Lack of distributional knowledge. Since the delay distributions in practical
networks are difficult to estimate and constantly change over time, any
practically viable solution must automatically adapt to the underlying unknown
delay distributions. (iii) Energy efficiency. Many smart devices are battery
limited, which prompts the need for energy-centric, low-complexity distributed
network protocol designs. This project will address the above key challenges and
develop the analytical foundations for controlling and optimizing information
freshness in wireless M2M networks, resulting in fully distributed provably
efficient algorithms and protocols that will be extensively evaluated on a
large-scale fully programmable 5G wireless network testbed at Rice
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.