* 2107534
* IRES Track 1: Electrochemical Technologies for Carbon-Free Economy
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Jacob Brouwer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) will enable a diverse
group of the US students to pursue research opportunities that relate to
decarbonization of energy sector and enable carbon-free economy. Solar, wind and
other renewable energy technologies enabled transformation and decarbonization
of the power generation sector around the world. However, these power sources
are intermittent and reliable management of renewable resources on the power
grid will require a combination of flexible demand and energy storage.
Electrochemical technologies offer solutions to decarbonize electricity grid and
to transform transportation and manufacturing industries. Bringing in
international entities that are leaders in these areas can help establish global
competency in renewable energy research and provide undergraduate and graduate
students international experiences, especially in a cohort environment. Specific
focus is set on workforce development with relation to clean-energy jobs, as
this profession is expected to grow substantially, as US commits to decarbonize
its electric grid and transportation sectors. The program achievements will
solely focus on students learning, as a key objective is to retain and train US
workforce and to bring more underrepresented minorities in STEM to the US
workforce. Student cohort immersion into interdisciplinary research activities,
with hand-on laboratory experience and project-based learning will ensure
development of wide range of knowledge, proficiencies and
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the program is to develop US
diverse workforce in renewable technologies and increase students' awareness of
the low temperature technologies with zero carbon emissions and to involve
students in specific research activities focused on fundamentals. Over a three-
year period, eighteen students from the US will spend ten weeks (each year) at
the Technical University of Berlin (TU Berlin) and Fritz-Haber Institute (FHI)
of Max-Planck Society conducting mentored research in a multidisciplinary
environment. Student research projects will fall into three general areas: i)
hydrogen technologies, ii) carbon dioxide reduction technologies, iii) low
temperature ammonia production. These projects will leverage resources and
state-of-the-art equipment and facilities at TU Berlin and FHI. Conducting these
research activities in Germany will provide a broad, global context for the
clean energy technologies, as Germany has set ambitious goals for renewable
energy penetration and TUB and FHI are world leaders in electrochemical
technologies. The program intends to develop globally engaged students, who
think about chemical transformations, engineering, and economics within the
context of zero-emission technologies and environmental
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.