* 2107619
* Rational Design and Fundamental Understanding of Multimodal Amyloid Probes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jie Zheng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2024
* USD 361,996.00

The hallmark of many debilitating diseases, such as Alzeimer’s disease (AD) and
type II diabetes (T2D), is the presence of abnormal masses/aggregates of
proteins termed “amyloids”. These amyloids, in which composition is disease
dependent, are generally considered to be ideal markers for disease diagnosis
and therapeutic intervention. Unfortunately, existing probes are limited in that
they are only able to detect the presence of a single targeted amyloid protein.
This project will develop a new class of generic, multiple-mode, multi-target
amyloid probes that will detect a wide variety of proteins associated with
different amyloid diseases. Design principles for the multimodal probes can be
transformed to numerous molecular-recognition applications for targeted drug
therapy, biomarker detection, and disease diagnostics (e.g., cancers and
COVID-19). The proposed multi-disciplinary research activities will provide
diverse training for students at all levels, especially from underrepresented
and low-income families. The students will develop knowledge and skills in data
mining, molecular simulations, neuroscience, and lab-on-chip techniques in close
relation to public health problems. Finally, the integrated educational and
research activities will enrich the curriculum of the Corrosion Engineering
program at the University of Akron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives
of this project are to (1) fully explore, identify, and engineer – with both
data-driven simulations and experiments – a new family of AIE@βPs (an
aggregation-induced emission (AIE) molecule conjugated with small β-sheet-
forming peptides (βPs)) probes capable of early and enhanced detection of
multiple pathological aggregates and co-aggregates formed by the same and
different amyloid proteins, which co-exist in human body fluids across different
amyloid diseases and (2) conduct fundamental sequence-structure-recognition
studies on these multi-mode, multiple-target AIE@βPs probes. The AIE molecule
targets the aggregated amyloids and avoids the aggregation-induced quenching,
while βPs target the β-structures of amyloid aggregates via specific β-sheet
interactions. The project’s objectives will be achieved via three tasks: (1)
develop a machine-learning model, combined with molecular simulations and
biophysical experiments, to screen, identify, and validate a library of βPs
capable of self-assembling into β-sheet structures and cross-interacting with
both Aβ (associated with AD) and hIAPP (associated with T2D); (2) design and
synthesize a series of AIE@βPs probes to detect Aβ, hIAPP, and hybrid Aβ-hIAPP
species at different aggregation states for demonstrating “conformational-
specific, sequence-independent” mechanisms via synergetic AIE- and βPs-induced
binding modes; and (3) transform AIE@βPs probes into different amyloid sensors
via surface immobilization by controlling their packing structures, densities,
and patterns of AIE@βPs. In parallel, multiscale molecular simulations will be
conducted to study the structures, dynamics, and interactions of βPs and AIE@βPs
with amyloid aggregates in solution and on surfaces, which will be correlated
with amyloid recognition mechanisms of AIE@βPs by experiments. If successful,
this work will provide new design principles and sensor systems for early
amyloid detection beyond few available today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.