* 2107048
* RI: Medium: Improving grounding, generalization and contextual reasoning in vision and language models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Olga Russakovsky, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,199,998.00

Recent Artificial Intelligence (AI) advances have brought us closer to the
possibility of important and exciting real-world applications: ranging from
robot assistants for the elderly or differently-abled, to large-scale video
analysis of footage from police body-worn cameras to examine police-civilian
interactions. Such applications require AI models to understand both visual and
natural language cues. However, the state of vision-and-language technology is
still not quite ready for these scenarios. Current visual recognition models
appear to recognize many different objects but lack an understanding of the
interconnection and structure of the visual world. Current image captioning
systems output reasonable but completely generic image descriptions. Modern
visual question answering systems are not robust to simple changes like synonyms
or word rearrangements. This research will lead to fundamental advances in
visual recognition and natural language understanding, laying the groundwork for
more effective human-machine collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research is to move towards a tighter, more accurate and contextual
integration of visual recognition and natural language processing. This involves
addressing three key challenges: (1) enabling accurate and scalable grounding by
establishing robust bi-directional connections between visual input and natural
language tokens; (2) improving generalization of vision-and-language models to
novel concepts and tasks; and (3) enabling contextual reasoning to allow models
to effectively adapt to human or task-specific needs. The unifying theme is that
all three challenges require innovation in not only modeling but also in
reliable and insightful benchmarking: current evaluation frameworks are
insufficient to drive progress in this space. The roadmap is to redesign
existing benchmarks and evaluation paradigms, use the newly formulated metrics
to identify the shortcomings in existing systems, and rely on these insights to
drive the deep learning modeling innovations. This research uses the team’s
expertise in designing multi-modal models for vision and language as well as in
constructing effective large-scale benchmarks. The findings will be disseminated
through technical workshops, open access publications, and open-source code.
They will also be integrated into undergraduate, graduate and K-12 curriculum
through collaboration with foundations like AI4ALL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.