* 2107394
* Targeted Infusion Project: Increasing Mathematics Achievement Gains by Engaging Students of STEM at Tennessee State University
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Wanda Payne, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2024
* USD 363,788.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Accordingly, Tennessee
State University will establish its “Increasing Mathematics Achievement Gains by
Engaging Students (IMAGES)” Project that will support the enhancement of
introductory mathematics courses to the benefit of undergraduate students who
will pursue degrees in science, engineering, technology, and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMAGES Project is designed to provide a pathway
for on-time graduation, to increase student learning and engagement, and to
promote academic and professional development for STEM students. This project
will target first year students who are majoring in mathematical sciences,
architectural engineering, civil engineering, electrical engineering, or
mechanical engineering and who do not meet the ACT requirement for enrolling in
Calculus I during their first semester at Tennessee State University. The
project comprises of three major components: the redesign of a one-semester Pre-
calculus course, the implementation of adaptive and active learning strategies,
and the provision of student support services. The first-year mathematics
experience will include Pre-calculus I with adaptive learning strategies during
the fall semester, Calculus I with active learning strategies during the spring
semester, and Calculus II during the summer term with active learning strategies
in an online format. The student support services will include peer tutoring,
peer mentoring, a STEM student seminar series, and opportunities for
experiential learning. The IMAGES Project will enhance the academic
infrastructure of existing STEM disciplines at Tennessee State University and
contribute to strengthening diversity in STEM career
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.