* 2107793
* Spatially Encoded Hard-Soft Colloidal Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Catherine Murphy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Catherine Murphy of the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is developing methods to coat
spherical and rod-shaped inorganic nanomaterials with spatial and chemical
control. Selective chemistry on nanorod sides or tips generates patchy
nanomaterials that are analogous to antibodies, which are nanoscale objects that
can recognize large molecules such as specific proteins. A small library of
proteins that should bind to specific patches is being screened for selectivity
with the coated nanomaterials. Aggregation of the protein, alpha-synuclein, a
brain-abundant protein that changes shape when binding to nanoscale lipid
vesicles, is associated with the neurodegenerative condition known as
Parkinson’s Disease. The ability of alpha-synuclein to aggregate after binding
to either soft or hard lipid vesicle mimics is being assessed for future
applications in either detection or therapeutic intervention for
neurodegenerative disease. Graduate and undergraduate students working on this
project will learn to synthesize, characterize, and measure the biochemical
properties of nanomaterials. An on-ramp to science program is being established
that targets undergraduates who are interested in science but are new to the
field. This program aims to broaden the participation of students from groups
that have been historically underrepresented in science. Professional
development activities to improve the functioning of the scientific enterprise
in terms of research ethics and program climate are being developed and will be
discussed with both students and faculty to allow them to
thrive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves expanding the seed-mediated
growth of anisotropic nanostructures such as gold nanorods to nanoscale
conformal and patchy coatings. Both hard calcium phosphate mineral and soft
hydrogel and water-soluble coatings will be examined for their ability to
maintain patchy behavior on molecularly functionalized gold nanorods. Some of
these patches exhibit affinity to specific proteins, so protein imaging
experiments will be used to understand how patchy nanomaterials lead to patchy
protein adsorption. Alpha-Synuclein binding to and molecular display at these
soft and hard nanomaterials will be measured via dynamic light scattering,
plasmonics, and mass spectrometry. Subsequent fibrillization experiments will be
evaluated using standard optical assays, dynamic light scattering, and electron
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.