* 2107173
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Transparent Fair Division of Indivisble Items
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Hadi Hosseini, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 568,417.00

Fair division deals with the distribution of resources and tasks among different
parties, e.g., individuals, firms, nations, or autonomous agents, with the goal
of achieving fairness and economic efficiency. Fairness has increasingly become
crucial in distributing precious and scarce medical equipment, and its absence
has exacerbated healthcare issues during the COVID-19 global pandemic. A wide
variety of real-world applications such as scheduling, dispute resolution,
healthcare management, and refugee settlement assume complete knowledge about
allocation decisions, which gives rise to negative computational and
impossibility results. The existing approaches to mitigate these challenges, in
turn, impose a high cost on transparency. The broad goal of this project is to
provide theoretical and algorithmic solutions for fair allocation of indivisible
items in practical, large-scale settings, as a broad contribution to the grand
scheme of artificial intelligence (AI) and economics for social good. This
research will offer a novel and promising perspective for developing practical
and transparent fair solutions while providing a systematic investigation on the
perceived fairness of allocation mechanisms that are applicable to societies at
large. This project will integrate and develop algorithmic solutions for
transparent fair division in a publicly available software system with the goal
of extending its reach--and in general promoting fairness and transparency--to a
broad national and international audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a new framework for achieving fairness and efficiency in the
allocation of indivisible resources with minimum cost on transparency.
Specifically, it will make progress in four interconnected dimensions: 1)
Tradeoffs between transparency, fairness, and efficiency, that aim at analyzing
the compatibility of the properties and devising algorithmic solutions when
allocating indivisible items, 2) Strategic aspects of fair division, that
investigates agents' behavior and strategies under transparency requirements, 3)
Domain restriction, that focuses on developing tractable solutions by
circumventing the impossibility results in achieving compatible solutions, and
4) Bads and mixtures, that extend the transparency and fairness framework to
include desirable (goods) and undesirable items (bads). Furthermore, this
research plans to close the current gap between theoretical foundations of
fairness and the perception of fairness through a series of comprehensive
empirical evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.