* 2107125
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: A General Framework for Automated Test Transfer
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Alessandro Orso, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 295,971.00

Because software is increasingly prevalent in day-to-day life, it is extremely
important to ensure its quality. Among the various techniques used to assess and
improve the quality of software, testing is by far the most used. Unfortunately,
writing tests is a tedious and time-consuming task that is often performed
manually and mostly from scratch for every new application developed. In fact,
whereas it is common practice to reuse code in modern software engineering, test
reuse has been mostly neglected. Testing could greatly benefit from the fact
that many software applications share functionality, and test cases for many of
these applications are readily available, although in need of adaptation to be
transferred to different test scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To tap into this
potential, this project is advancing software testing by enabling test transfer:
automated reuse of User Interface (UI) tests across systems that share at least
part of their functionality. While the initial focus of the project is on mobile
and web applications, its ultimate goal is to develop a modular framework that
can be extended to support additional types of software. This project promises
to advance automated testing on multiple fronts. First, by employing various
analysis techniques to identify conceptually similar UI elements across apps,
test transfer is intended to enable the reuse of test inputs that are otherwise
difficult to produce automatically. Second, by migrating tests written for
similar features, test transfer is intended to produce tests that target
meaningful use cases. Third, test transfer is intended to produce tests with
sophisticated oracles, that is, checks of test outcomes, distinguishing it from
most prior automated testing techniques that only focus on crashes. The
techniques, tools, and datasets developed within the project are being made
openly available to the public to benefit the community. The project findings
are also being integrated into the on-campus and online curricula of the
participating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.