* 2107140
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infuse Virtual Reality and Industry 4.0 into Design and Manufacturing Laboratory for Student-centered Learning Experience
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Xiaobo Peng, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,742.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. This project at Prairie View Agricultural
and Mechanical University (PVA&amp;M) intends to address curriculum deficiencies
by addressing the industrial trend of Industry 4.0. It is proposed that modern
product development and manufacturing concepts be infused into an existing
design and manufacturing laboratory. Participating students will work in a
collaborative environment which will assist PVA&amp;M in attaining its goal of
increasing STEM graduation rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
enhance the learning experience and research capabilities at Prairie View
A&amp;M University in engineering design and manufacturing by infusing Industry
4.0 concepts. This project has five main objectives: (1) To equip students with
engineering design skills that incorporate manufacturability. (2) To expose
students to the computer-connected design and manufacturing framework of
Industry 4.0. (3) To Improve students’ hands-on experience and grant unlimited
access using Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) technologies. (4)
To provide an online communication platform for effective peer-to-peer and peer-
to-instructor idea-sharing. (5) To improve students’ learning outcomes for
engineering design and manufacturing courses, and their communication, lifelong
learning, and teamwork skills. To this end, the project intends to create a set
of learning and training modules on Design for Manufacturing (DFM) and various
manufacturing equipment. These proposed modules will be based on evidence-based
learning strategies and integrated into the PVA&amp;M VR Advanced Design and
Manufacturing (VR-ADAM) system. A learning management system-based – PVA&amp;M
Design and Manufacturing forum will be developed to promote a collaborative and
mutual learning experience. This student-centered and -driven cyberlearning
environment is scalable and can be adopted by other disciplines. Thus, an annual
summer VR-ADAM workshop will be organized within the HBCU community to encourage
broader adoption of VR-based teaching and learning. Furthermore, the research
results, modules, and relevant teaching materials will enrich the NSF learning
material repository and benefit the research and educational
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.