* 2107791
* The Role of Plasmon Initiated Electron Transfer in Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Zachary Schultz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Zachary Schultz and his group at Ohio State University
are investigating new ways to detect and quantify trace proteins and other
biomolecules using lasers. The ability to detect specific biomolecules in real-
world samples is important for identifying pathogens, tracking environmental
pollutants, and monitoring disease. Specialized techniques called surface-
enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and tip-enhanced Raman scattering (TERS) use
nanoparticles to increase the strength of the signals observed in some laser-
based measurements. Currently, there are only a limited number of molecules that
are readily detected using these techniques under ambient conditions and in
complex systems. In order to address this limitation, the research team led by
Dr. Schultz is working to better understand the mechanism that is responsible
for the increased signals when proteins are in contact with nanoparticles by
using a laser to illuminate individual proteins or protein fragments through a
microscope. The goal of the research is to enable more sensitive measurements
that will make it possible to detect and identify a much wider range of
biomolecules. The project also addresses the need for a technically skilled and
scientifically informed workforce by incorporating aspects of the research
project into educational materials for the approximately 8,000 students who take
general chemistry courses each year at Ohio State University. The project also
provides valuable research experience for undergraduate and graduate students,
and supports the Schultz laboratory’s collaboration with students and faculty in
Chile, broadening student perspectives on the international nature and impact of
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team led by Dr. Zachary Schultz is
testing their hypothesis that stable radicals formed from interactions with
excited plasmon resonances on nanoparticles can transiently and selectively
increase the Raman cross-sections of biomolecules in SERS and TERS measurements.
The team’s experimental measurements suggest that such interactions occur, and
even alter the observed SERS spectra of the amino acid tryptophan and some
tryptophan-containing proteins. Imaging the SERS emission from a sample and
applying super-resolution algorithms should allow the researchers to locate and
identify individual molecules that are in contact with a nanoparticle. These
measurements are expected to simultaneously resolve the SERS spectrum of the
individual molecule, even in complex samples. The information the team obtains
from these sophisticated measurements should enable them to identify proteins
and other biomolecules that exhibit increased sensitivity, and also enable them
to better understand what makes such enhancements possible. Based on the
improved understanding of the mechanism for SERS and TERS enhancements, the
outcomes of this research can help guide the development of new and improved
chemical sensors that are important for a very wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.