* 2107713
* Unraveling the principles of catalytic diversity in the carotenoid oxygenase superfamily
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Philip Kiser, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 528,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Philip Kiser from the University of California, Irvine is
studying a family of enzymes known as carotenoid cleavage dioxygenases (CCDs).
These enzymes have a highly conserved 4-His iron center and exhibit a remarkably
diverse set of catalytic activities. They are well known to oxidatively split
carotenoids, which are colored compounds found abundantly in nature including in
many foods. Beyond this oxidation reaction, certain CCDs catalyze other
reactions involving carotenoids and their derivatives and also non-carotenoid
molecules. These reactions are involved in several important biological
processes including the production of universal light-sensing molecules,
breakdown of spent plant matter, and generation of signaling molecules critical
for plant and animal physiology. As such, control of CCD function has long been
of interest in a variety of applied research fields including agriculture,
horticulture, medicine, and biofuel production. Despite their importance, many
critical gaps in knowledge remain regarding how CCDs achieve such varied
activities, which consequently has limited our ability to control or modify
their function. This research project seeks to provide a molecular level
understanding of how CCDs achieve their diverse activities. The new knowledge
may open new avenues for controlling the CCD activity using small molecule
modulators or by rational alteration of their molecular structure. The
participation of graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented
minority groups and those with military service in this research will help
achieve a broader educational goal of promoting the entry of such individuals
into STEM-fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this research
project is to elucidate the determinants of the varied activities that are
exhibited by CCDs. The first aim is to uncover the mechanism by which CCDs
trigger dioxygen reactivity using a variety of sophisticated spectroscopic
techniques. The second aim will employ high-resolution X-ray crystallography to
uncover the active site properties that allow certain CCDs to carry out trans-
cis isomerization of carotenoid substrates. The third aim focuses on probing the
breadth and mechanism of CCD substrate specificity by rational mutagenesis and
the CCD activities found in archaea that occupy diverse ecological niches.
Overall, this research will advance the understanding of the catalytic diversity
of CCDs and will provide novel insights into their evolution and biological
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.