* 2107293
* Catalyst Project: Development and Implementation of Intelligent Adaptive Cyberlearning System for Minority Freshmen Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Peter Clarke, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,990.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Alabama A &amp; M
University intends to develop and implement an adaptive cyberlearning system to
support student education and learning in freshmen-level mathematics courses.
This cyberlearning approach seeks to lay the foundation for enhancing student
engagement in mathematics, leading to long-term persistence in STEM and serving
as a model for other institutional contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this project is to develop and utilize an innovative, transformative,
and focused approach to improve students’ learning and performance of Pre-
Calculus Algebra skills at Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University
(AAMU). Central to the approach is an adaptive cyberlearning system referred to
as MATH-CyLE. Students and instructors will utilize MATH-CyLE’s digital learning
content and embedded learning and engagement strategies to support pedagogy and
provide students with an intelligent interactive adaptive system to support
their individualized learning. The impact of the cyberlearning system will be
investigated to determine whether there are improvements to the indirect
learning of students who use MATH-CyLE, as compared to students who receive
traditional instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.