* 2107567
* RUI: Extraction, Purification and Characterization of the Interaction Between Cyclotide and Cyclotide Aggregates with Lipid Bilayers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Ajay Mallia, Georgia Gwinnett College
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 260,968.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Neville Forlemu, Ajay Mallia, Simon
Mwongela, and Sairam Tangirala at the School of Science and Technology, Georgia
Gwinnett College, propose to investigate the chemical, structural, and
aggregation properties of cyclotides. Cyclotides are mini-proteins with a unique
structure and exceptional stability used by plants for protection against pests.
The ability to modify cyclotides can enhance their potential applications in the
design of antibiotics, diagnostic agents, and eco-friendly pesticides. To guide
the efficient design of cyclotides with diverse applications, the investigators
propose ways to extract and purify cyclotides, to understand their chemical and
structural properties, self-assembly, and their interactions with lipids. It is
anticipated that by enhancing interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education, and by gaining skills and expertise in using
synthetic processes, analytical instruments, and computational techniques, the
competitiveness of the students involved will be enhanced for the ecosystem of
technology and life science companies that depend on innovation and research to
thrive in the state of Georgia. It is a goal of the proposed research to
generate a diverse pool of scientific researchers capable of meeting ever-
growing economical and societal needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
elucidate the molecular details of supramolecular structures involving
cyclotides and their interactions with lipid bilayers. The thermodynamic
properties of cyclotide aggregates will be investigated using hybrid molecular-
dynamics and Monte-Carlo simulations. Machine learning-based algorithms to
improve simulation speeds will also be implemented. This research seeks to
enhance understanding of how diverse cyclotides permeate or modulate lipid
bilayer membranes with varying phospholipid composition. In addition, the
membrane binding, morphology, and self-assembly of cyclotides will be explored
using atomic force microscopy, and capillary electrophoretic measurements. The
goals of this research include: (i) utilizing green solvents to efficiently
extract and purify cyclotides; (ii) determining of the morphology, inter- and
intra-molecular interactions that give rise to self-assembly in cyclotide
aggregates; (iii) ascertaining the mode of interactions between cyclotides and
lipid bilayers; (iv) examining applications of cyclotides as soft materials,
delivery agents, and scaffolds for green pesticides; and (v) demonstrating the
application of machine learning-assisted computation to predict the molecular-
level interactions in cyclotide-based assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.