* 2107800
* Probing the Outer Solar System: Searching Below the Noise
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Connolly, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 421,301.00

This research team from the University of Washington will develop an image
processing tool for to detect Trans Neptunian Objects (TNOs) and Main Belt
Asteroids that can be used with Rubin Observatoryâ€™s Legacy Survey of Space and
Time (LSST) data. New generations of astronomical surveys such as LSST will soon
open a new era in Solar System science by mapping the skies in unprecedented
depth and detail. LSST alone will increase the number of known TNOs from the
2729 known today to over 40,000 and the number of Main Belt Asteroids with
measured orbits will also increase by an order of magnitude. Current analysis
techniques make use of only a fraction of the information present within these
data (requiring that asteroids and comets be detected in individual images). By
combining or coadding images from these surveys to increase the signal-to-noise
ratio, the number of small bodies detected by the LSST could increase by over an
order of magnitude. This project will develop codes building on an existing
prototype to process these images. The tool will be made available to the
community upon completion. The broader impacts of this project are to develop
tutorials and educational material for astronomical data science targeted
towards undergraduate students. As part of this curriculum, a series of
educational modules (tutorials, Jupyter notebooks, videos, and astronomical
applications) will be developed, prototyped, and evaluated using the Pre-MAP
program at the University of Washington (a program that targets traditionally
underrepresented groups in STEM by introducing them to research in their first
year).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to develop open-source software to
aid in the detection of moving objects in large data sets from upcoming all-sky
surveys, such as LSST. A prototype of KBMOD (Kernel-Based Moving Object
Detection) can search over 10 billion moving object trajectories in a stack of
10-15 4Kx4K images in under a minute using consumer-grade GPUs. This project
will build upon the success of KBMOD to develop a framework capable of finding
TNOs in the multi-year surveys from the LSST; develop a tool set for the robust
classification of asteroids and comets from their light curves based on advanced
statistical techniques including neural networks; implement optimized search
algorithms and strategies for searching for moving sources in surveys with long
temporal baselines and for faster moving sources (e.g. Main Belt Asteroids); and
extend the probabilistic framework to the question of image classification -
initially focusing on the identification of binarity in barely resolved images
of asteroids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.