* 2107923
* Collaborative Research: Aggregation Mechanisms in Carbon Nanomaterials Based on Pi-conjugated Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hans Lischka, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Hans Lischka of Texas Tech
University at Lubbock and Professor Miklos Kertesz of Georgetown University are
studying the mechanisms of aggregation of individual polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon molecules into assemblies. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are
ubiquitous molecules that occur in practically all carbonaceous materials,
including ones as familiar to the general public as soot. Facilitation as well
as inhibition of aggregation requires understanding of the driving forces for
this process at the molecular level. Such molecular level of understanding is
central to the control of the formation of functional carbon nanomaterials and
crucial for the rational development of organic semiconductors for application
in electronic and optical technologies, such as organic solar cells, electronic
sensors and quantum computing systems. During the course of conducting this
collaborative project, graduate and undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds will be trained, and summer courses on the science of soft matter
that are geared towards high school students will be conducted. The software
protocols developed will be publicly shared with the scientific community and
tutorials on quantum mechanical methods geared to the general public will be
developed. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses an urgently needed
systematic study of the radical and biradical character of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon molecules and its role in their aggregation into nano-sized
structures. Molecular level understanding of cluster formation is crucial for
the rational development of organic nanocarbons for application in electronic
and optical technologies. Computational modeling with highest-level quantum
chemical methods (multireference theory) in combination with lower level, but
computationally more efficient methods (ab initio single reference methods and
density functional theory) will be employed. Descriptors will be used to
construct and calculate promising dimer and trimer stacking combinations to
evaluate the pancake interaction strength and compare them with experimental
observations. These quantum chemical simulations will be extended by global
modeling activities which will reflect in more detail the condensed phase
structure based on the available interaction data of the quantum chemical
calculations. This project includes collaboration with two experimental groups,
providing structural and other characterization data. This project is expected
to lead to a new and systematic approach to data collection based on
computational work in the form of structural and energetic information with
additional descriptors for biradical character. In the longer term, a better
understanding of pancake bonding in the context of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons has the potential to provide important new insights into the
mechanisms of radical and biradical aggregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.