* 2107114
* IRES Track 1: Convergent research to support provision of safe water in eastern coastal Madagascar
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mahmooda Pasha, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 288,759.00

Both within the U.S. and throughout the rest of the world, people often lack
access to a safe, reliable supply of publicly provided drinking water. In the
U.S., this may result from natural disasters or temporary failures in
infrastructure, such as Hurricane María in Puerto Rico in 2017 or the Texas
power crisis in 2021, both which deprived U.S. citizens from access to safe
water for days, weeks, or months. In many other parts of the world, lack of
access to safe water may be a regular part of life. In such contexts, people may
be forced to periodically gather non-potable water, to treat it themselves to
improve its quality and safety, and then to store the treated water within their
homes. However, an important challenge is that it is not clear what practices
should be employed for treating and storing water to minimize health risks. For
instance, in Madagascar, water is commonly acquired from decentralized sources
and then treated at the point of use (e.g., the household) to improve its
safety. In this project, cohorts of U.S. students from the University of South
Florida (USF) will travel to Toamasina, Madagascar, to conduct research in
support of providing safe water via point-of-use treatment and sound storage
practices. The project is motivated by three sets of overlapping and
complementary driving objectives: (1) to advance disciplinary knowledge in the
convergent fields of environmental engineering and social/behavioral sciences
(social psychology/social marketing); (2) to develop global skills and
competencies in a cohort of U.S. students in support of a globally competitive
U.S. workforce; and (3) to contribute to the provision of safe water in a water-
stressed area in eastern coastal Madagascar. Although the immediate results of
this project’s research will most directly benefit the populace of Toamasina,
those results are likely to apply to a broad array of settings (both domestic
and worldwide) where point-of-use disinfection of water is deployed and where
water is stored with or without point-of-use
disinfection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During each year of this 3-year project, 5
U.S. students (four undergraduates or early graduate students, plus one PhD
student or candidate) will travel to Madagascar for a period of 7 weeks during
the summer. In Madagascar, students will be mentored by the President and Vice
President of Ranontsika, a non-governmental organization (NGO) that that aims to
improve public health by promoting access to high-quality drinking water through
a social business service franchise model. USF and Ranonstika have a successful
existing partnership, and we have previously collaborated on several important
initiatives related to the presence of lead (Pb) in household water in
Toamasina. The intellectual merit of this project derives from the completion of
convergent research in the complementary disciplines of environmental
engineering and social psychology (social marketing). Environmental engineering
students will (a) develop methods/procedures for estimating proper chlorine dose
for point-of-use disinfection of potable water in an environment with widely
varying raw water quality, and (b) develop methods/procedures for controlling
bacterial re-contamination in household water storage containers (with
particular emphasis on households not practicing point-of-use disinfection).
Simultaneously, social/behavioral sciences students will use social marketing to
understand the local community’s knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors
related to point-of-use disinfection and household storage, including the
importance the community places on specific products and techniques, where they
seek information, and when/how/why they employ particular practices. Results
from these two complementary lines of research will be combined to develop a
strategy that encourages or modifies behaviors to maximize water safety. Broader
impacts of this project will include the development of global competencies and
skills within the cohort of students who conduct research in an international
setting. In this project, by partnering with an NGO that is based on a unique
business model, students will observe alternative models for successful
enterprises in low-income countries. The work proposed here will strengthen an
existing partnership between USF and Ranontsika, and will expand our
collaborative research portfolio by investigating disinfection and
microbiological quality of water as well as Pb contamination of household
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.