* 2107768
* RUI: Understanding Close White Dwarf Binaries Using Planetary Nebula Central Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Todd Hillwig, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 217,400.00

Between one third to one half of all stars are found in binary systems, and many
in their late evolutionary stages will become close white dwarf (WD) binary
stars, a short-lived stage consisting of either two closely spaced WDs or a WD-
main sequence pair. These objects play an important role in many astrophysical
contexts, including the “common envelope” (CE) phase in binary star evolution,
non-spherical planetary nebulae (PNe) formation, cataclysmic variables (e.g.,
novae), as well as alternate pathways to type Ia supernovae (SNe), the latter
serving as a key cosmological distance indicator. Insights into the formation
and evolution of these systems depends on expanding the list of known examples,
particularly those making up the central stars in planetary nebulae (CSPNe),
which is the primary goal of a research program at Valparaiso University. This
work will also support direct participation by undergraduate research students
and further develop astronomy labs utilizing the Southeastern Association for
Research in Astronomy (SARA) Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photometric and
spectroscopic observing campaigns will be undertaken with the specific goal of
doubling (from 90 to &gt;160) the existing set of known close binary CSPNe. More
detailed follow-up observations of the newly discovered binary CSPNe (as well as
known examples) will be used with binary modeling to provide detailed system
parameters such as each star’s mass, radius, and temperature. The newly
increased set of known parameters will then be used to better understand the
formation of double white dwarf (DWD) binaries and white dwarf binaries with a
main sequence (MS) companion. The research team is working on Monte Carlo
analysis and binary evolution calculations for DWD systems. That work will be
expanded and updated as the observed sample size increases. The researchers will
also use the results to test existing Monte Carlo, population evolution, and CE
computations and the results will be available for other researchers to use as
future constraints to their modeling. The results will also provide independent
measures of DWD merger rates, SN Ia rates, and the SN Ia delay time distribution
(DTD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.