* 2107738
* A Self-Consistent Bayesian Investigation of Star Cluster Binary Populations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Aaron Geller, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 618,125.00

About 2/3 of the stars in our galaxy reside in close pairs, called “binary
stars”. Many of these stars are born within larger families known as “star
clusters”. Yet despite how common and important binary stars are, vital
questions remain. The investigator will use newly available observations and
state-of-the-art software to produce a large database of the empirical
properties of binary stars and their host star clusters. The investigator will
then use this database to examine theoretical predictions. This database will be
made publicly available through a custom website and will enable many follow-up
studies by the astronomical community. The investigator will also mentor up to
nine undergraduate. Each student will learn skills in research methods, coding,
data analysis, and web development. The investigator will help to advance a more
diverse, sophisticated, and highly competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and his team will self-
consistently characterize the binary star populations in hundreds of open star
clusters, across a wide range of cluster properties, using a Bayesian Analysis
of Stellar Evolution (BASE-9) tool. For each cluster, the investigator will
compile available photometry from Gaia, 2MASS and Pan-STARRS, and use these data
within the BASE-9 software to (a) identify photometric binaries and determine
their masses and mass ratios, (b) establish the cluster age, distance, reddening
and metallicity, and (c) derive star-by-star photometric membership
probabilities and masses. The investigator will use this database to examine
predicted trends in binary frequency and mass-ratio distribution across
different clusters (as functions of, e.g., age, metallicity, density, cluster
mass, etc.) as predicted by stellar dynamical and star formation models, and
within each individual cluster (e.g., as a function of distance from the cluster
center) as predicted by two-body relaxation and mass segregation effects. The
investigator will also develop a custom online interactive table and plotting
utility that will provide public access to this database of binary and cluster
parameters. Most students working with the investigator will be recruited from
the Chicago area through an existing network that the investigator has developed
as part of the NSF-funded Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program
he directs at Northwestern. In addition to the directed research projects, these
students will also create their own research websites and help to develop the
interactive website that will host the binary star and star cluster database.
Over the summer, each student will be fully integrated into Northwestern’s
astrophysics REU program, which provides numerous professional development
workshops, including coding and high-performance computing, science
communication and career planning discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.