* 2107542
* Implementation Project: Improving Retention and the Quality of STEM Education and Research at Oakwood University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Kenneth LaiHing, Oakwood College
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 616,684.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) provide support to design, implement, study, and
assess comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students
and the quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation
project at Oakwood College outlines parallel analysis of faculty and student
professional development for the purpose of enhancing the teaching and learning
experience, as well as bolstering the institution’s research capacity. The
project is grounded in evidence-based practices and the extent to which these
endeavors are integrated on the campus of Oakwood College has the potential to
transform the STEM education and research capacity of the institution, as serve
as a national model of institutional transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project goals are to (1) increase the number of research-active STEM faculty,
who engage in research, proposal writing, and faculty development, and (2)
increase the number of well-prepared, competitively trained minority STEM
graduates, who pursue graduate studies or enter the STEM workforce. STEM faculty
will receive trainings and mentorship to engage in research. Undergraduate
students will attend university-wide programs to conduct research along with
STEM faculty leads. Employing quasi experimental pre- and post-test,
qualitative, and mixed methods research designs, the project team will
investigate the effect of the project activities on faculty and students’
research self-efficacies, productivity, and awareness, and document faculty
perceptions of the trainings and the lived experiences of the students in the
research programs. It is anticipated that participating faculty will be more
likely conduct research and sustain their productivity. Further, participating
students may be more likely to pursue graduate studies or research-oriented STEM
positions after graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.