* 2107187
* AF: Medium: Smoothed Analysis for Optimization and Games
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Mihalis Yannakakis, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 921,383.00

Many algorithms and heuristics that work well in practice have poor performance
under the worst-case analysis due to delicate pathological instances that one
may never encounter, practically speaking, creating a huge theory-practice gap
in the understanding of such algorithms. One of the best known such examples is
the Simplex algorithm for Linear Programming, which is widely used in practice
but has exponential running time in the worst case. To provide a more realistic
explanation for its success, Spielman and Teng introduced the smoothed-analysis
framework, which can be viewed as a hybrid of the classical worst-case and
average-case analysis. The smoothed-analysis framework has since been applied to
a range of problems in areas such as mathematical programming, machine learning,
numerical analysis, etc. Among them, the smoothed analysis of algorithms and
problems that arise from combinatorial optimization and algorithmic game theory
has been studied intensively during the past decade. However, despite much
progress, some of the most fundamental problems remain wide open, and tools
currently available for performing smoothed analysis remain limited. This
project plans to explore some of the new directions and challenging problems
that have emerged in the smoothed analysis of algorithms for optimization and
game-theoretic problems. The goal of the project is to develop new techniques
that will enable better understanding of a broad range of algorithms and
problems through the lens of smoothed analysis. The research team is broadly
disseminating new results from the project by giving talks at interdisciplinary
conferences, major universities and research labs, and by developing new
advanced courses on smoothed analysis. The interdisciplinary nature of the
project is likely to appeal to students with diverse backgrounds. In addition to
advising and mentoring Ph.D. students, the research team is actively involving
undergraduate students in accessible research projects. The research team is
also participating in outreach activities that may help develop interest in
Computer Science from a broader population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the
smoothed analysis of combinatorial-optimization problems, the research team is
focusing on the local-search paradigm. A core problem that the team plans to
study is the smoothed complexity of the FLIP algorithm for Local Maximum
Constraint Satisfaction problems, including examples such as MAX-CUT and
MAX-3SAT. The team also plans to study the smoothed complexity of heuristics for
the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), such as k-Opt. Improved understanding of
k-Opt may shed new light on the smoothed analysis of Lin-Kernighan, one of the
most widely used heuristics for TSP in practice. For the smoothed analysis of
algorithms and problems from game theory and economics, the team is working to
investigate the smoothed complexity of Policy and Value Iteration for solving
Markov decision processes and more generally, stochastic games. The team is also
working to establish unconditional lower bounds for the smoothed complexity of
the Lemke-Howson algorithm for bimatrix games and the global Newton method of
Smale for market equilibria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.