* 2107525
* Testing the p53 code for Gene Regulation with Chemical Protein Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Champak Chatterjee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With joint support from the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry
Division and the Genetic Mechanisms cluster in the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division, Dr. Champak Chatterjee from the University of Washington
will investigate how modifications to the protein p53 control how human genes
are turned on or off. The p53 protein controls how the genetic information in
DNA is rewritten or transcribed to the intermediate message in the form of
m-RNA. Mutations in the p53 transcription factor are known to cause human
cancers. The ability of p53 to control genes is itself controlled by the
reversible addition of other small proteins to this transcription factor. This
project will use new synthetic chemistry to reversibly add variants of the
protein known as a small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) at specific positions
of p53. Studies are designed to reveal how the SUMO modifications affect the
ability of p53 to regulate the expression of human genes. This project will
train graduate and undergraduate students in protein synthesis techniques, along
with biophysical and biochemical assays of p53 function. In addition, an
outreach program will introduce high school students to genetic disorders
arising from mutations in transcription factors and provide research training to
high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will construct specific
post-translationally modified p53 proteins and use advanced biophysical and
biochemical techniques to quantitatively characterize the roles of these
modifications on the regulatory function of this transcription factor. Covalent
conjugation with isoforms of SUMO and their acetylated forms on the disordered
C-terminal region of p53 are known to regulate gene expression. This project
provides a split-intein-mediated semisynthetic strategy to construct p53
modified by distinct SUMO isoforms, which are not readily available from
biological approaches. Isoform-specific effects of p53 sumoylation that are
confoundingly associated with both transcription activation and repression in
cells will be carefully investigated through biochemical assays. Fundamental
knowledge generated by this study will likely provide new insights into
regulation of the master gene regulator in humans by reversible post-
translational modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.