* 2107429
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Synthesis of Logic Programs for Democratizing Program Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Rajeev Alur, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 04/30/2025
* USD 504,559.00

Despite massive advances in program-analysis techniques, the diversity of
situations in which software development occurs -- including programming
environments and application domains -- has created a large community of
programmers who are under-served by existing analysis, verification, and bug-
finding tools. The investigators are leveraging advances in relational program
representations and declarative query-synthesis methods to develop novel
interactive systems by which software developers can identify bugs and security
vulnerabilities in code. The main impact of this research will be to increase
the accessibility of program analysis technology to the working
programmer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system is exposing a rich example-
based interface, and is driven by a range of synthesis techniques involving
constraint solvers, provenance trackers, and co-occurrence relationships among
the entities of the program. The project is developing example-guided synthesis
algorithms, exploring approaches to synthesize recursive programs, and devising
component-based frameworks by which to assemble complex program analyzers from
libraries of simple constituent analyses. Furthermore, the investigators are
developing methods to automatically extract the necessary relational data from
compiler infrastructure such as LLVM, and to connect their algorithms to widely
supported programming environment interfaces such as the Language Server
Protocol (LSP), thus maximizing the utility of the proposed research to a broad
range of software developers. The project is mentoring and training
undergraduate and doctoral students, including female and under-represented
minorities. Finally, the research and pedagogical artifacts developed in the
project are being disseminated to software developers and researchers through
workshops, tutorials, and courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.