* 2107991
* Collaborative Research: A Panchromatic View of Normal Galaxies in the Early Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jason Prochaska, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 40,971.00

A tool to identify “normal” galaxies at high redshifts (large distances), not
biased by their brightness, is the presence of Damped Lyman-alpha systems (DLAs)
in spectra of background light sources. Studying DLAs is essential to further
our understanding of galaxy evolution in the early Universe, but little is known
about the galaxies associated with DLAs and the relation between them and those
identified by other methods. This project will use the Atacama Large Millimeter
Array (ALMA) to directly image DLA galaxies and aims to answer fundamental
questions of galaxy formation. The project will also include a “Bridge” program
(post-bachelors degree/pre-graduate school) to attract and retain talented
students from traditionally underrepresented groups, with a goal of increasing
their participation in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team has leveraged
the power of ALMA to directly image HI-selected galaxies identified by DLAs.
This project aims to answer fundamental questions of galaxy formation including:
What are the luminosities, star formation rates, gas masses, and stellar masses
of normal galaxies at high redshifts? What is the incidence of rotating disks
and mergers? Do absorption-selection and emission-selection yield the same
population of galaxies? The project also leverages the JVLA, NOEMA, VLT, GTC,
and Keck observatories to dissect the galaxy population from the far-UV to radio
wavelengths, accessing ionized gas, neutral gas, stellar, and dust diagnostics.
The Maria Mitchell Observatory (MMO) Bridge program will provide students the
opportunity to improve their hands-on research skills, gain first-hand knowledge
of graduate-level research, and prepare for entrance into STEM graduate
programs. The postdoctoral researcher at Johns Hopkins University will work
directly with the MMO Bridge students, gaining valuable mentoring
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.