* 2107289
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Responsive Parallelism for Interactive Applications: Theory and Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Stefan Muller, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2025
* USD 189,419.00

The hardware advances of recent years have brought multicore chips and parallel
computing to the mainstream. As a result, today, parallelism is not found just
in the traditional scientific applications that have dominated research and
development in parallel computing in past decades. We must now consider
parallelism in interactive applications which are characterized by frequent
interactions with users or other software systems and therefore must be
responsive. This project’s aim is to develop a practical approach to interactive
parallel applications. The project’s novelty, in addition to focusing on this
under-studied intersection of parallelism and interaction, is that it follows an
end-to-end methodology that brings together many areas of computer science and
bridges theory with practice. The project has the potential to impact the design
of several application areas that require large-scale interactive applications,
including web services, desktop clients for CAD/CAM, games, and a variety of
mobile applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research’s end-to-end goals
require advances in type systems, programming languages, scheduling theory, and
runtime systems. The research team will develop a calculus for modeling
interactive parallel applications at a high level of abstraction. This calculus
will equip a fully general formal programming language based on Church's Lambda
Calculus with a cost semantics, making it possible 1) to express interactive
parallel applications and 2) to reason about the throughput and responsiveness
of the programs. A type system will ensure the absence of thorny bugs such as
priority inversions that can prevent establishing responsiveness guarantees. The
investigators will prove that this calculus is realizable by developing
scheduling algorithms that can faithfully match the cost semantics so as to
guarantee the desired performance criteria. On the practical side, the project
team will extend Cilk, a C-based parallel programming language, to support
interactive parallel applications. This will require developing a run-time
system that faithfully implements the scheduling algorithms and optimizations
that ensure practical performance. The educational component of this project,
which involves teaching undergraduates parallel algorithms, will create ample
opportunities to test the practical effectiveness of the proposed
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.