* 2107727
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Absorption and Emission Line Probes of Galactic Winds with eBOSS
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Britt Lundgren, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 93,082.00

Star formation is a very inefficient process with only 5% - 20% of the gas
converted into stars. Galactic outflows play an important role in self-
regulating star formation and maintaining the low efficiency. The Principal
Investigators (PIs) Tremonti, Diamond-Stanic and Lundgren, will use observations
of 300,000 galaxies from the extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey
(eBOSS) to measure the physical properties of galaxies, including the outflowing
gas, to investigate the underlying physics responsible for the low efficiency of
galactic star formation. To promote student engagement in science technology
engineering and mathematics (STEM) the PIs will design a set of web-based
computational astronomy activities suitable for both high school and
undergraduate students using the eBOSS survey data. The team will disseminate
these activities through a series of workshops for educators and evaluate their
effectiveness in improving students’ data literacy, computational skills, and
interests in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will create and analyze
high-quality spectra based on stacks of thousands of individual eBOSS galaxy
spectra at redshifts of 0.4 &lt; z &lt; 1. They will compare outflowing gas
traced via absorption lines to outflowing gas traced via emission lines to test
whether these methodologies are measuring the same or different components of
the outflow. They will also measure the geometry and spatial extent of the
outflows through backlighting experiments that use the spectra of background
quasars and use this information to estimate robust mass outflow rates. The team
will identify clear empirical relationships between galactic outflows and
galaxies. They will release a catalog of stacked spectra and associated physical
properties to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.