* 2107200
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Principled Uncertainty Quantification in Deep Learning Models for Time Series Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Shuochao Yao, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 325,933.00

Time series data are ubiquitous in modern science and engineering. An
unprecedented amount is being collected in diverse applications such as
healthcare systems, the Web, cyber network monitoring, self-driving cars, and
Internet-of-Things services. While deep learning has achieved enormous success
in time series predictive analysis, a key bottleneck of such models is that they
are ignorant about the uncertainties in their predictions. A consequence is that
they can produce wildly wrong predictions without noticing---this will lead to
misguided decisions, which can be catastrophic in life-critical applications.
This project aims to remedy this issue and advance deep learning towards more
trustworthy time series analysis. The project will enable principled deep
learning models for uncertainty-aware and reliable time series regression and
classification without sacrificing their predictive power. Research findings
from the project will be incorporated into graduate-level classes, tutorials,
and workshops to bring multiple stakeholders and domain scientists
together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of this project are divided
into three thrusts. First, the project will develop novel techniques bridging
deep sequential models (e.g., recurrent networks, transformers) with Gaussian
processes to quantify uncertainty in the functional space. Second, the project
will explore how to learn calibrated deep sequential models and how to further
decouple different sources of uncertainties to understand where a model's
predictive uncertainty comes from. Third, the project will harness uncertainty
to improve the reliability and efficiency of time series predictive systems.
These techniques will enjoy the representation power of deep neural networks for
modeling complex temporal dependencies in time-series data, while providing
principled methodologies for quantifying and leveraging uncertainty for
robustness and performance. The developed new models, algorithms, and techniques
will be deployed in two important applications for times series analysis: 1)
public health monitoring and forecasting, and 2) real-time analysis for mobile
sensing time series data. The developed tools will also be open-sourced for
trustworthy time series analysis that can benefit many other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.