* 2107748
* Synthesis and Characterization of Novel Hydrogel Formulations for the Single Chirality Purification of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kevin Tvrdy, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Interfacial Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical,
Biochemical, Engineering and Transport Systems (CBET), Kevin Tvrdy of the
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs is developing novel hydrogel
separation media for optimizing the separation and purification of single-walled
carbon nanotubes. The project explores the rational design of both relatively
expensive hydrogel formulations, based on biologically derived polysaccharides,
and relatively inexpensive hydrogel formulations, based on small molecule
building blocks. The metric of success of this project is the degree of purity
of the single chirality SWCNs that are isolated using the proposed hydrogel
formulations. The availability of pure single component carbon nanotubes of
uniform properties has the potential to significantly impact a wide range of
applications, in nanoelectronics, biological imaging, photovoltaics and energy
harvesting and storage. Master's level and undergraduate students will be
involved in conducting the proposed research. Research results will be
incorporated in a nanoscience course and shared with the general public in a
monthly "Science on Tap" lecture series designed to promote science literacy and
appreciation of science in the Colorado Springs
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Kevin Tvrdy and his students
seek to develop hydrogel media specifically tailored for the chiral separation
of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs). Top-down modification of
commercially-available Sephacryl hydrogels will be pursued, as well as bottom-up
synthesis. Biologically derived polysaccharides will be crosslinked using
radical polymerization to form novel hydrogel formulations, and a select group
of water-soluble monomers and crosslinkers will be used to form alternative low-
cost formulations. The hydrogel products will be characterized with
spectroscopic and microscopic techniques, and their potential for SWCNTs
separations based on chirality will be quantified. The metric of success of this
project is the degree of purity of the single chirality SWCNTs that are isolated
using the proposed hydrogel formulations. By focusing on the rational design of
novel hydrogel media, this work seeks both fundamental knowledge of the
chirality dependent physiochemical driving forces at the hydrogel/nanotube
interface, and application of that knowledge to realize gel formulations
tailored for isolation of specific nanotube chiralities. Achievement of the
central goal of this project has the potential to impact how nanotubes are
integrated into both fundamental and applied research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.