* 2107291
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Efficient and Trustworthy Proof Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Milos Gligoric, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 04/30/2025
* USD 427,709.00

Formal verification of software in a proof assistant (such as Coq) can establish
the correctness of software, preventing software bugs that could otherwise lead
to significant financial losses or even loss of life. Unfortunately, proof
assistants are not currently well adapted to large-scale software development
and are expensive to use in terms of both development time and expertise. The
goal of this project is to increase productivity of proof engineers (i.e., users
of proof assistants) via techniques that simplify development and maintenance of
large verification projects, as well as to increase trustworthiness in the
toolchain commonly used by proof engineers. The project's novelties include
learning-based and analytical approaches for proof construction, extraction, and
maintenance, as well as testing techniques for establishing the trustworthiness
of proof assistants. The project's impacts are increased productivity and
increased software quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
techniques that help proof engineers (1) construct proofs by learning and
enforcing conventions, automatically locating relevant lemmas, and synthesizing
generalized invariants; (2) augment the extraction of executable code from
verified artifacts with runtime monitoring for checking assumption violations
and with novel support for generating executable variants of logical
specifications; and (3) facilitate the maintenance of large proof repositories
by detecting brittle proof scripts, as well as learning common transformations.
Furthermore, to increase trust in the proof engineering toolchain, the
investigators develop testing techniques that target the core components of
proof assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.