* 2107524
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Fine-grained Emotion Analysis in Crises
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* James Pennebaker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 452,312.00

History is rich with situations where the same event has been interpreted
completely differently by different groups of people. Through events such as the
OJ Simpson case, the COVID-19 crisis, and the murder of George Floyd, we have
observed disparate reactions to events that community leaders, police
departments, policymakers, and everyday citizens fail to anticipate. The purpose
of this project is to begin to identify social, emotional, and linguistic
markers of crises (e.g., social turmoil, natural disasters, etc.) that predict
the various ways people will react to the same events. This is achieved by
analyzing the language of social media, a rapidly-growing source of data from
which we can understand the expression and perception of emotions at a very
large scale, with far-reaching potential uses from academic research to public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding emotions, the context surrounding
these emotions, and subsequent behaviors are of great value to those in a
crisis, seeking information about a crisis, or helping manage responses to a
crisis. This project will discover mechanisms to provide comprehensive, fine-
grained emotion analysis across different social platforms, and derive robust
and reliable predictive models. Fine-grained emotion analysis aims to: (1)
detect expressions of emotions in a text and characterize their intensity and
polarity, (2) identify the triggers causing the emotions, and (3) analyze
emotion deviation (i.e., the varied emotions that people express towards the
same trigger). This research will contribute annotated datasets of emotions
expressed on social media across distinct crises and generalizable models
equipped with deep linguistic understanding for contextualized emotion analysis.
Industry and academic partners will participate by evaluating the ability of the
models to work on situations and data sources different from those used to
develop the models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.