* 2107462
* RAPID International Type I: Assessing Adaptive Responses During COVID-19 Research Collaboration: A Study of Collaborative Contexts
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Wesley Shrum, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2024
* USD 198,138.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve the U.S. national research system
and promote scientific progress by identifying the nature and scope of COVID-19
impacts on international collaboration in research and education. The principal
objective is to understand the impact of new information and communications
technology (ICT) on the process of networking and collaboration under pandemic
conditions, as well as adaptations to these conditions. This assessment allows
us to investigate the causes and conditions under which collaborative
interactions become disrupted as well as recommend best practices from among
those identified as successful by participants. The researchers will analyze
both qualitative and quantitative interviews in order to (1) identify principal
collaborations and collaborators of each scientist, both local and
international; (2) examine the pre-pandemic use of travel, face-to-face
meetings, and remote collaborative software, as well as the factors associated
with their relative importance across countries; (3) enumerate the types of
impacts that COVID-19 had on these collaborations; (4) assess the degree to
which technology and scientific practice affected preparedness for disruptions
(5) develop a typology of adaptive responses; (6) analyze participant
perceptions of the relative effectiveness of these responses on the progress and
outcomes of collaboration (7) examine the degree to which men and women
scientists had different experiences during the pandemic as well as different
responses. Project interviews and analysis are to be widely distributed to
provide grounded guidance for policy makers and others seeking to understand the
impacts of pandemic conditions on the production of knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Part 2.&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide systematic comparisons
among a population of scientists across four countries. Data on collaborative
practices will be collected from individual scientists, while analysis will
yield insight into the nature and process of pandemic collaboration and adaptive
practice. International collaborations and U.S. scientists will be compared with
scientists in Ghana, Kenya, and India. Previous studies of scientific and
engineering communities in these areas have been ongoing since 1994, providing a
valuable baseline for comparative assessments of disruptions to international
collaboration and the assessment of responses. The project will utilize a
combination of qualitative and quantitative interviews with 1100 researchers.
The study population includes scientists that engage in international
collaborations involving the environment, natural resource management, and
sustainability. The two primary research sectors are universities and national
research institutes. Our population of scientists and educators is drawn from a
group of organizations in and around Baton Rouge, Nairobi, Accra, and
Trivandrum. The locations represent diversity in levels of scientific and
educational development, with the U.S. community arguably at the summit of
international science, followed by Kerala, representing a relatively high level
of development, Kenya a medium level, with Ghana comparatively lower. The
results of this project will contribute to an understanding of the diversity of
adaptive responses among international collaborations and provide guidance for
policy makers and managers seeking to understand these differences and design
effective interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.