* 2107444
* Dynein function at the vertebrate kinetochore
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Jennifer DeLuca, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2025
* USD 808,826.00

Cell division (mitosis) is one of the most fundamental biological processes. It
is remarkable as every division must take place with exceedingly high fidelity.
Infidelity of the process leads to various afflictions, including cell death.
Each cell’s duplicated genetic information – contained within chromosomes – must
be equally (and faithfully) divided between the two daughter cells and the high
degree of accuracy in this process is the consequence of a complex network of
safety mechanisms that ensures mistakes are corrected prior to the completion of
mitosis. The molecular machinery that ensures high-fidelity chromosome
inheritance from mother to daughter cells includes an elaborate arrangement of
filamentous structures called microtubules, and large protein-based structures
assembled upon the chromosomes called kinetochores. Proper division of the
genetic material requires that all duplicated chromosomes physically connect to
microtubules through their kinetochores, allowing the chromosomes to become
organized and aligned at the center of the cell in preparation for division.
Kinetochores must make mechanically stable attachments to microtubules, and it
is through these stable connections that duplicated sister chromosomes are both
driven to the middle of the cell, then pulled apart towards the end of mitosis.
Cells contain a monitoring system (a “checkpoint”) that prevents cells from
exiting mitosis until all kinetochores are properly attached to microtubules
such that they are poised to faithfully divide the chromosomes. While it is
known that kinetochores monitor and regulate their own attachment status, how
the attachment status of each kinetochore is relayed to the checkpoint machinery
is unknown. The goals of this research project are to determine how a molecular
motor, called dynein, affects and facilitates: (1) chromosome alignment, and (2)
mitotic checkpoint signaling. The results from this project will have a
significant impact on our understanding of mitotic cell division, and how the
underlying molecular processes ensure it takes place with high fidelity. The
Broader Impacts of the work include the inherent importance of this process to
all multi-cellular life on the planet, together with outreach work that will be
carried out at the community level and to elementary school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand how the
microtubule motor protein dynein functions at kinetochores to promote faithful
segregation of chromosomes during cell division. Cells possess complex
mechanisms that ensure chromosome segregation occurs with remarkably high
fidelity. During cell division, microtubules that comprise the mitotic spindle
facilitate separation of sister chromatids through direct attachments to
kinetochores, large macromolecular assemblies built upon centromeric DNA. Cells
employ at least two critical mechanisms to minimize errors during this process:
(A) The spindle assembly checkpoint prevents mitotic progression until all
chromosomes have established proper kinetochore-microtubule attachments.
Effectors of this checkpoint accumulate on improperly or unattached
kinetochores, and consequently transmit a “wait anaphase” signal. Only upon
establishment of proper attachments are these proteins evicted from
kinetochores, which silences the inhibitory signal, thereby promoting anaphase
onset. (B) The error correction pathway promotes the release of incorrect
kinetochore-microtubule attachments, thereby allowing them to “reset” and form
new, correct attachments. A key effector of both these processes is the
microtubule motor protein dynein, which (1) transports checkpoint effectors away
from kinetochores upon proper microtubule attachment, and (2) transports
erroneously attached chromosomes to spindle poles, where they have a high
likelihood of being corrected. The researchers will use a combination of in
vitro and in-cell approaches to understand the role for dynein in both of these
critical mitotic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded by the
Cellular Dynamics and Function program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.