* 2107351
* IRES Track I: Modeling Human-Elephant-Conflict Using GIS Methodologies with Engaged Community Ecosystem Management near Wasgamuwa National Park, Sri Lanka
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Scott Kelley, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 07/31/2024
* USD 288,303.00

The development and utilization of natural resources can create environmental
issues when humans disturb wilderness areas and come into conflict with
wildlife. Managing ecosystems in these frontier spaces, and mediating conflicts
between human and non-human communities, requires an interdisciplinary approach.
In the past, when ecosystem management is viewed as a purely technical issue,
managers have come into clashed with other stakeholders and communities. It is
essential to train future professionals and researchers in interdisciplinary and
community engaged research methodologies so they can better mediate
environmental conflicts in the future. This is especially true in the area
around Wasgamuwa National Park in central Sri Lanka: as humans have expanded
their agricultural footprint into elephant grazing lands, Human-Elephant-
Conflict (HEC) has increased and led to loses of habitat, housing, and life. The
Sri Lanka Wildlife Conservation Society (SLWCS) is an internationally recognized
and awarded NGO that works with farmers and villages in and around Wasgamuwa
National Park to collaboratively research elephant behavior and find solutions
to decrease HEC. Students participating in this IRES project will work with the
SLWCS in Sri Lanka to study elephant ecology, community engaged research, and
habitat mapping. This project will run for three years, and each year a new
cohort of nine U.S. students from the University of Nevada, Reno will
participate. The cohorts will be interdisciplinary, with students from STEM
fields and the humanities, so that they can learn how to view problems from
multiple perspectives. Additionally, recognizing the need for new approaches to
solving complex problems in an increasingly global world, students will work
with researchers from other institutions in Sri Lanka to learn new research
methodologies, develop research questions with community partners, and cultivate
communication practices that enable them to effectively engage with different
groups. Students participating in the project will learn how to facilitate
meaningful collaborations, enabling them as practitioners of natural resource
management to cope with environmental issues more effectively – a trait that is
increasingly important as anthropogenic forces are challenging the resiliency of
ecosystems across the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing strategies that
mitigate Human-Elephant-Conflict (HEC) will ensure beneficial futures for both
human and elephant communities that increasingly interact with one another. To
identify and assess the driving forces of HEC, as well as examine its
environmental impacts, this project will conduct research in Sri Lanka’s
Wasgamuwa National Park and the surrounding communities that can contribute to
the broader literature on HEC management. Working under the guidance of
scientists and researchers with the Sri Lanka Wildlife Conservation Society
(SLWCS), participating students will analyze and map the ecology of elephants in
relation to HEC in an area that has seen a rapid increase in incidences in
recent years. By conducting community-engaged research coordinated by SLWCS
personnel, this project will help better inform the contributing factors to HEC
in the region and provide recommendations on pathways to effectively address it.
Additionally, this project will examine the dynamics of the ecology of elephants
in edge habitats, and how natural resource management issues can be mitigated
through community engagement. In addition to the primary objective of this
research, this project addresses three other areas of scholarly concern: 1) How
do natural resource managers and environmental scientists construct productive
and meaningful collaborative partnerships with community members and
stakeholders?; 2) How do we prepare and train students for the increasingly
interdisciplinary nature of natural resource management?; and 3) How do
environmental scientists, natural resource managers, and organizations construct
and maintain their credibility/ethos in contentious, environmental deliberation?
To answer these questions, this project will train and work with 27 University
of Nevada, Reno undergraduate students in social-ecological research
methodologies, GIS software and techniques, and community based participatory
research, in order to work towards mitigating HEC in affected communities.
Participating students will be provided with valuable research experiences along
with exposure to international collaborations, and they will use the project’s
findings to engage communities around the United States and Sri Lanka in
developing solutions to complex ecosystem management
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the International
Research Experiences for Students program (IRES) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.