* 2107664
* Dynamic Optical Studies of Transport Phenomena Associated with Melting and Recrystallization at the Nanoparticle-Ice Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Bogdan Dragnea, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2025
* USD 435,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Bogdan Dragnea at Indiana
University is utilizing sophisticated microscopies to study how nanoparticles
affect ice melting. It is well-know that ice melts to form water when the
temperature reaches 32 degrees Fahrenheit, or 0 degrees Celsius. However, this
is not always the case. Nanoparticles, which are about a million times smaller
than the period at the end of this sentence, can change this transition
temperature. When embedded in ice, a thin layer often forms near the
nanoparticle surface that can melt below normal temperatures. Working with his
students, Professor Dragnea uses a photothermal microscopy technique to observe
the melting of this thin ice layer when the nanoparticle is rapidly heated by a
laser. Their discoveries could have implications for understanding a variety of
environmental processes such as ice crystal formation in the atmosphere, as well
as provide ways of controlling friction and adhesion on icy surfaces. The
project is also providing research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds. In addition, through collaboration with the
Indiana University Research and Technology Corporation (IURTC), Professor
Dragnea is introducing his students to entrepreneurial concepts as they
translate the project's instrumentation and scientific knowledge into useable
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Dragnea is developing photothermal
microscopy methods to obtain the transport and thermodynamic properties of the
interfacial quasi-liquid layer (QLL) that separates the solid surface of a
nanoparticle from bulk ice. Single nanoparticles with well-defined surface
chemistries and geometries are embedded in a film of polycrystalline ice. The
nanoparticle is then heated by laser excitation, raising the temperature of the
surrounding solid. The formation of the QLL is detected by measuring the light
scattered by the nanoparticle at various temperatures. The measurement is
facilitated by modulation of the interfacial liquid thickness through repeated
absorption of laser pulses by the nanoparticle. In addition to characterizing
the convex surfaces of spherical nanoparticles, the formation of the QLL near
concave surfaces of shape-controlled nanoparticles is also studied. By comparing
optical and thermal simulations to experimental observations, transport and
thermodynamic parameters are extracted. Experiments performed on individual
particles alleviate challenges associated with impurities, defects, and
particle-to-particle variations that reduce accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.