* 2107215
* TRTech-PGR: Connecting sequences to functions within and between species through computational modeling and experimental studies
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Shin-Han Shiu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,400,000.00

Life as we know it would be impossible without plants. They are a source of
food, oxygen, timber, fiber, and medicine. Therefore, improving plant traits,
such as yield, nutritional quality, and resilience, is crucial for sustainable
production of plant products. Key to our ability to improve plants is a thorough
understanding of how plant DNA controls traits. For example, corn DNA contains
~2 billion letters, and different sets of these letters affect different plant
traits. But we have limited knowledge about which letters matter and how they
control traits. When we do have a good understanding of the connection between
DNA and traits, such understanding is limited to a handful of model plants
chosen for their relative ease of study. Thus, to have more complete knowledge
of how plants work, we will connect DNA sequences with traits they control using
an Artificial Intelligence-based approach, machine learning where computers are
used to uncover hidden patterns from a wide range of biological data. In
addition, we will apply transfer learning to translate knowledge from one plant
species to another so we can later transfer what we know about model plants to
other species. The outcome of the project will be computer programs that can
predict the connections between DNA sequence and traits and transfer information
across species. Using these programs, scientists can better understand how
plants work and this knowledge can ultimately be used to create more productive
and resilient plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid growth in omics data has
led to discoveries transforming plant science. However, as more genomes become
available, connecting sequences to their functions globally remains challenging.
Thus, our first goal is to build and validate computational models that can
predict sequence functions. The second project goal is to develop and apply
transfer learning to address sequence-to-function problems across species and
environments. To achieve the first goal, existing multi-omics and phenotype data
from four model species–Arabidopsis, maize, rice, and tomato—will be integrated
with machine learning to address two sequence-to-function problems: predictions
of biological process functions such as enzyme or signaling pathway membership,
and physiological and morphological phenotypes. These prediction models will be
dissected using model interpretation methods to provide mechanistic insights
through understanding why and how the models work. To achieve our second goal,
using the same data from target model species and addressing the same focal
problems, transfer learning strategies will be developed and optimized to assess
how knowledge can be best transferred across species and environments. There is
relatively abundant experimental data available for the four models we will
focus on, and by holding out different amounts and types of data, a wide range
of “data-poor” scenarios can be recreated and evaluated. For both project goals,
the predictions will be validated with holdout experimental data independent
from data used for modeling and new data from genetic experiments conducted for
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.