* 2107201
* IRES TRACK I: International Collaboration Focused on Developing Visible-Light Responsive Nanohybrids for Photocatalysis and Photoelectrochemical Solar Energy Conversion â€“ SOLARIS
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Justyna Widera-Kalinowska, Adelphi University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,998.00

This U.S.-Polish International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project
creates a unique three-year opportunity for U.S. students to acquire early
career research experience abroad in the fields of materials science,
nanotechnology and solar energy conversion working side by side with renowned
European scientists. Through this collaborative project between Adelphi
University and Warsaw University, IRES students will participate in research
focused on development and characterization of novel composite materials for
alternative energy sources and environmental remediation applications. The
photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic properties of the new materials will be
thoroughly characterized using state-of-the-art instrumentation to correlate the
structure and properties of individual components with properties enhancement of
the nanohybrid composites. The US-Polish team expects go gain a better
understanding of the basic working principles of these semiconducting nano-
architectured composite materials in order to increase their effectiveness in
photovoltaic and photocatalytic devices for solar fuel production and hazardous
waste degradation. This project will also provide research experience for
teachers by exposing them to innovative hands-on approach to student teaching
and teaching them how to create a student-centered active learning environment
in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRES project supports the
participation of 6 U.S. students annually, 18 total for the 3 year duration. PI
will recruit qualified IRES students from diverse and underprivileged
backgrounds. U.S. student participants spend 8 weeks at the Faculty of Chemistry
and Centre for New Technologies (CeNT), Warsaw University (UW) in Poland working
together with their U.S. and Polish mentors and Polish students on thematically-
linked research projects focused on photovoltaics and photocatalysis. Pre-trip
training includes both technical and cultural preparation. As a pre-requisite to
the summer program in Poland students take an independent study with the PI to
learn about experimental methods and theoretical aspects relevant to the
proposed studies. Post-travel follow-up by the PI continues with scientific
mentoring and career advice. The broader impact is multi-faceted. A cost-
effective method for manufacturing highly efficient photovoltaic and
photocatalytic devices will greatly facilitate the application of those devices
in economically and environmentally important fields such as hazardous waste
treatment and alternative solar energy production. Moreover, these studies will
help to correlate the electronic properties of the hybrid with the structural
parameters of the semiconducting components. Furthermore, the students involved
in this study will start building up an international professional network and
will learn to work in an interdisciplinary, multi-cultural environment. The
involvement in this project of Teachers and Students Future-Teachers will give
them novel opportunity for the hands-on research experience and better prepare
them for their work in the K-12 education system. The results of this
collaboration will be disseminated by presentations at conferences, publication
of journal papers, as well as outreach to high school students and teachers.
Overall, the cooperative activities of this IRES project are expected to enhance
STEM education at both institutions, strengthen international partnering, and
facilitate the development of research collaboration in this critical area of
national and international need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.