* 2107101
* CNS Core: Medium: Detroit â€“ A New End-to-end System for Practical and Accessible IoT
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Richard Wolski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 895,273.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) is a rapidly emerging set of technologies in which
ordinary objects are equipped with digital intelligence -- the ability to sense,
analyze, actuate, and control their environment automatically. By linking our
physical and digital worlds, IoT devices make it possible to perform advanced
data analysis in place -- to enhance decision-making by humans, to detect,
diagnose, and remediate problems without human intervention, and to automate
operations throughout our economy (e.g., in health care, military, agriculture,
technology, financial, transportation, energy sectors, among others). This
project focuses on how to securely program, deploy, and manage IoT systems and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will develop a
portable, multi-tier (sensors, edge, cloud) platform, called Detroit, that
supports "write-once-run-anywhere" programming for IoT devices. The platform
will enable low-latency data analytics and response in or near the sensing tier,
while leveraging emerging public cloud computing technologies at the edge and
cloud tiers. High-level language support and platform services (for monitoring,
security policy enforcement, and deployment management) will be used to hide the
complexities of IoT, give developers tools with which they can specify and
automatically check security and deployment properties, and automate placement,
end-to-end authentication, and repair/update for IoT
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable secure IoT innovation
to become broadly practiced rather than solely the domain of distributed and
embedded systems experts. Such democratization is key to realizing the positive
societal transformation and shared economic impact that the IoT promises is
possible. In addition, the project will use real-world IoT testbeds and
applications, from several other scientific domains (e.g., smart homes, digital
agriculture, and ecology), to evaluate and demonstrate the advances and to
ensure that they are useful to developers and researchers across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the project will develop, collect,
and maintain source code, datasets, and results related to this effort that will
be shared publicly via the GitHub repository https://github.com/MAYHEM-
Lab/Detroit. These artifacts will include the Detroit platform, benchmarks, IoT
applications, and sensor data that can be used to drive, compare, and evaluate
IoT systems research advances. The project will maintain these artifacts for the
duration of the project and two years following.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.