* 2107283
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Enabling Extremely Fine-grained Parallelism on Modern Many-core Architectures
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kyle Chard, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2024
* USD 166,302.00

Computer systems are becoming increasingly complex: multisocket systems with
many-core processors and general graphic processors have the potential to
address the needs of demanding applications at the node level. Programmability
and efficiency are often not easy to find together due to the hardware growing
several orders of magnitude in degree of parallelism to thousands of computing
units on a chip. Task parallelism is an important type of parallelism in which
computation is broken down into a set of inter-dependent tasks which can be
executed concurrently on various computing units. To achieve strong scaling and
high levels of effective parallelism, there is a growing need in today's
parallel languages with supporting over-decomposition (many more tasks than
cores) in order to improve performance, hide latency caused by blocking
operations, and otherwise achieve maximum speedup. By enabling the efficient
support of fine-grained parallelism across the growing range of scales seen in
modern and future hardware, it is expected that the productivity of parallel
programmers will be enhanced. Trends show evidence that most of the Top500 high-
performance computing systems will likely employ hardware that this work
directly targets. The project aims to conduct a high-impact education program in
distributed parallel programming with broad reach, encouraging student
internships grounded in real-world challenges, and paving the way for technology
transfer from research to open-source projects. Special emphasis is placed on
engaging women and underrepresented minorities. This education facet will create
a new and more accessible foundation for fluency in parallel computing for
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work explores novel data-
structures and algorithms that allow for scalable runtime and execution models
for fine-grained parallelism at sub-microsecond timescales. Preliminary work by
the PIs at the language and runtime levels suggests a path to achieving this.
The project objectives are: 1) unifying runtime enabling task granularities
measured in cycles: design, analysis, and implementation of building blocks for
efficient fine-grained computing on diverse node hardware; 2) evaluating
performance of these building blocks in the context of real parallel systems and
application kernels on a range of computer architectures; 3) measuring
performance and scalability impact of runtime on benchmark kernels and real
applications; and 4) integrating this research with education programs from
undergraduate to graduate levels through new course material on parallel
computing. This high-risk/high-reward research is geared towards yielding
transformative improvements in the ease and efficiency of programming parallel
machines at every scale. The contributions lie in the realization of productive,
implicitly parallel high-level languages optimized for single node deployments
with many-core architectures to support fine-grained parallelism measured in
cycles, enabling an entirely new class of many-task computing applications. The
dataflow architecture makes implicit parallelism tractable with a programming
model whose impact could rival that of MATLAB, R, and Python, with the added
benefit that the same code could also run in a distributed system or large-scale
HPC systems. Thus, the scientist would be able to write a program once, run it
at any suitable scale, and have it seamlessly use the most appropriate
granularity for each component of the hardware. This work’s innovations in
dataflow architecture will be broadly applicable to a number of existing
parallel programming systems such as OpenMP, Swift/Parsl, and CUDA/OpenCL, in
terms of both efficiency in executing fine grained parallelism and adding
support for implicit parallelism where possible. Target hardware includes
Intel/AMD x86, ThunderX/2 ARM, IBM Power9, and NVIDIA/AMD
GPUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.