* 2107103
* Catalyst Project: Strengthening the Biology Program at Virginia Union University with Course-Based Undergraduate Research
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Hendricus Van Antwerpen, Virginia Union University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Accordingly,
Virginia Union University seeks to enhance the educational experience of its
undergraduate Biology majors so that they persist in the major while building a
strong culture of research within the department. The project involves the
establishment of a Zebrafish Core Facility, the implementation of new Course-
based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) in critical undergraduate
Biology courses, and the engagement of undergraduate students as peer
educators/mentors in those courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to the entire
project is the establishment of the Zebrafish Core Facility. The Core Facility
will include an Aquaneering eRack with zebrafish breeding tanks, seven (7)
imaging stations (each with a stereomicroscope, camera, and computer for image
capturing &amp; processing), and a research-grade fluorescence stereomicroscope
that will be used for whole-mount metabolite tracing, immunocyto-chemistry, and
in-situ hybridization. It will support the new CURES in two undergraduate
Biology courses at Virginia Union University: a required Cell Biology course for
Biology sophomores, and an “Independent Research” elective for Biology juniors
and seniors. CUREs will be supported with the expertise of the institution’s
research faculty in addressing topics ranging from the regulation of pH in the
central nervous system, the teratogenic influence of environmental contaminants,
the use of metalorganic frameworks in drug delivery, and lipoprotein-mediated
transport of lipids, using zebrafish as a model system. The project includes a
plan to engage three undergraduate students as peer educators/mentors annually.
In addition to participating in the CUREs, those students will benefit from
summer research experiences, and professional development activities that will
support their designated roles as peer educators/mentors. Ultimately, the
project promises to increase research activity of both faculty and students in
the Department of Biology, thereby enhancing the quality of student preparation
for entry into the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.