* 2107860
* 3D Momentum Imaging of Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization (MALDI) in the Time Domain
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Wen Li, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Wen Li and his group at Wayne State University are
undertaking fundamental studies related to mass spectrometry, a powerful method
of chemical analysis with broad applications in biology, chemistry, and
medicine. Specifically, the Li group is studying the mechanism of Matrix-
Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization (MALDI), a widely employed technique for
producing ions that are subjected to mass analysis. Despite decades of research
effort, knowledge of the details of the underlying mechanism of MALDI remains
imperfect. This project aims to enhance our understanding of these details using
newly developed research tools to provide unprecedented insights into the MALDI
process. It is expected that improved insight may lead to improved sensitivity.
Students engaged in these studies will gain excellent interdisciplinary
training. Dr. Li is also active in outreach to high school students, in efforts
to enhance their interest in career paths in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to enhance understanding of the mechanisms of primary ionization in
MALDI and aims to improve the sensitivity of the technique in detecting complex
and large molecules of biological relevance. Femto- and picosecond lasers
coupled with high-resolution three-dimensional momentum imaging of both ejected
electrons and ions will be employed with the goal of providing unprecedented
details about ionization dynamics. Schemes using ultrashort pulse pumping to
reduce the sample loss to neutral desorption will be devised with an aim of
significantly increasing sensitivity. Specifically, three projects will be
integrated to unravel the complex dynamics: 1) developing a novel ultrafast
thermometry method based on electron imaging with a resolution of tens of
picoseconds for measuring the time-resolved temperatures of samples; 2) carrying
out time-resolved thermometry measurements on DHB to assess the validity of
various models; and 3) investigating a new laser desorption/ionization mechanism
driven by femtosecond pulses. These studies are expected to illuminate details
of the initial ionization process and may lead to enhancement of MALDI
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.