* 2107929
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Digital Calibrators for 21cm Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Laura Newburgh, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 355,332.00

One of the greatest mysteries in modern cosmology is the Dark Energy-driven
accelerating expansion of the Universe. Galaxy surveys have a unique capability
to measure the expansion of the Universe that occurred long ago, enabling a
sensitive measurement of the presence and characteristics of Dark Energy.
Experiments have been undertaken with surveys of hundreds of thousands of
galaxies using optical telescopes, but those surveys are still limited by the
number of galaxies they can measure. Radio surveys can get around this
limitation but require precise understanding of the instrument making the
measurement. This proposal will develop new radio signal technology and
techniques to improve the capability of current instruments to do these
experiments and thus enable a better understanding of the nature of Dark Energy.
The project looks to expand interaction with school teachers to enhance their
knowledge of radio astronomy techniques that can be relayed to students in
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will design, prototype,
characterize, and deploy deterministic digital calibration signals for the
purpose of improved calibration for 21 cm cosmology. New 21 cm interferometers
require precise calibration, particularly of the instrument beam, to remove
bright foregrounds and extract the cosmological signal of interest. Currently,
the incoherent (power only) calibrators developed to address this challenge
limit the dynamic range of the measurement and also have no direct sensitivity
to instrument phase. The calibration source proposed here addresses these
critical gaps to make full-sky, high signal-to-noise measurements of the complex
(real and imaginary) instrument beam. The calibration source will produce a
precise signal that can be correlated in the radio interferometer correlator,
yielding a deterministic signal that can be used to make measurements of the
beam in both phase and amplitude. The project includes an expansion of existing
programs with educators in learning digital signal processing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.