* 2107636
* CDS&amp;E: Statistical Learning Tools for NMR Spectroscopy of Non-Crystalline Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Philip Grandinetti, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 421,080.00

With the support of the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Ceramics Program in the Division
of Materials Research, Professor Philip Grandinetti and his group at the Ohio
State University are developing machine learning tools to improve understanding
of the physical and chemical properties of glass-containing materials using
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy – the technique upon which
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is based. Specialty glasses continue to play
critical roles in a large range of technological applications, such as glass
substrates for handheld electronic device displays and lighting, optical fibers,
nuclear waste storage, and bio-glass implants. These applications have high
societal impact across a wide range of environmental, energy, and health-related
issues. A major challenge in tailoring the properties of new glass compositions
is the inadequacy of available quantitative details about the structure of
glasses, which determines their macroscopic (bulk) properties. Professor
Grandinetti is developing more sensitive methods and open-source software tools
that perform a deeper analysis of NMR data and give richer details about
structure in glassy materials. The work addresses a range of factors determining
glass properties such as dimensional stability, strength, phase separation,
hardness, and chemical durability. It is providing research opportunities for
students from underrepresented groups, in part through a partnership with Berea
College in Kentucky. Collaborations provide all students involved in the project
with opportunities for interactions with scientists in industry as well as
across national boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
solving the ill-posed problem of inverting an NMR spectrum into its underlying
distribution of nuclear interaction parameters, followed by a quantitative
mapping of these parameters into structural distributions. In this effort,
Professor Philip Grandinetti and his group are developing open-source Python
programs, documentation, and tutorials, and associated progressive web apps to
enable fast, easy-to-use, and versatile simulations and analyses of experimental
one- and higher-dimensional solid-state NMR spectra. They capitalize on their
recent discovery that highly selective excitation of quadrupolar nuclei can
extend NMR transition lifetimes and provide dramatic sensitivity enhancements.
This advance in turn is expected to enable expanded applications of the
statistical learning tools to natural abundance O-17 2D NMR spectra of inorganic
oxide materials. Quantification of modifier cation clustering and tetrahedral
framework network disorder in a series of alkali and alkaline earth silicate
glasses is another aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.