* 2107104
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Visualizing Computational Solutions to Improve Computational Thinking in Science Courses
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Derrick Hylton, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 339,179.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Broadening Participation Research (BPR) in STEM Education projects
supports the development, implementation, and study of new theory-driven models
and innovations related to the participation and success of underrepresented
groups in STEM undergraduate education. It is expected that the award will
further the faculty member's research capability, as well as improve the
recruitment, retention, and success of underrepresented groups in STEM education
and the workforce. The project at Spelman College seeks to investigate the
extent to which the visual representations in iFLOW (a block-based programming
tool) can reduce barriers for underrepresented groups to computational thinking
relative to traditional text-based programming. Specifically, the proposal
outlines efforts to develop and implement innovative curriculum materials that
support students in physics and chemistry courses to visualize computational
solutions to science problems, as well as identify the needed computational
thinking skills and attitudes for computationally focused careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational thinking is the practice or thought process
of applying fundamental computer science concepts to solve problems. The main
goal of this project is to create a systematic approach to the development of
computational thinking and skills for students taking undergraduate courses in
physics and chemistry. The project intends to define the attributes and outcomes
for these courses, to identify student barriers to the integration of
computations in these courses, and to develop intervention strategies to
overcome these barriers, as well as to propose a pathway to the development of
computational thinking and skills in the physics and chemistry undergraduate
curriculum. The project will test the suitability of block-based programming in
overcoming certain barriers in the progression towards text-based programming,
as well as formulate appropriate assessment for computational thinking in
physics and chemistry courses. The project aims to determine and utilize
intervention methods that are scaffolded throughout the academic curricula to
enhance computational thinking skills in Spelman students and overcome common
barriers to self-efficacy in data-driven fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.