* 2107975
* IMAGiNE: Testing multi-level controls on an aridity tolerance phenotype over time through physio-genomic data integration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dale DeNardo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 869,404.00

When faced with environmental challenges, animal populations have adjusted to
better cope with local conditions, using mechanisms that range from permanent to
highly dynamic. While changes to the inherited genetic material are permanent,
dynamic adjustments include alterations in behavior, including the timing and
duration of activity, the rate of gene expression off of DNA (i.e., RNA
transcription) and non-permanent but stable and heritable alterations that
affect gene expression (epigenetic modifications). These mechanisms operate on
different timescales, and currently, we do not know the relative importance of
these mechanisms in enabling animal populations to adjust to changing
environmental conditions. DeNardo and colleagues will compare the ability of
different populations of rattlesnakes to tolerate prolonged periods of limited
water availability, examining three different population pairs that diverged at
different times in the past. The team will examine differences in the genomic
DNA, behavior, physiology, gene expression, and epigenetic modifications between
populations pairs as well as seasonally among individuals in each population.
The ability to integrate different types of information is critical for big data
analysis which is a critical skill in science and industry, and the research
group will develop undergraduate and graduate teaching modules for use in
innovative courses. To extend this training out to K-12 learners, they are
partnering with the Ask a Biologist program at Arizona State University to
design and implement an online educational and interactive drought survival game
that will enable gamers to explore the impact of genomic and behavioral
strategies for rattlesnakes during extreme drought conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive phenotypes are ubiquitous in nature, but such
phenotypes can come about in different ways, including deterministic mechanisms
such as coding and regulatory genomic changes, as well as plastic responses such
as epigenomic, transcriptomic, and behavioral modifications. These mechanisms
not only operate on different timescales, but their relative importance and how
they interplay to produce adaptive phenotypes is largely unknown. Understanding
these relationships and how they vary based on divergence time of the phenotype
is critical to understanding how organisms respond to novel environmental
conditions and therefore accurately predict their ability to tolerate the
impacts of rapidly changing environmental conditions. Here, DeNardo et al. will
integrate whole-genome, epigenome, and transcriptome sequencing with behavioral
and physiological data to quantify their direct and indirect contributions to
tolerance of prolonged water limitation in three rattlesnake lineages of
differing divergence times. Integrative statistical analysis using structural
equation modeling will enable them to compare the relative controls across the
different lineages, among populations within lineages, and within individuals
across seasons and hydric states. To improve teaching integrative statistics at
different educational levels, the PIs will develop modules that progressively
use these datasets in undergraduate and graduate online and in-person courses.
In coordination with Ask a Biologist, they will also coordinate the design,
implementation, and assessment of an online education and interactive drought
survival game that, at differing complexity levels, will require the gamer to
assign genomic and behavioral strategies to rattlesnakes as they enter a time of
drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.