* 2107276
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Localization in Millimeter Wave Cellular Networks: Fundamentals, Algorithms, and Measurement-inspired Simulator
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* R. Michael Buehrer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 317,500.00

The ability to find one's location can provide convenience, enable many new
applications, and may even mean the difference between life and death in safety-
critical applications such as E-911. While global satellite systems, such as the
Global Positioning System (GPS), provide accurate outdoor positioning under
clear sky conditions, they do not perform well indoors, in urban canyons, or
under tree canopies, due to the lower signal strength or even total signal
blockage. In such scenarios, devices have to rely on the terrestrial wireless
communications networks, primarily cellular and/or WiFi networks, for
positioning. The new 5G standard has enabled utilizing vast spectrum in the
millimeter wave (mmWave) range for communications, and its large bandwidth
promises high location accuracy. However, since mmWave signals exhibit
fundamentally different properties than the lower frequency signals used in the
traditional cellular networks, localization algorithms used in the current
networks may not be effective in 5G. Since the emphasis of 5G system design has
been on communications, mmWave localization has not received as much attention.
Responding to this urgent need, this project develops the first comprehensive
and multi-disciplinary approach to localization in mmWave cellular networks by
merging ideas from diverse areas such as propagation science, localization
theory, stochastic geometry, and system-level simulations. It will also develop
a first-of-its-kind open-source mmWave localization simulator that combines all
research contributions in a form that can be easily adopted by the research
community. Further broader impacts will be through education, research
dissemination, industry collaboration, and broadening participation of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.