* 2107516
* Understanding Substellar Atmospheres: Constraining Physical Properties and Testing Models for Brown Dwarfs and Exoplanets
* MPS,AST
* 02/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Emily Rice, MACAULAY HONORS COLLEGE FOUNDATION
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2022
* USD 291,050.00

The cool brown dwarf objects span the gap between stars with hotter temperatures
and gas giant planets with much cooler temperatures. Scientists study these
brown dwarf objects to understand how both planets and stars formed. The T
dwarfs, a subset of the brown dwarfs, are the coolest well-populated group of
these objects. Thus, they could be good analogs for the cool atmospheres of
large exoplanets. However, we do not understand their atmospheric properties.
The investigators will study those cooler substellar objects including T dwarfs
and companions having planetary masses, and in-between transition objects. They
will learn about the atmospheres, gravity, dust and cloud properties of these
objects, and use this information to develop models to describe the properties
of these substellar objects. This research serves the national interest by
increasing our knowledge of these objects that are transitional between planets
and stars, contributing to our understanding of planet formation. Undergraduate
students from the CUNY colleges will work on this research. Public outreach
events as different as the Astronomy on Tap program and Hayden Planetarium
presentations will reach a diverse public
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brown dwarf objects, of which T dwarfs
are the coolest well-populated spectral class, are promising analogs for the
cool atmospheres of exoplanets, but the diversity of their atmospheric
properties is not yet well understood. The principal investigators and team will
conduct a comprehensive study of cool, substellar objects, including L-T
transition objects, T dwarfs, Y dwarfs, and planetary-mass companions. The team
will derive the physical and atmospheric properties; identify and calibrate
spectral diagnostics of secondary parameters like gravity, metallicity, and
dust/cloud properties of these substellar objects; and provide detailed feedback
from model fits; thus establishing a foundation for exoplanet atmosphere
studies. The team has the data and analysis tools in hand to curate benchmark
objects, generate template spectra, and identify spectral outliers; create
spectral energy distributions; calculate bolometric luminosities; fit synthetic
spectra from atmospheric models to low, medium, and high resolution spectra;
constrain age, radius, and mass using kinematics and evolutionary models; and
curate a public compilation of benchmark and outlier objects. The principal
investigators are experts in empirical analysis of brown dwarf spectra,
photometric and kinematic analysis of brown dwarfs, and analysis with synthetic
spectra from cool model atmospheres. Undergraduate students from the student
population of the CUNY colleges will be incorporated in projects related to this
research. Public outreach events such as the Astronomy on Tap program,
STARtorial science fashion blog, Hayden Planetarium presentations, and the
AstroBetter website, will reach and interact with a diverse public audience.