* 2107216
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium:  Exploiting New Degrees-of-Freedom in Wireless Networks with Reprogrammable Intelligent Metagratings
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Zhu Han, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 06/30/2025
* USD 399,997.00

The explosive growth of wireless data traffic has triggered new user
requirements and applications in wireless systems, motivating the exploration of
innovative communication paradigms. In a parallel effort, the development of
metasurfaces has shown the possibility of controlling electromagnetic waves in
extreme ways, with potentially disruptive opportunities for wireless networking.
This project explores the impact of reprogrammable intelligent metagratings
(RIMs) on next-generation wireless systems. Several fundamental issues related
to the use of RIMs in wireless networks will be addressed, such as RIM
integration, interference management, resource allocation and multiple access.
This research effort will enhance metasurface technology and wireless
communication/networking systems, opening new perspectives and solution concepts
for RIM-enhanced wireless systems. The proposed cross-layer approach will fill
existing gaps both in communications and networks research, as well as in the
physical layer. The resulting program will be inherently interdisciplinary and
transformative, combining concepts in decision theory, optimization, information
theory, communications, networking, control theory, electromagnetic and signal
processing. The project team will publish research in high-profile journals, and
resources such as data and codes will be publicly available to facilitate
technology dissemination. The proposed research will also significantly boost
the quality of our undergraduate and graduate programs, not only by impacting
curriculum development but also by engaging students in highly interdisciplinary
research, forming a new generation of scholars with unique expertise. The
proposed outreach activities will encourage high-school students, especially
female and minority students, to pursue science and engineering
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant advances in communication theory,
networks, protocol and hardware research will be needed to allow effective
coordination and maximum utilization of RIMs for wireless communications. The
proposed research will advance in disruptive ways a highly interdisciplinary
emerging research area: i) New theories, designs and experimental demonstrations
will be developed to optimally enhance wireless communications, becoming the
foundation for advances in network designs, protocols and algorithms. ii) The
project will explore the opportunities enabled by breaking reciprocity in RIMs
for full-duplex networks and enhanced spectral efficiency. iii) In addition to
signal improvement at the desired destination, RIMs will also enable disruptive
progress in mitigating interference. Resource management and interference
management in RIM-assisted communication networks will be enabled, including
spatial equalization before reception for multipath mitigation, RIM-assisted
Device-to-Device communications and RIM-aided dirty paper coding. iv) The
realized RIMs will improve localization accuracy and enhance existing protocols
in the higher network layers, enabling RIM-assisted MAC access with collision
avoidance and physical layer security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.