* 2107285
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Effects of Integrating Learning-Strategy Instruction within Math Courses on Student Math Mindset, Self-Regulated Learning and Performance
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Ling Xu, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Broadening Participation Research (BPR) in STEM Education projects
supports the development, implementation, and study of new theory-driven models
and innovations related to the participation and success of underrepresented
groups in STEM undergraduate education. It is expected that the award will
further the faculty member's research capability, as well as improve the
recruitment, retention, and success of underrepresented groups in STEM education
and the workforce. The project at North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical
State University seeks enhance the quality of STEM education for undergraduate
students enrolled in existing math courses by integrating evidence-based
cognitive, metacognitive and management learning strategies. The project aims to
serve as a model for understanding the interrelationships between four
constructs (learning strategies, math mindset, self-regulated learning, and
performance) while accounting for the students’ racial, gender and math
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a repeated measures between-
subjects design and a mixed-methods approach to examine four research questions:
(1) Does integrating learning-strategy instruction within gate-keeper math
courses promote math growth mindset among underrepresented minority (URM)
students? (2) Does integrating learning-strategy instruction within gate-keeper
math courses promote self-regulated learning (SRL) among URM students? (3) What
is the nature of association between students’ math growth mindset and SRL? and
(4) Does learning-strategy instruction, math growth mindset, and SRL predict
students’ performance in gate-keeper math courses? The researchers will
incorporate several research-based learning strategies into five gate-keeper
math courses and collect and analyze quantitative and qualitative data on the
four main constructs, students’ identity, and other covariates in control and
treatment sections of these math courses to answer the above questions. The
quantitative analyses will include Path Analysis, Pearson correlations, two-
sample hypothesis tests and descriptive statistics. The qualitative analyses
will help the researchers to better contextualize and interpret the quantitative
results. The project is expected to foster the development of math growth
mindset and SRL among URM students, improve students’ experience and performance
in gate-keeper math courses, improve students’ retention and graduation rates in
STEM, and enhance the capabilities of math faculty to conduct discipline-based
educational research and scholarly teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.