* 2107072
* IRES Track 1: Chapman - Stockholm International Research Experience in Heterogeneous Catalysis
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jerry LaRue, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 251,267.00

Science is naturally an international endeavor; however, undergraduate students
are often not exposed to this critical aspect early in the scientific careers.
STEM students at Chapman University, a midsize undergraduate university located
in diverse Southern California, are often engaged in research with faculty,
participate in local summer internships, and study abroad through campus
programs. Despite these opportunities, students rarely have the opportunity to
experience research on the international scale at other research institutions.
In collaboration with Stockholm University and the KTH Royal Institute of
Technology in Stockholm, Sweden, U.S. undergraduate students at Chapman will
have the opportunity to perform research in heterogenous catalysis for 10 weeks
during the summer. The learning objectives of the program are to (1) provide
transformative international research experiences for undergraduate students,
(2) increase student awareness of new research fields, including, heterogeneous
catalysis, (3) train the next generation of international researchers, (4)
increase the participation of under-represented students in STEM fields, (5)
expose students to the benefits of international collaborations, and (6) educate
students on Swedenâ€™s long and impactful history in the sciences. These
activities will prepare students with the skills needed to be effective and
ethical scientific researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the world population
continues to rise, novel solutions to global issues, such as climate change,
food production, clean energy production, access to clean water, and pollution
control, will need to be developed. Heterogeneous catalysis often plays a
critical role in combating these challenges, from synthesizing ammonia for
fertilizers using the Haber-Bosch process, to synthesizing carbon-neutral fuel
with the Fischer-Tropsch process, to reducing pollutants in the air with the
catalytic converter in cars. As the urgency of global challenges increase, it
becomes increasingly important to train a scientifically literate and
technically trained workforce whose backgrounds span multiple disciplines.
Students from Chapman University will have the opportunity to perform research
in foreign research labs at Stockholm University and the KTH Royal Institute of
Technology for 10 weeks during the summer. The foreign research mentors have
developed a collaboration to investigate model systems for catalytic tar
reforming in biomass gasification using modern surface science techniques and
computational methods. Student scholars will work collaboratively on these
projects and gain experience using sophisticated laser systems, working with
surface science instruments, analyzing experimental data, performing kinetic
modelling, and writing scientific reports. These student scholars will be
encouraged to embark on future scientific pursuits, develop skills necessary to
ensure success in the STEM fields, such as problem-solving and critical
thinking, and will engage in the international cultural exchange of ideas and
practices. These are expected to help create a more diverse population of
science-literate citizens to address current and future global
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.