* 2107275
* IRES Track I: Manifestations of climate change in extreme events
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Chris Forest, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Human-induced changes in the global climate and atmospheric environment are
among the most significant scientific challenges to address this century.
Increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases are the dominant cause of observed
warming since the mid-20th century. Earth System Models are used to both
understand these issues as well as project the future state of the climate and
the environment. However, significant uncertainties remain in these models,
owing to the lack of high-quality data of key variables, especially from complex
terrains that encompass mountains, rainforests, and a variety of land uses. This
IRES project will provide five U.S. undergraduate students each year the
opportunity to spend eight weeks in Peru to study the extreme weather
manifestations of climate change. Peru is on the extreme side of potential
impacts that climate change can have, and therefore, the training we will
develop in Peru could be applied to the United States. Students will learn the
necessary research skills to apply theories about climate change, impacts,
adaptation, and solutions within the Peruvian context. Students will also work
in Peru to address challenges associated with climate change. The international
experiences will contribute to increasing retention and graduation rates of
participating students, improve programs and strategies for sustaining diversity
in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program provides
individually challenging experiences in research and well-organized integrative
team activities and professional development to undergraduate students. The
program aims to provide a high quality, and balanced research activities that
positively impact the participants’ lifelong career choices in science and
engineering research. The students will work with faculty and investigators from
Peru and United States to integrate weather sensors and mount them on a drone,
design experiments, collect and analyze data, and present results to scientific
and non-scientific audiences. Students will study complex terrain and ecosystems
in collaboration with local scientific and engineering experts, and utilize
laboratory and local field infrastructure. Proposed activities rely on existing
and new data sets, social science data collection, and ground-based and remote
sensing measurements in collaboration with local partners in Peru to study
extreme weather events such as severe hailstorms and frost conditions in the
Peruvian Andes, and wildfires in the Peruvian Amazon. Research activities will
include data analyses to mitigate El Niño phenomena and identify Drawdown
solutions to combat climate change. Students will work within the areas of
faculty expertise but choose and define a project of personal interest. Each
project will have at least two faculty mentors to help the students develop with
multidisciplinary approaches to tackle their research activities. This program
includes a robust mentoring component aimed at sharing best practices for future
researchers. The involvement of undergraduates in research with exposure to
climate change and the social impact on humankind has implications well beyond
the technical scope of the individual research projects, and the inclusion of
science communication shows how research can directly impact
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.