* 2107267
* Collaborative Research: FTE: Medium: Three Dimensional Algorithmic Assembly and Information Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Natasa Jonoska, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 374,998.00

The future of materials is often thought to entail bottom-up construction of
three-dimensional systems to the highest possible precision. Biomolecules
intrinsically program their own structures, interact with high precisions and
are able to self-organize in complex structures. This project relies on these
capabilities and aims to use the informational character of DNA to program
biomolecules so that predesigned, highly-precise, 3D arrangements can be
achieved. Such developments would benefit a range of scientific and
technological fields including soft materials, biomedical interfaces, drug
delivery, computational devices, and centuries-long information storage. The
project merges chemistry and biochemistry with theoretical computer science and
mathematics from three universities so that exceptional opportunities will be
provided for interdisciplinary student training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is designing DNA-heteromatter motifs and demonstrate algorithmic DNA
self-assembly that is authentically three-dimensional. A prototype of 10x10x10
storage units is being built whose seed is made of three DNA origami-based
planes, and the cube is filled with algorithmically-arranged tensegrity triangle
blocks. The project will develop methods for storing and retrieving 3D
information that is algorithmically derived. These methods are based on X-ray
ptychography, cryogenic electron microscopy (cryoEM), and high-throughput DNA
sequencing to ensure that the designed systems will be readable and usable for
centuries. Through mentorship and training, the project is helping to reduce the
diversity gap between the national population and tenured faculty at research
institutions by providing professional development to undergraduate, graduate
and postdoctoral participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.