* 2107425
* Fluorescent PN-Heterocycles in Supramolecular Chemistry and Recognition
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Haley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 630,000.00

With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, Professors Michael Haley and Darren
Johnson and their students at the University of Oregon will investigate a new
class of molecules that contain adjacent phosphorous and nitrogen centers as
part of overall structure. These "PN-heterocycles" feature a strong hydrogen
bond donor adjacent to a strong acceptor within a compact, fluorescent core.
Fundamental supramolecular chemistry is at the heart of this proposal, and our
studies will explore and expand the utility of these easily-prepared molecules
as fluorescent materials, strong hydrogen bonding motifs for self-assembly and
molecular recognition, and supramolecular materials. This project provides
interdisciplinary research training to graduate and undergraduate researchers.
The broader impacts of this project also include (1) internship opportunities at
universities, national labs, and companies, (2) individual development plans,
(3) regional/international collaborations; and (4) mentoring opportunities to
ensure students receive both a depth of technical training and a breadth of
professional training to launch their careers. The PI's commitment to mentoring
undergraduate research and to innovation suggests that the research will have
broad impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental research aims to design and
synthesize PN-heterocycles as new fluorophores and as recognition motifs in
supramolecular chemistry, organic materials, and molecule/ion recognition. The
aims of this project are organized around the following two complementary
primary objectives: (1) to perform fundamental studies on these PN-heterocycles
in the areas of chiral resolution, organic materials, and new fused-arenes
featuring extended conjugation and/or prototropic tautomerism; and (2) to
explore the utility of PN-heterocycles in supramolecular chemistry in the areas
of hydrogen bond-driven self-assembly, oxoanion recognition, and chiral
recognition. The ultimate goal of this research program is to expand the
fundamental understanding of these new PN-heterocycles and extend these studies
into supramolecular chemistry and molecular recognition. These new heterocycles
have the advantage of featuring a very strong hydrogen bonding motif with an
inherently fluorescent scaffold, putting both chiral recognition and signal
transduction elements directly at the site of recognition and assembly. This
research employs a combination of methods, including calorimetric, NMR
spectroscopic, and spectrophotometric titrations, to determine the binding
properties of the supramolecular receptors and to gain a better understanding of
how structural changes influence their binding affinity, selectivity, and
optoelectronic properties. The studies provide the researchers with broad
experience in organic synthesis, physical organic chemistry, supramolecular
chemistry, computational chemistry, X-ray crystallography, and the interplay
between electronic structure and molecular
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.