* 2107711
* Collaborative Research:  A Systematic and Comprehensive Study of Black Hole-Driven Turbulence in Massive Galactic Systems
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yuanyuan Su, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 278,074.00

In order to prevent the immediate conversion of a galaxy’s total gas supply into
stars, a feedback mechanism must exist to slow down star formation. One
promising candidate is the injection of turbulence into a galaxy’s supply of gas
by a super-massive black hole. This research team has developed a technique to
measure gas turbulence in systems hosting giant central black holes and will
directly evaluate the viability of this mechanism using a large sample of
galaxies. The team will work with artists/graphic designers to integrate their
work into a series of freely available planetarium shows, mentor under-
represented groups in STEM research, support a postdoc and a graduate student,
and introduce undergraduates to astronomical research. This project is jointly
funded by MPS/AST and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deliver a more complete view
of the “feedback” provided by accreting SMBHs, leading to a better understanding
of the black hole-host galaxy relation. More specifically, it will directly
probe the energetics of the intra-cluster, circum-galactic, and interstellar
media of massive early-type galaxies. The origin of turbulence, the coupling
between hot and cold gas, and the microscopic physics will be revealed through
the gas kinematics of these systems at different mass scales using X-ray
(Chandra), visible (VLT/MUSE), and sub-millimeter (ALMA) observations. The
innovative technique of studying the velocity structure of multi-phase filaments
has the potential to be a more direct and accurate way to probe turbulent gas
motion, vis-a-vis X-ray surface brightness fluctuation analysis, resonant
scattering analysis, and even the direct X-ray line width measurement with
Hitomi. This project will be a pathfinder for the calorimeter-based X-ray
observatories of the next generation such as XRISM, Athena-XIFU, and
Lynx.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.