* 2107947
* Ion-plasma etched nano-structured surfaces for high performance transmissive and diffractive elements in imaging/spectroscopic instruments for astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hanshin Lee, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 309,854.00

Astronomy relies on detecting light from faint and distant objects in the
Universe. To do this all light gathered by a telescope needs to be measured with
highly efficient instruments that minimize losses of the light collected by the
primary mirror. The investigators will build a new kind of diffraction grating
and reflection-suppressing (anti-glare) optical lenses. The team will etch
nanometer-scale structures by bombarding the glass surfaces with charged ions in
a controlled way. This method has been shown to greatly improve the light-
transmission efficiency of these optical devices. In combination, gratings and
anti-glare lenses will increase the efficiency of current and future observing
instruments. This program integrates and provides training opportunities for
students in astronomy, instrument science, optical physics, and material
engineering topics. There are potential applications of such devices in a broad
range of electro-optical components and systems in other disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to advance a range of photonic
and instrumentation tools that are crucial for astronomical spectroscopic
research. This includes the introduction of highly deterministic reactive ion
etching fabrication technologies for high aspect ratio, compact line-density,
high-dispersion astronomical surface relief gratings, as well as, randomly
textured nanoscale anti-reflective surface structures, and their combined use to
push diffraction and transmission efficiency to theoretical limits. These gains
will not only significantly enhance the capabilities of existing telescope and
facilities, but also demonstrate the fabrication technology for diffraction
gratings and transmissive optical elements needed in the next generation of
astronomical instruments. When combined with Extremely Large Telescopes and
their Adaptive Optics systems, these advances will make a significant
improvement in total delivered throughput for a broad range of astronomical
low/medium/high resolution spectroscopic instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.