* 2107397
* SHF: Medium: Human-Centric Program Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Sorin Lerner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,008,001.00

The goal of Program Synthesis is to automate the process of software
development, helping to build software faster, cheaper, and with fewer errors.
Despite many recent research advances in this area, there is limited to no use
of synthesis in mainstream software development. The reason is that prior
research in this area has mainly focused on the algorithms that power program
synthesizers, and have devoted much less attention to the interaction between a
synthesizer and a human programmer. This project investigates the human-facing
side of Program Synthesis, with the goal of making synthesizers more usable by
programmers and integrating these tools better into software-development
workflows. By transforming the way in which programmers write code, this project
has the potential to make software better at a lower
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores three broad research arcs at the
intersection of Program Synthesis and Human-Computer Interaction. (1)
Communicating Intent: How should the programmer provide input to the
synthesizer? (2) Comprehending Synthesized Code: How should the programmer
understand the output of the synthesizer? (3) Tightly Integrated Synthesis
Workflow: How should we tightly integrate synthesis into the programmer's
workflow? More specifically, the investigators tackle the following research
challenges: (1) understanding how synthesis techniques can take advantage of
multiples kinds of specifications; (2) developing novel synthesis techniques
that can work in the face of incomplete or incorrect specifications; (3) guiding
synthesis techniques to take into account human-oriented considerations, such as
understandability of the code, or predictability of the tool; (4) personalize
synthesis approaches to the preferences of the programmer, to make the tools
more usable and the results more understandable to the individual programmer;
(5) adapting traditional programming workflows to make them more amenable to
synthesis; (6) making it easier for the programmer to decide, given a task, if
they should use synthesis or just write the code directly. All new techniques
developed in this project are incorporated into an online development
environment Snippy, which is freely available on the web. To evaluate Snippy,
the investigators conduct controlled A-B experiments with programmers, testing
whether Snippy helps them solve typical programming
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.