* 2107709
* Laser-Driven and Magnetized Ultracold Neutral Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Thomas Killian, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 528,400.00

This project will explore the fundamental behavior of a plasma, a soup of
electrons and ions, in a virtual ‘magnetic bottle’ trap. In order to understand
how the magnetic field of the Earth protects life from electrically charged
particles streaming from the sun, or to generate clean energy from nuclear
fusion, one has to understand how a plasma behaves in a magnetic field. This is
one of the key problems in the field of plasma physics. This project will
provide a detailed understanding of the behavior of plasmas trapped by a
magnetic field. The plasma will be created in a highly controlled manner that
results in an ultracold plasma, which is colder than outer space. Such low
temperatures make it easier to isolate different processes in the system for
study, such as the rate at which particles escape from the trap. Surprisingly,
an ultracold plasma shows behavior that is similar to hot and dense
astrophysical plasmas, so these experiments can answer fundamental questions on
the properties of objects such as white dwarf stars, which can possess strong
magnetic fields. The project will also train students in a broad set of
technical skills so they can contribute to the STEM workforce. Outreach and
recruiting efforts will be pursued in order to increase participation by
students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
combine recently developed tools for laser cooling ions in an ultracold neutral
plasma (UCNP) with magnetic-confinement techniques. This offers exciting
opportunities for discovery plasma science, such as characterizing equilibration
and transport phenomena in crossover regimes of magnetization and Coulomb-
interaction (or ‘coupling’) strength. Combining laser and magnetic forces may
provide a solution for long-standing challenges to plasma confinement in a
quadrupole magnetic-field geometry, namely the escape of plasma through loss
gaps along field lines. The combination of strong coupling and magnetization
modifies transport phenomena and collective modes, and has attracted increasing
interest from the dusty and high-energy-density plasma communities. These
experiments will create a new system for probing this physics, and will test
recent theories describing collisional processes in this regime. The specific
goals are to (1) characterize the loss processes and scaling of magnetic
confinement times with magnetic field for UCNPs formed in a quadrupole magnetic
field, (2) measure the self-diffusion constant for magnetized ions and observe
effects of strong coupling, and (3) use laser forces to plug loss gaps that
typically allow plasma to escape along guiding-center magnetic field lines in a
quadrupole magnetic field, creating long-term
confinement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.