* 2107705
* Collaborative research: The End of Star Formation: Gauging the Impact of Feedback on Dense Gas
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Grant Wilson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 409,024.00

Stars by the billions trace the structures of entire galaxies throughout the
visible universe. The investigators aim to improve models of the star formation
process. Dense gas cores are the parts of interstellar gas clouds that are the
birth sites of individual stars, or small groups of them. However, cores are
often observed to be weakly bound by external pressure and their own gravity.
Star forming clouds are very vulnerable to external influences from their
surroundings. The investigators will observe and model the range of environments
where cores are found, and they will characterize those environments and the
star forming cores. In addition, this program will support the AstroTROUP
initiative to provide paid research experiences during the academic year to
STEM-underrepresented minority student majors in Astronomy, as well as to hire
peer tutors for help in their coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will
support a series of projects to analyze local molecular cloud environments in
systematic ways using already available images of the regions. First, gas
structure and turbulent conditions will be constrained based on analysis of the
probability density functions and power spectra. Second, the investigators will
create a library of synthetic infrared observations of feedback-influenced
molecular gas from magnetohydrodynamic simulation results. They will use this
library to train a machine learning algorithm to systematically map out feedback
influences. Finally, the investigators plan to perform a comprehensive analysis
of core properties, derived from the investigatorâ€™s Clouds to Cores Legacy
Survey as a function of gas properties and feedback
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.