* 2107602
* Molecular Recognition of Anionic Sulfur, Oxygen, and Nitrogen Species
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Pluth, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 380,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the NSF Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Pluth of the University of
Oregon will develop general methods to bind, differentiate, and recognize under-
investigated anionic sulfur-, oxygen-, and nitrogen-containing species. These
small molecules play diverse and important roles in biological systems and the
environment. This research aims to gain a better fundamental understanding of
how these species behave in different systems. Through conducting this
interdisciplinary research, graduate and undergraduate students will receive
training in organic synthesis and analytical studies in supramolecular
chemistry. In addition, the research team will engage students in local
underserved middle schools in hands-on science activities to expand their
exposure to STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Michael Pluth and his research team
will investigate the molecular recognition of anionic reactive sulfur, oxygen
and nitrogen species, such as peroxynitrite, nitrite, thionitrite, and
perthionitrite. This project will focus on three specific aims. In Aim 1,
synthetic anion-binding hosts will be used to elucidate the factors that
influence binding of anionic guests including NO3- (nitrate), NO2- (nitrite),
SNO- (thionitrite) and SSNO- (perthionitrite). In Aim 2, additional host
receptors will be rationally designed and synthesized for specific recognition
of SNO- and SSNO-. In Aim 3, the research team will investigate whether the
anion-binding receptors can be used to modify the chemical speciation and
reactivity of reactive small molecules. Information gleaned from these
investigations is expected to expand the understanding of what specific
recognition motifs can be used to stabilize small molecule regulators and
control the equilibria of their interconversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.