* 2107946
* Multiphase Chemistry of Air Pollutants from Urban Cured-In-Place-Pipes Installations: Unrecognized Source of Atmospheric Micro- and Nano-Plastics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Alexander Laskin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 459,529.00

Air pollution is a national and global problem with significant adverse impact
on human health and wellbeing. Nationwide, there is a growing concern about the
emissions of gaseous and particulate air pollutants from urban CIPP (Cured-in-
Places-Pipes) installations. The CIPP process is widely utilized to repair
leaking sanitary and storm sewer pipes in urban areas. Recent studies have shown
that CIPP emissions consist of complex mixtures of gaseous and liquid organic
pollutants containing significant amounts of micro- and nano-plastic particles
(MNPs). Because of their low degradation rates and persistence in environmental
media (soils, water and air), MNPs pose long-term threats to ecosystems. MNPs
are also easily transferred to human bodies through ingestion and inhalation,
posing a potential threat to public health. The goal of this project is to
investigate the chemical composition of urban CIPP emissions with a focus on the
secondary-formed and directly emitted airborne MNPs. The successful completion
of this project will benefit society through the generation of new fundamental
knowledge that could inform the design and operations of CIPP installations to
control, reduce and minimize the formation and release of MNPs. Further benefits
to society will be achieved through student education and training including the
mentoring of two doctoral students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the growing
concern about urban air pollution from CIPP installations, a fundamental
understanding of the multiphase chemistry, reactivity, and environmental/health
impacts of MNPs from CIPP emissions has remained elusive. The goal of this
research is to characterize the composition and multiphase physical chemistry of
urban CIPP emissions. To advance this goal, the PI proposes to combine field
sampling, laboratory experiments and advanced analytical characterization.
First, the PI proposes to fractionate laboratory and field samples from
representative and simulated CIPP emissions into three fractions: 1) water- and
solvent-soluble organic fractions, 2) dried (lyophilized) colloids, and 3)
individual colloidal particles. For the characterization of the CIPP soluble
organic fractions, the PI proposes to combine high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) interfaced
with soft ionization sources [i.e., electrospray ionization (ESI) and
atmospheric pressure photo-chemical ionization (APPI/APCI)] to obtain a broad
account of the polar and nonpolar organic compounds that might be present in
CIPP emissions. For the dried (lyophilized) CIPP colloidal fractions, the PI
proposes to combine particle flow cytometry with dynamic light scattering to
characterize their particle size distributions. Finally, the PI proposes to
combine Raman microscopy, SEM (with EDX), and synchrotron-based scanning
transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) complemented by near edge X-ray absorption
fine Structure (NEXAFS) to image and analyze the composition of the individual
particles (e.g., MNPs) present in the dried (lyophilized) CIPP colloidal
fractions. The successful completion of the proposed research could lead to a
comprehensive characterization of MNPs and gaseous/liquid organic pollutants
from CIPP emissions ultimately providing new fundamental knowledge to guide the
design and operations of CIPP installations to control, reduce and minimize
urban air pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the
Environmental Engineering program of the NSF/ENG/CBET Division and the
Environmental Chemical Sciences program of the NSF/MPS/CHE
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.