* 2107246
* Collaborative Research: SHF Medium: A language for molecular communication using temporal codes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Rebecca Schulman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2025
* USD 449,997.00

Molecular programming is the discipline of encoding and processing information
through molecular interactions. Enabled by advances in DNA and RNA synthesis,
this field has led to the development of transformative methods to store
information using biomolecules, methods to perform diagnostics and “imaging”
without a microscope, methods to recognize and treat complex diagnostic states
with rationally designed molecules, as well as methods to orchestrate the
synthesis and assessment of large libraries of potential materials, devices or
drugs. Further scaling up the capabilities of molecular programs promises to
enable massive information storage and processing, to accelerate therapeutic or
vaccine development, and to fully automate chemical and materials synthesis and
processing. This project will advance molecular computing by developing a new
approach to transmitting information in molecular systems that is based on
temporal changes in the concentrations of specific biomolecules. Temporal
programs will be produced and decoded using in-vitro artificial gene networks,
where individual RNA molecules will have the capacity to carry multiple messages
encoded in the fluctuations of their concentration. The resulting temporal codes
will allow biomolecular components to communicate with one another to coordinate
their efforts, allowing the development of integrated molecular devices. These
methods could be used in other areas of bioengineering, such as for
communication between biomolecular processes and implantable medical devices.
The resulting research will bring innovation in undergraduate and graduate
educational material for bioengineering and data science, and will broaden
participation in computer science research by creating summer research
opportunities to a diverse community of undergraduates and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to systematically understand
how to design biochemical circuits that can recognize different temporal
patterns of chemical input signals by adopting existing fundamental engineering
concepts from control theory and computer science. It will construct in-vitro
genetic circuits that can generate and recognize temporal input patterns of
increasing complexity to validate and optimize our approach. Circuits will then
be adopted for the detection of temporal variations in light and different
biomolecular signals. These circuits could be used to increase the range of
responses that can be triggered in cells or in light-sensitive materials, and to
develop biochemical tools to make it easier to study how living cells produce
and interpret time-varying biochemical signals. The investigators will build on
their collaborative experience and complementary expertise in 1) computer
science and integrated biochemical systems design and 2) signal processing and
feedback control to build circuits that can interpret both discrete and
continuous domain signals as well as their combinations. The development of new
biochemical circuits capable of recognizing specific temporal inputs and the
development of tools to use them with light and biochemical inputs will impact
engineering, materials science, biology, biochemistry, synthetic biology and
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.