* 2107424
* IRES Track I: The Broad Impact of Flavor. A Research Experience on Metabolomics of Microbial Populations during Cacao Fermentation at the Escuela Superior Politecnica de Litoral
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jose Reyes-de-Corcuera, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 296,115.00

Centered on the development of the complex flavor profile of fine flavor cacao
during fermentation, this IRES aims at enhancing the global and scientific
competency of the student participants. This program promotes the participation
of minorities and underrepresented students in STEM disciplines. The craft
chocolate industry has grown rapidly over the last decade in the US and other
parts of the world. The global trade of fermented and dried cocoa beans affects
the lives of millions of individuals from cacao growers to chocolate
manufacturers and the consumer. About 5% of the cacao produced in the world is
from varieties that produce high quality chocolate, with Ecuador as one of the
largest producers of such varieties. However, the large variability in the
quality of fermented beans affects the quality, acceptability, and value of the
chocolate produced. The variability in the quality of fermented cacao also
lowers the price that local cacao growers, mostly smallholders, are paid.
Despite its impact on flavor, of all the stages of chocolate production, cacao
fermentation remains the most complex and the least studied. In this IRES
project, U.S. students will participate in multidisciplinary research to better
understand and control the variability of cacao fermentation in Ecuador.
Students will learn research methods, experiment design, chemical analysis, food
microbiology, sensory analysis, and multivariate data analysis. Every year, for
three years, cohorts of two graduate and two undergraduate students from across
the U.S. will be immersed for 8 weeks in a diverse team in Guayaquil, Ecuador.
Students will be mentored by cross-disciplinary faculty from the University of
Georgia, and from the Center for Biotechnology Research of Ecuador (CBRE), as
well as by the quality manager at KAOKA, a French chocolate manufacturer with
fermentation operations in Ecuador. In this international industry-academia
collaboration, students will participate in laboratory and field research where
they will further their scientific, professional, and sociocultural
skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Our research goal is to consistently produce high-
quality cocoa products through controlled fermentations. Students from each
cohort will work on one of five subthemes that aim at characterizing the sources
of variability, harnessing them, and designing systems and procedures that
minimize variability. Research activities with scientific mentors and local
students at CBRE include analyzing the chemical composition of fresh cocoa beans
using a metabolomics approach that encompasses advanced chromatographic methods
and multivariate analysis. This approach will help elucidating the variability
of the raw material and correlating the principal components to the quality of
the fermented beans. At KAOKA, students will learn the daily operation of a
large fermentation facility and interact with technical staff and workers to
design and execute field experiments. Students will characterize the chemical
composition and analyze the evolution of the microbial populations to identify
means of measuring and controlling the progress of the fermentation. Students
will also analyze the composition of chocolate produced from different
fermentation batches to assess how composition affects the flavor complexity and
the duration of the organoleptic experience and strategize means of producing
the best quality attributes. Finally, informed by all the previous studies, some
of the participants will design and optimize a small-scale fermenter for
smallholders. The dissemination of this IRES is expected to inspire other
students from minorities and underrepresented groups to pursue STEM careers and
participate in similar experiences. This research is expected to benefit the
growing U.S. craft chocolate industry and contribute to eventually help cacao
smallholders and their communities. This new knowledge likely to positively
impact the fermentation of other cacao cultivars in other regions and to
contribute to the U.S. leadership in science-driven development efforts in
developing countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
International Research Experiences for Students program (IRES) and the Division
of Biological Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.