* 2107839
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: WoU-MMA: Crossing the Chasm: From Compact Object Mergers to Cosmic Fireworks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alexander Chekhovskoy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 296,685.00

The project will model the evolution of matter outflows following the merger of
neutron star binaries. The project will stitch together the results from
simulations that are valid at different scales, using the output of smaller
scale simulations as the input for larger scale simulations. In this way, the
project will be able to follow the matter outflows and jets from the initial
merger event all the way out to the point where the material interacts with the
interstellar medium. The project will be able to predict the electromagnetic
signals from the merger and relate them to the initial properties of the binary
system. The project will also develop materials for use in public outreach to
bring astronomy education to students in kindergarten through high school. This
award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea. This project
is supported by both the National Science Foundation and the US-Israel
Binational Science Foundation to further collaborations between the
astrophysical communities in the two countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will start with final snapshots from general relativity simulations of
the merger event as initial conditions for general relativistic
magnetohydrodynamic (GRMHD) simulations. Similarly, the final snapshots of the
GRMHD simulations will be used as initial conditions for the magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) simulations that carry the jets out to distances where it interacts with
the interstellar medium. The project will then calculate electromagnetic signals
from the simulation results using a radiative transfer code. The simulations
will be run on GPUs for increased computational efficiency. The project will
also develop "Star Packs" for the Sacramento Library appropriate for K-5
students that can be checked out in libraries. The PI at Purdue will develop
instructional materials on gravity and black holes for middle- and high-school
students. The Northwestern PI will develop instructional materials for an
electro-magnetism class at the high-school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.