* 2107977
* I-Corps:  Hybrid additive manufacturing that provides computational solutions to fabricate geometrically complex components
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Michael Sealy, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software platform that provides hybrid manufacturing solutions
for designing light-weight mechanical systems with predictable short- and long-
term failure rates. Providing a targeted hybrid manufacturing solution may
extend service life and reduce operational costs by improving strength and
production quality. As a result, additive manufacturing becomes accessible to
aerospace and biomedical applications that have strict functional design and
reliability requirements or geometrically complex structures. Geometric
complexity and lattice structures are becoming a staple in modern design.
Current tools such as topology optimization are incapable of maximizing
strength-to-weight ratios. This software platform provides a hybrid
manufacturing solution that optimizes weight while it proactively increases
strength through interlayer cold working. In aerospace components, this lowers
the buy-to-fly ratio by saving weight, which lowers fuel cost. In addition, this
software platform addresses maintenance and reliability issues of legacy
aircraft and tool-and-die components by significantly reducing lead times for
replacement parts with enhanced aftermarket performance. The technology may
provide industry with software solutions to best manufacture components
requiring weight savings or known times to failure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a hybrid additive manufacturing
technology that combines three-dimensional printing with secondary material
strengthening processes, such as laser peening, to improve functional
performance. Laser peening is a surface treatment that induces favorable
compressive residual stress in components to increase hardness and strength
throughout large build volumes. The technical barrier addressed by this
technology is understanding when, where, and how much laser peening is needed
throughout the build volume. The proposed technology provides computational
solutions for hybrid additive manufacturing that identify optimal locations for
interlayer peening needed to achieve the highest possible strength-to-weight
ratios without compromising functionality or performance. The model is able to
simulate distortion and strength from cumulative residual stress fields induced
by interlayer peening. This technology has been shown to increase toughness of
stainless steel by 50% and increase corrosion resistance of a biomedical-grade
magnesium alloy by 70% compared to traditional additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.