* 2107138
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Automated Word Level Synthesis for Hardware Code Generation and Verified Abstraction
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Aarti Gupta, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2024
* USD 465,000.00

The success of formal methods has enabled widespread applications in ensuring
correctness, safety, and reliability of computing systems. This project on
automated word-level synthesis is providing a core utility for diverse
applications since the bit-vector representation of various computing systems is
well-suited for both hardware designs and low-level software. By virtue of the
underlying formal reasoning, the programs synthesized by the automated methods
are guaranteed to be correct-by-construction, thus improving their quality and
improving developer productivity. The two application domains targeted in this
project – computer networks and systems-on-chips – form core components of the
computing infrastructure that provides numerous products and services of
interest to society. The research activities involve training and mentoring
graduate students, and development of teaching
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-world applications that require bit-precise
reasoning for synthesis and verification, such as in the domains of computer
networks and hardware, remain challenging in terms of performance and
scalability. One main reason is that existing techniques for synthesis over
bitvectors rely largely on a translation of multi-bit words down to bits, called
bit-blasting, which destroys the high-level structure in the application
programs. This project aims to improve automated synthesis of word-level bit-
precise programs, with applications in network packet processing and
verification of systems-on-chip (SoCs). The core research activities include
development of a new approach to word-level synthesis. The synthesizer is guided
by word-level quantifier elimination over bit-vectors without bit-blasting. It
also leverages the well-known framework of Syntax-Guided Synthesis (SyGuS),
where the search for a program is guided by domain knowledge captured in the
form of context-free grammars, program sketches, and partial specifications
comprising input-output examples. The project develops suitable grammars and
synthesis methods in two application domains: (1) synthesis of code for
programmable network switches from high-level packet processing programs, and
(2) synthesis of verified architecture-level abstractions from hardware designs
of accelerators and processors in modern SoCs. These improve techniques for code
generation (from high-level to low-level programs) and verified abstraction
(from low-level to high-level programs), respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.