* 2107470
* SHF: Medium: Cross-Cutting Effort to Make Non-Volatile Memories Truly Usable
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Josep Torrellas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2025
* USD 900,012.00

The emergence of non-volatile memory technologies offers great potential for
improving the performance of modern software systems and applications, and is
very likely to revolutionize multiple areas of computing. However, the use of
non-volatile memory in computer systems faces substantial programming,
performance, and usability challenges. These challenges hinder the widespread
adoption of non-volatile memory in current and future computing systems, and
make applications that use non-volatile memory difficult to write. To address
these problems, this project uses a cross-cutting and multi-layer effort that
makes advances in compilers, computer architecture, and distributed systems.
With such an approach, the project significantly improves the software
development productivity of programs using non-volatile memory technologies, as
well as their performance. In addition, this project includes a robust education
effort at the University of Illinois, where new interdisciplinary courses are
developed and research opportunities are offered to undergraduate students and
under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three major
thrusts. First, the project builds an easy-to-use and generic programming
framework for non-volatile memories that requires minimal programmer
involvement. Second, this project redesigns hardware primitives in the processor
and memory hierarchy to minimize the overhead of both memory persistency
operations and other operations needed to make the systems more usable. Third,
this project develops distributed data persistency models and applies them to a
distributed runtime environment that facilitates the use of non-volatile
memories in distributed computing systems. The project further includes an
effort to collaborate with Microsoft and Intel to perform technology transfer.
Finally, this project maintains a public repository with all the data, code,
results, emulators, and simulators used and developed throughout this project.
The repository is accessible through http://iacoma.cs.uiuc.edu, and will be kept
up to date for at least three years after the project
ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.