* 2107060
* CNS Core: Medium: Characterization, Mitigation, and Management of Active 3D Camera Interference
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 750,000.00

This project focuses on interference encountered in active 3D camera networks.
Active 3D cameras are gaining widespread use in many scenarios, primarily to
understand location and presence of objects in vicinity of the camera. While
expensive forms of it is common in autonomous vehicles for understanding the
environment, technological improvements have led to these devices to be
inexpensive, and suitable for integration in common mobile devices, such as
smartphones and tablets. In such mobile devices, active 3D cameras enable many
new ways that users can interact with the physical world. Active 3D cameras
operate by sending light pulses in different directions, and by observing the
reflections of these light pulses, can understand the properties of its
environment. As more and more devices are equipped with active 3D cameras,
chances of interference between multiple active 3D cameras go up. As the light
pulses from different active 3D cameras "collide" in space and time, the
inference about the environment is going to be inaccurate. In the case of
autonomous vehicles this can lead to incorrect estimates of objects in the
physical world leading to disastrous consequences. In the case of common mobile
devices and their applications, such errors will lead to poor user experience
and overall performance. While this problem has not been a significant issue
thus far, due to limited number of active 3D cameras in our environment, the
significant reduction in its cost will likely lead to an explosion of these
devices. This project is designing methods by which such interference between
active 3D cameras can be detected, mitigated, thereby preserving their
usefulness in diverse scenarios. Beyond the core research activities, the
project also involves significant educational components which include setup of
a laboratory-oriented curriculum around 3D camera and wireless systems for
students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels; creation of interactive,
children-focused workshops on “fun with cameras” at public science events in the
University Wisconsin-Madison campus; and engagement of undergraduates in
research activities. The outreach plan involves engagement with industrial
partners, public dissemination of results through project website, through open-
sourced artifacts, and through conferences and journals, and in creating
specific forums that encourage students from underrepresented groups towards
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.