* 2107298
* HCC: Medium: Designing Human-Centered Environments for Enhancing Diversity in Open Source
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* James Herbsleb, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

To increase inclusion and enhance diversity at all levels of participation, this
research will investigate gender-based barriers to involvement in open source
software. Surveys show that the representation of women in open source software
is only about 5%, even worse than the technical workforce overall. Previous
research on gender in the computing profession has identified lack of self-
efficacy and mentorship support as key barriers to participation and retention
for women and underrepresented individuals. This project will investigate how
these barriers influence participation in open source software development
communities. It will identify and disseminate actions project owners and
contributors can take to enhance participation from underrepresented groups.
This research will create tools and conduct workshops to enhance participation
from underrepresented members. Since participation in open source is
increasingly important for obtaining employment in technical fields, this
research has the potential to significantly enhance workforce development.
Finding ways to make open source more welcoming to all genders could nearly
double the available technical workforce, with major benefits both to industry,
where talent is in short supply, and to society, by enhancing the nationâ€™s
ability to create software-intensive products and services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance diversity in open source by
first performing a series of mixed-methods studies of practice, consisting of
interviews, a large-scale survey, and archival analyses to understand: (a) how
participation experiences vary based on subjects' genders; and (b) why they
leave or do not join open source software projects. Based on these studies, the
research team will design, deploy, and evaluate interventions that enhance self-
efficacy and facilitate new forms of mentoring in open source environments. The
following specific research contributions are expected: (1) deeper knowledge
about the causes of low participation by women in open source software
development and open collaborative environments; (2) an understanding of how
automation and visualization can support self-efficacy and mentorship for
underrepresented contributors in open collaboration environments; and (3)
guidelines for the design of inclusive collaboration environments. More
generally, this research is expected to yield new knowledge about how to enhance
human performance through the design of inclusive, open environments in software
engineering and even more broadly, for computer-supported
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.