* 2107806
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Bridging the gap between fluid and plasma scales in AGN jets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dimitrios Giannios, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 237,883.00

When matter falls into supermassive black holes, it forms a disk of material.
Jets of matter streaming away from the disk can be produced in the extreme
environment of a black hole. These jets are promising sources of high energy
cosmic rays and neutrinos that can be detected on Earth. This project will
produce computer models of the acceleration of particles in these jets. The
project will combine two techniques to provide a better understanding of how and
where cosmic rays and neutrinos are produced in jets. The techniques can also be
applied to other sources of cosmic rays, such as gamma ray bursts and pulsars.
The project will also develop an interactive website that introduces the latest
developments of the research. This website will be combined with day-long
workshops to make the material accessible to high-school students. A program
will also be developed to bring astrophysics discussions to soup kitchens in the
New York City area. This award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe
Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling of the acceleration of particles in
astrophysical jets will be done with relativistic magnetohydrodynamics and
particle-in-cell codes that can tie small scale non-thermal processes with
larger scale fluid models. The approach used will allow for the development of
mid-scale studies linking the regimes of the two different codes. Models of
radiative processes will then be applied to the output of the mid-scale models
to produce reliable radiative signatures expected from different regions and
processes within the jets. The approach used in this work can be also applied to
gamma ray bursts, double neutron star mergers, and pulsar wind nebulae. The
project will also provide research opportunities for undergraduate students. The
project will develop an interactive website called "Astrophysics Lab on Cosmic
Rays" which can be used in both undergraduate and high-school settings. Use of
the materials in the high-schools will be assisted by day-long worktops for
educators and students. The project will also implement a program called "Astro-
soup", where serving food to the homeless in NYC will be accompanied by a more
structured discussion on astrophysical topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.