* 2107360
* Conjugated Polymers Doped via Covalent Dopant-Molecule Adducts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Paulette Clancy, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,301.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Howard E. Katz and Paulette Clancy of
the Johns Hopkins University are developing small organic molecules for use in
doping of conjugated polymers. Conjugated polymers are carbon-based
macromolecules that contain long chains consisting of alternating double and
single bonds. When the double bond arrangements are changed by removing or
adding electrons, positive and negative charges are created in the polymers that
enable them to conduct electricity similarly to metals such as copper.
Currently, conjugated polymers are the most important class of materials used
for optoelectronic devices such as LED (light-emitting diode) screens in mobile
devices and computers; also being used to protect such electronic components
from outside electrical interference. In this research, systematic studies using
a combination of experimental and computational approaches will closely examine
the mechanism of electron transfer in these polymeric systems, a mechanism for
which many details are still not known. Increased understanding of such systems
has the potential to lead to novel conjugated materials with tunable electronic
properties of relevance to flexible electronics and power devices. The education
and outreach activities of this project will focus on the engineering innovation
program at Johns Hopkins University targeting low-income Baltimore City
participants. A boot camp on coding will be offered to middle schoolers with the
goal of improving the programming skills of future STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math) scientists, with the particular goal of reaching women and
members of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
targeting a series of thiophene-based molecules and oligomers for use in doping
of conjugated polymers. The proposed theoretical and experimental studies are
designed to test the hypothesis that the free energy change from (a) difference
in hole/electron affinities, (b) work of charge separation, and (c)
delocalization/distribution entropy between neutral conjugated polymers and
covalent ion-adducts will lead to charge transfer and electrical conductivity.
Thiophene-based conjugated molecules and oligomers for adduct formation studies
will be selected with a range of hardness/softness and to favor paired-electron,
covalent bond formation (as opposed to electron transfer interactions) in
aprotic solvents to enable testing of whether the covalent adducts ultimately
serve as electron transfer agents of conjugated polymers. Extensive
spectroscopic and electrochemical characterization methods are to be used to
gain a deeper understanding of the doping mechanism and how structural changes
affect doping levels, solid-state structures, conductivity, and the Seebeck
coefficient. The results associated with this research have the potential to
lead to more reliable doping strategies in conjugated polymer- a key challenge
for further development of organic bioelectronics and flexible
conductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.