* 2108205
* New Experimental and Theoretical Frameworks for the Study of Nuclear Spin State Lifetimes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alexej Jerschow, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2024
* USD 465,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Alexej Jerschow and his group at New York University are
investigating the magnetic properties of molecules, and their capacity for
storing information. These magnetic properties are at the heart of nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR), a technique enabling medical imaging, the study of
molecular structure and dynamics, and the characterization of materials. The
work will involve both experimental and computational aspects, seeking improved
understanding of the underlying structures and processes. Students participating
in this work will be broadly educated in experiment and theory related to
analytical techniques, nuclear magnetic resonance, and quantum mechanics.
Through collaboration with the Pratt Institute, the team will participate in
projects using spectroscopic techniques for art conservation, work that is
expected to engage a diverse group of students from non-traditional pathways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Jerschow group is studying nuclear
spin singlet states with potential for storing magnetization and information
over periods much exceeding usual spin-lattice relaxation times. These
properties may lead to new classes of contrast agents for magnetic resonance
imaging, and enable measurements of slow dynamic processes. The project seeks a
thorough understanding of the nature of nuclear spin singlet state relaxation,
thereby potentially unlocking hitherto untapped potential. At the conclusion of
this study, the Jerschow group aims to have established a combined experimental,
theoretical, and computational basis for the study of nuclear spin singlet
lifetime limiting factors including situations of relevance for physiological
conditions. The work will include NMR spectroscopy methodology as well as
computational efforts. Secondary goals include the establishment of new
measurement paradigms (e.g. symmetrization/desymmetrization), the
characterization of obscure relaxation mechanisms such as scalar relaxation of
the second kind, and spin-rotation, and the generation of novel approaches to
predict NMR properties from molecular dynamics simulations, which could
facilitate the development of new structural and dynamics
probes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.