* 2108094
* Precision Cosmology with Photometrically-Classified Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Masao Sako, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 344,394.00

Type 1a supernovae can be used as a tool to measure distances to galaxies at
high redshift. Surveys of such supernovae therefore allow astronomers to
determine cosmological parameters. This project makes use of imaging surveys to
make improvements in photometric classification of supernovae and to construct a
framework for accurately characterizing the resulting uncertainties on
cosmological model parameters. The Principal Investigator will establish a new
mentoring program for physics majors at the University of Pennsylvania. This
program will help create a cultural shift within the department and increase
awareness of issues related to inclusivity and diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cosmological parameter measurements with present and
future supernova surveys will rely on photometric Type Ia supernova (SN Ia)
classification with or without spectroscopic redshifts of the host galaxies. The
PI will conduct a research program to make improvements in photometric
classification and to construct a framework for accurately characterizing the
systematic uncertainties on cosmological model parameters. The project focuses
on quantifying the systematic uncertainties due to (1) photometric
misclassification of SN candidates and (2) mis-association of their host
galaxies. Data from the Dark Energy Survey will be used to characterize the non-
SN Ia population. This will be used to help improve photometric classifiers as
well as place robust uncertainties on misclassification rates versus redshift,
which is essential for precision cosmology. The methodology will be applied to
help make further improvements with the Vera Rubin Observatory. The PI will
establish a mentoring and support program for Physics majors at the University
of Pennsylvania. The mentors will consist of graduate students, who will be
trained through the PI and other teaching resources at Penn. Undergraduate
students will be paired with a mentor, who will guide them through the process
of finding a research advisor, making realistic decisions about their career
paths, and for those interested, help them with the graduate-school application
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.