* 2108676
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Development and Application of Machine Learning Classification of Optical Transients
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Victoria Villar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 398,737.00

This project will develop, test, and use, a range of machine learning (ML)
algorithms and pipelines for the photometric classification of optical
transients from current and future surveys. The discovery rate of optical
transients already outpaces traditional spectroscopic classification methods,
and with future surveys only a tiny fraction of their discoveries can be
observed spectroscopically. Photometric classification is therefore essential,
for identifying rare transients in real time, for classifying transients to
allow population studies, and for discovering new classes of transient. Each of
these goals requires different ML and algorithmic approaches. Now that
appropriate data are in hand and usable for initial classification tests, this
is the right time to test the pipelines to be used for the real-time discovery
of rare transients, in preparation for future much larger data volumes. Students
and postdocs will gain experience developing and implementing ML algorithms,
carrying out spectroscopic and multi-wavelength studies of astronomical
transients. This experience will feed into undergraduate education, connecting
classroom learning and hands-on research and involving non-computer science
majors, including student observing with large-aperture telescopes, and science
fair experiences for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on
recent successes by this team in creating initial classification pipelines using
a range of ML algorithms, which were trained on, and then applied to, real data.
It draws on a combination of large survey data, ML techniques, and active multi-
wavelength follow-up, to prepare students and postdocs for Big Data scientific
techniques in astronomy. This project will develop pipelines to: (i) combine
time-series based light curve classification with image-based host galaxy
classification; (ii) develop, test, and implement ML pipelines targeted at
specific classes of known rare transients; and (iii) design algorithms for
anomaly detection to discover new types of rare transients. The classification
tools produced by this work will be used for a wide range of time-domain
astrophysics applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.