* 2108788
* High Fidelity Fluid-Kinetic Hybrid Modeling of Intense, Short Pulse Laser Plasma Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Bradley Shadwick, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

The project is dedicated to the development of new computational tools for
studying laser-plasma accelerators that achieve high physical fidelity at
reasonable computational cost. The key element is the use of multiple physics
models, each tuned to accurately represent particular plasma processes. The
project includes the development of new two-dimensional simulation codes which
will be used to determine the key physical processes involved in electron beam
formation in laser-plasma accelerators. Knowledge gained in this project will
aid the effort to realize the technological promise of laser-plasma accelerators
with a wide range of applications from high-energy physics, astrophysics, and
nuclear science to medicine, biology, and chemistry. Additionally, this project
has an important educational component and will aid in workforce development by
providing training in the basic plasma physics and the physics underlying
advanced accelerator technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser-plasma
acceleration is a key enabling technology for a new generation of compact
particle and radiation sources. Detailed manipulation of phase space will lead
to a further revolution in advanced accelerators. Realizing these advances
requires exploiting the promise of laser-plasma accelerators with a first
principles understanding of the phase-space dynamics of these systems. Clear and
complete understanding of phase-space processes opens the door to the
manipulation of phase space and to greater control over the electron beam
parameters. High-fidelity computational tools are essential to developing this
understanding. Multi-physics approaches alter the physics content of the models,
depending on the system behavior, allowing for high accuracy while keeping the
computational cost to manageable levels. Many of the technological applications
of intense-laser plasma interactions, such as compact, next-generation light
sources, have stringent limits on beam quality that exceed what is currently
available. The results of this study are expected to advance the development of
these technologies, having ultimate applications in a wide range of
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.