* 2108660
* Collaborative Research: De Novo Protein Constructs for  Photosynthetic Energy Transduction
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* William DeGrado, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 10/31/2024
* USD 374,994.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors Michael Therien and David Beratan of Duke
University and William DeGrado of University of California-San Francisco are
studying new approaches to design materials that direct, store, and release
energy. Biology has developed numerous designs that carry out these functions;
chemists, however, have yet to create energy harvesting, storage, and release
systems from scratch that possess the sophistication of those seen in nature.
Recent advances in protein design enable chemists to construct large molecules
that capture and manage the flow of positive charges, negative charges, and
energy. By designing protein-based materials that migrate and collect charges
and energy, unique optical, electrical, and chemical functions will be realized.
The experimental procedures used in this effort will (i) provide new tools to
build proteins having innovative designed functions, and (ii) characterize the
structures and energy storage and release functions of these proteins. This
pursuit will allow graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to acquire
specialized training in synthetic chemistry, protein design, protein
biochemistry, modern computational methods, and techniques to monitor fast
processes that move charge and energy. The protein design methods developed will
be broadly applicable, and enable construction of new biologically inspired
materials that carry out novel functions not seen in nature. Outreach activities
of this project will introduce college and pre-college students to important new
technologies, and teach skills important for future careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological energy transduction relies on
protein-cofactor assemblies that possess physico-chemical functionality that far
exceeds that realized to date through molecular and macromolecular design and
synthesis. This research project will be undertaken to realize such complex
functionality through “design from scratch” strategies that exploit de novo
proteins that bind abiological cofactors, and in the process, elucidate
fundamental design principles required for photosynthetic energy transduction,
storage, and release. This project takes advantage of an integrated, multi-
disciplinary approach to evolve peptide-cofactor complexes that possess
sophisticated electro-optic functionality, encompassing cofactor design and
synthesis, advanced computational methods that provide proteins that bind these
cofactors in precise, organized spatial arrangements, protein expression and
characterization, state-of-the-art pump-probe transient optical methods that
characterize function and reaction dynamics, and high resolution protein
structure determination. Information from this study is expected to elucidate
fundamental principles required for photosynthetic energy transduction, and
designed proteins that possess novel electro-optical function and transduce
energy via innovative pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.