* 2108917
* DISES: Coproducing Actionable Science to Understand, Mitigate, and Adapt to Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms (CHABS)
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Robyn Wilson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,599,997.00

Despite large investments in improving water quality efforts worldwide,
cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms (CHABS) remain common and are getting worse.
CHABs can produce toxins, which can sicken or kill humans and animals, impair
recreational opportunities, and threaten the supply of drinking and irrigation
water for millions of people worldwide. Improving water quality and reducing
CHABs is vital for society and a healthy environment. Fundamental gaps in
knowledge of this complex socio-environmental system (SES) limit our ability to
fully understand the problem, assess response actions, and motivate and support
transformative change. This DISES award supports research addressing critical
knowledge gaps around the role of nutrient pollution in determining the size and
toxin concentrations of CHABs, the promotion of farmer collective action, the
economic benefits of water quality improvements, and improving SES governance.
The investigators will address these gaps through improved watershed simulation
and integrated economic and hydrologic modeling, advances in SES science and
theory for water quality governance, and improved capacity for transforming SES
through actionable knowledge to support CHABs decision making. Results will
inform national integrated assessment models of nutrient pollution, and the
guidance produced will inform management in other eutrophic waterbodies impacted
by agriculture. This research will train the next generation of
interdisciplinary SES scholars and practitioners including two postdoctoral
scientists and seven graduate and at least eight undergraduate students. The
team will involve more than 100 students in outreach. Multiple datasets will be
made available on the Open Science Framework, and these will also be used to
develop CHABs SES curricula that will benefit teachers and students in grades
5-12. The curricula will be distributed through the Teaching Channel and the
daVinci Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHABS degrade water quality and diminish
essential ecosystem services worldwide. Despite longstanding efforts to
understand this complex SES and reduce excess nitrogen and phosphorus inputs,
poor water quality remains a persistent problem. Fundamental gaps in knowledge
of critical SES components and interactions include: understanding the role of
nitrogen (N) loading and N and phosphorus (P) cycling in driving CHAB biomass
and toxin concentrations; farmer collective action behavior; the economic
benefits of water quality improvement; and how to change SES governance. These
gaps inhibit our ability to adjust existing management and governance
approaches, which may make toxic CHABs worse. This interdisciplinary research
and education project focuses on advancing CHABs SES science, improving
practical CHABs management, and training the next generation of SES scholars to
help address this societal challenge. Specifically, this research will: 1)
advance fundamental understanding of more transformative approaches to
behavioral change and SES water quality governance; 2) advance fundamental
understanding of the role of N in driving CHAB biomass and toxicity and how in-
stream processing of N and P influences the spatial and temporal distribution of
water quality improvements; 3) improve watershed and integrated assessment
models to incorporate new fundamental understanding of behavioral change, the
role of N (in addition to P), in-stream transformation of N and P, and economic
benefits of water quality; and 4) employ improved integrated assessment models
to assess the effects of different coproduced management and governance
scenarios on downstream water quality, coproduce actionable policy-relevant
information and knowledge, and test the effectiveness of a stakeholder-engaged
approach for building transformative capacity and enabling improved SES water-
quality governance. Qualitative and quantitative datasets, insights and
guidance, improved models, and curricula will be produced and made widely
available through academic and non-academic outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.