* 2108314
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Constraining the uncertain physics of galaxy formation: cosmic rays, black holes, and beyond
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dusan Keres, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 330,903.00

Computer simulations of galaxy formation are powerful tools to help understand,
test, and predict the observed properties of galaxies in the local and extremely
distant Universe. Given the large number of sensitive wide-area galaxy surveys
that have recently started (or are soon to be underway) there is a critical need
for simulations that model the formation and evolution of galaxies with the
highest accuracy. The proposed research will build upon the group’s earlier
transformative galaxy simulations by adding the effects of gas accretion onto
massive black holes, extremely high energy atomic nuclei (cosmic rays), and
magnetic fields. These efforts will additionally train graduate and
undergraduate students, mentor area high school students, and produce animations
for public shows. The team will continue an educational program for prison
inmates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research represents the further development
of a project started several years ago by the FIRE (Feedback in Realistic
Environments) collaboration to create state-of-the-art hydrodynamic simulations
of galaxy formation and evolution that included a detailed treatment of
“feedback” from massive stars and supernovae. That work successfully reproduced
a wide range of observed galaxy properties – masses, chemical abundances trends,
and scaling relations – for dwarf galaxies up to approximately Milky Way sized
(L*) systems. For more massive galaxies, an accurate treatment of the energy
injected by rapidly accreting massive black holes (i.e., active galactic nuclei;
AGN) is required. This is one of the primary updates to the original FIRE
simulation code proposed here. Other potentially important processes, including
magnetic fields and cosmic rays, and a new framework to track chemical
abundances are to be implemented as well. These promise to result in new galaxy
simulations with parsec-scale resolution that are more accurate and that allow
predictions (i.e., “forward modeling”) for a wide range of physical phenomena,
including resolved radio and gamma-ray emission, cosmic ray spectra, Faraday
rotation in and around galaxies, the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect, and the dynamics
of the circum-galactic medium. The FIRE team will make publicly available to the
scientific community new modules for the GIZMO simulation code developed as part
of this work, as well as data products from the project. In the area of Broader
Impacts this project will support four graduate students, a dozen undergraduate
students, and a number of high-school students involved in creating scientific
animations. The team will also engage inmates in educational activities via a
partnership with the Stateville Correctional Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.