* 2108227
* Developmental Architecture of Structure and Color on Butterfly Wings
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Brian Counterman, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 456,763.00

Color patterns are one of nature's most dynamically rich and important signals
of communication among plants and animals. In nature, these colors are produced
by either pigments or structures that reflect different wavelengths of light.
This project leverages the dramatic diversity in butterfly wing color patterns
to study the biological basis of pattern development. The relative simplicity
and the accessibility of butterfly wings make them attractive model systems for
the study of pattern formation. Using a combination of genome sequencing,
microscopy and gene-editing, the project will identify the genes involved in the
formation of complex color patterns. These results will provide valuable
insights into basic biological processes that control cell and tissue
development. The research will provide hands-on training for undergraduate and
graduate students in molecular and computational biology methods. Through
"Butterfly Roadshows" and other outreach events, the researchers will engage K-6
students with immersive activities that explore butterfly diversity using
origami paper microscopes, which students can continue to use in their own
backyards. Collectively, the outcomes of this research program will represent a
major milestone for understanding the genetic and developmental processes that
orchestrate color patterning and how complex, biologically-important color-based
signals are generated in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is
to explore the developmental genetics of structural coloration using butterfly
wing patterns as a model system. Butterfly wings form large arrays of
differentiating epithelial cells that determine scale fate, and ultimately, the
final color pattern of the wing. Colors are the result of pigments and/or
structures of individual wing scales that reflect different wavelengths of
light. Unlike pigment-based colors, structural colors result from three-
dimensional nanostructures that manipulate the behavior of light. Although the
developmental and genetic basis of pigment-based variation is well understood in
a wide array of organisms, little is known about the generative processes
responsible for structural coloration. The natural arrangements of butterfly
scale types in space, their sexual dimorphism, and the ability to assay position
specific gene expression patterns across the wing throughout development
provides an unparalleled opportunity to identify the genes and developmental
processes responsible for patterning and activating highly specialized cellular
states. Through a combination of transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq), in situ
hybridizations, immunofluorescence, electroporation and CRISPR genome editing,
this study aspires to provide a direct connection between changes in gene
networks and cytostructural variation. The project team members will also
implement a multifaceted outreach and educational program that will (1)
establish a vibrant Student Training Program, (2) actively recruit students from
underrepresented groups, and (3) develop a public outreach program that engages
students in hands-on, inquiry-based discovery. These efforts by the project team
will ensure the impacts extend well beyond the specific research
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.