* 2108434
* Catalyst Project: Incorporating Inclusive Teaching Practices in the Design of a Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experience in Polymer Chemistry
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Asem Abdulahad, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Xavier
University of Louisiana seeks to broaden participation in STEM through course-
based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs). Specifically, the project
identifies the upper-level Principles of Polymer Chemistry course to enhance the
laboratory component through the development of a CURE. In addition, there is an
identified need to broaden the availability of CUREs across STEM disciplines and
the project aims to develop a community of practice (CoP) to cultivate
discussion and effectively implement additional
CUREs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pedagogically, the traditional experience for
students in educational laboratories are designed to provide a framework where
students reinforce their understanding of concepts covered in traditional
lecture periods. By leading students down a linear intellectual pathway towards
a single conclusion, such laboratory experiences minimize student intellectual
engagement, and bypass the essence of scientific inquiry â€“ asking a question
that can be addressed through experimentation. Course-based undergraduate
research experiences (CUREs) offer students the opportunity to increase their
scientific literacy while building essential laboratory skills through
instructor-guided, research experiences that occur within the classroom. The
overall goal of this project is to broaden participation in STEM through CUREs.
Towards this goal, this proposal focuses on the following objectives: (1)
develop a CUREs course that focuses on improving student learning outcomes in
polymer structure-property relationships and laboratory training using inclusive
teaching practices, and (2) implement a local community of practice to work with
other faculty at Xavier University of Louisiana towards offering more CUREs
courses across STEM disciplines. Offering a CUREs course that focuses on polymer
chemistry will expand student involvement in meaningful research experiences in
the development of functional materials. Additionally, through a community of
practice that is inclusive of faculty representing a variety of STEM disciplines
at Xavier University of Louisiana, this project has significant potential to
increase the number of research experiences for undergraduate students at a
minority-serving institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.