* 2108871
* Laboratory Search for Magnetorotational Instability
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeremy Goodman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 502,228.00

One of the more common, but less understood, phenomena in astrophysics is the
dissipation of orbital energy of charged plasma in accreting disks. This general
phenomenon occurs in situations as diverse as protoplanetary disks and active
galactic nuclei. The dissipation is thought to arise due to one or two distinct
phenomena. First, a non-linear hydrodynamic shear flow instability can arise
from multiple layers of material in a disk moving at different speeds, similar
to the simpler Kelvin-Helmholtz instability. Second, a linear instability can
arise in the charged and magnetized flow of a plasma. This latter phenomenon is
called a magnetorotational instability (MRI). The team has already conducted a
series of experiments that seem to exclude hydrodynamic shear flow instability
as the reason for the dissipation of orbital energy. They now seek to conduct a
series of experiments using charged liquid metal to explore MRI. The team will
also train a postdoc and a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
experiments have been set up at Princeton to examine dynamic instabilities that
might lead to turbulent flow in astrophysical accretion disks. The Hydrodynamics
Turbulence Experiment (HTX) studies instabilities such as shear flow
instability; the Liquid-Metal MRI experiment is meant to study magnetorotational
instability. So far, HTX has provided results that seem to preclude shear flow
instability as a major contributor to the dissipation of orbital energy in
accretion disks. However, the MRI hypothesis remains unproven. The team will add
new diagnostics to the Liquid-Metal MRI experiment, to include ultrasound
doppler velocimetry to measure the flow field, since the liquid metal is opaque.
Motors will be upgraded to allow operation at higher rotation speeds (Rm &gt;
4.5) where the teamâ€™s simulations indicate that MRI should arise. The
experimental campaign will be accompanied by numerical simulations to better
understand the laboratory results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.