* 2108219
* CAS: Metallopeptide Artificial Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kara Bren, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 494,440.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Kara Bren of the University of Rochester will
develop and study small biomolecule catalysts for reactions relevant to
developing alternative energy resources and to removing toxic species from
water. One of the targeted reactions is the production of the clean-burning fuel
hydrogen from water. The other reaction is the transformation of nitrite, a
common groundwater pollutant, into ammonia and hydroxylamine, which are useful
products. The planned studies will elucidate mechanistic details of these
reactions. Furthermore, light-driven hydrogen production will be studied as a
means for storing solar energy. These studies will yield information broadly
applicable to the development of alternative energy resources and environmental
remediation. This project will also contribute to growing a diverse scientific
workforce by enhancing the Rochester Early Connection Opportunity program for
undergraduates by addition of an independent study and research component.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award will focus on the
development and study of the mechanism of multi-electron, multi-proton reactions
catalyzed by cobalt peptides from the amino terminal, copper- and nickel-binding
family. Targeted reactions include proton reduction to dihydrogen and nitrite
reduction to ammonia and hydroxylamine. Emphasis is on the understanding of the
impact of diffusing proton shuttles and protonatable catalyst moieties on
reaction activity, efficiency, and mechanism. The role of proton-coupled
electron transfer (PCET) in these reactions will also be investigated. The
results of the electrochemical studies will be applied to the development of
photochemical systems with enhanced hydrogen evolution activity. Success in this
project is expected to yield improved catalysts for nitrogen oxyanion reduction
and proton reduction and enhance the understanding of the role of PCET in the
catalysis of proton-requiring reactions in water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.