* 2108197
* Mechanically Entwined Double Helical Covalent Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Wei Zhang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 390,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Wei Zhang of the University of Colorado-
Boulder will develop novel synthetic strategies for polymers that form long
double helices, similar to naturally occurring DNA (2'-deoxyribonucleic acid)
and collagen. This research aims to understand the critical parameters
determining the folding, winding, and self-assembly of the polymers into double
helical structures, which may exbibit unique materials properties. The proposed
work will serve as a platform for providing new opportunities for education,
outreach, and minority involvement on multiple levels. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in multidisciplinary research involving
organic, supramolecular, polymer chemistry, and
nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemists have been trying to build molecules
that can rival the sophistication of Nature’s biomacromolecules for some time.
However, synthesis of high molecular weight covalently bonded polymers that form
extended double helices, similar to naturally occurring DNA and collagen, still
represents a grand challenge. The goals of this research are to develop novel
synthetic strategies for helical polymers connected with robust yet dynamic
covalent linkages, to understand the double helical covalent polymer (HCP)
formation process, and to establish a general design principle for HCPs. A
series of rigid aromatic ring-based building blocks with varied physical
dimensions, varied distribution of electron density, and varying number of
reactive sites will be prepared to study the effect of monomer structure on HCP
formation. Moreover, the only strategy of forming double helices over the past
three decades has been maneuvering secondary attractive interactions between the
two single-stranded subunits (intra-duplex bonding). By contrast, the novel
chemical-mechanical hybrid bonding approach proposed herein (focused on inter-
duplex bonding) may open up many new possibilities for the design and synthesis
of higher order functional polymeric architectures, including double helical
polymers and their assemblies. This new system would offer an alternative simple
model to study the relationship between the structures of linear polymers and
their potential to assemble into a double helix. It also suggests novel
platforms for (i) linear polymer folding, (ii) supramolecular intertwining, and
(ii) chirality propagation. More specifically, in the latter case, the
possibility of forming chiral helical polymers by introducing chiral inducers
will be explored. The anisotropy of electronic and mechanical properties of the
highly-charged, long helical polymer crystals being targeted may be exploitable
for the future development of novel nanoscale materials with properties that are
distinct from those of native biopolymers and
biosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.