* 2108162
* Varstrometry for Off-nucleus and Dual (sub)Kpc Active Galactic Nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Xin Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 402,181.00

The mergers of binary supermassive black holes (SMBHs, that is, black holes that
weigh more than one million times the mass of the Sun) in the distant Universe
produce the loudest gravitational wave sirens. These gravitational waves are
detectable with future space- and ground-based gravitational wave observatories.
The prospects of detecting these gravitational wave sources, however, depend on
the demography of binary SMBHs. Finding close pairs of SMBHs in the distant
Universe, the progenitor population of merging SMBHs, has been observationally
challenging. This project will utilize a new method to efficiently search for
close SMBH pairs in the distant Universe. It will quantify their abundance and
study their physical properties. This program will provide a large sample of
close SMBH pairs. This sample will help us understand the formation and
evolution of binary SMBHs on their journey towards final coalescence. This
research project will advance the field of SMBHs. It will also create societal
values in terms of the dissemination of knowledge in classrooms and public
education, as well as dedicated outreach programs to promote diversity in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to search for rare, close-
separation pairs of SMBHs in the distant Universe following galaxy collisions.
It will develop a novel method to detect the jitter in the light centroid from a
pair of SMBHs. If both SMBHs are accreting matter they will produce a pair of
quasars. Due to the asynchronized random variability from both quasars in the
pair, the light centroid of the (unresolved) system will display a small jitter
on the sky. This jitter can be detected by precise positional measurements from
the Gaia satellite. Candidates selected using Gaia data will be followed up to
confirm the dual quasar nature. This project will produce the first large sample
of distant dual SMBHs at close separations. Furthermore, it will enable crucial
constraints on the evolution of dual SMBHs in the distant Universe. This award
addresses/advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.