* 2108962
* Collaborative Research: Constraining Fuzzy Dark Matter with Cosmological Simulations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Boylan-Kolchin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 285,129.00

This research team will carry out an extensive theoretical and computational
investigation into the nature of dark matter. Using computer simulations to
understand galaxy formation within this Fuzzy Dark Matter (FDM) model, they will
predict observational signatures and large-scale statistics, and constrain the
value for the mass of the FDM particle. This will allow FDM to be verified,
constrained, or excluded with existing or new observations. This study directly
affects other research, including the design of next-generation experiments
searching for direct evidence of a possible dark matter particle. The work will
connect women and under-represented minority students to mentorship and research
projects, helping to develop a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce, and
provide curricular tools to high school teachers, to engage a large audience of
potential STEM students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FDM is a physically motivated
model that could solve the small-scale astrophysical challenges faced by the
prevailing cold dark matter interpretation. It predicts many small-scale effects
that might be observable. This project will dramatically improve our theoretical
understanding of the nonlinear behavior of ultra-light scalar fields in the
Universe. Because analytic theory does not capture all the important physical
processes, these state-of-the-art numerical simulations will establish new ways
for observations to constrain the FDM model. They will probe the small-scale
dynamics of dark matter, distinguish between models, and possibly establish the
nature of dark matter. The work will generate open-source tools and products
which can be used to interpret observations of high-redshift galaxies or the
astrometry of Milky Way stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.