* 2108598
* Development of User-Friendly Controlled Cationic Polymerizations Under Ambient Conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Tristan Lambert, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Tristan Lambert of Cornell University
will be developing a more user-friendly and versatile approach to make an
important class of polymers. These polymers are formed from chemical reactions
known as “living cationic polymerizations”, which have a broad array of
potential applications for humanity. However, because of the very reactive
nature of the intermediates in these polymerization reactions, they tend to be
difficult to control and highly sensitive to impurities such as water. These
drawbacks severely limit the materials that can be readily prepared by these
chemistries and inhibit their use by non-specialists. Thus, the development of
strategies that provide greater control and robustness for living cationic
polymerizations represents a major challenge with wide ranging implications.
This research program will develop such a strategy for cationic polymerizations
using a novel class of polymerization agents called
pentacarboxycyclopentadienes, or “PCCPs” for short. The PCCPs have unique
properties that enable them to promote rapid yet controlled cationic
polymerizations that protect against impurities like water, and thus make it
straightforward to perform these reactions without special precautions. The
PCCPs also aid in controlling the molecular structure of the polymer, and thus
its macroscopic physical properties. The ability to conduct cationic
polymerizations under user-friendly conditions—that is at room temperature and
without rigorous avoidance of moisture or other impurities—will open up the use
of these processes to non-specialists for use in a wide variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Tristan Lambert of Cornell
University will use pentacarboxycyclopentadienes (PCCP) initiators to develop
user-friendly, controlled cationic polymerization reactions. The unique features
of the PCCP system will enable these normally highly sensitive reactions to
occur with greater control over polymer length, dispersity, and tacticity, and
with greater robustness to ambient conditions than previously possible. The
research will delineate the structural basis for this behavior and define the
scope and capabilities of the PCCP system. In addition to this scientific
effort, further educational outreach activities in terms of lectures to high
school students and the development of a homeschool resource website will extend
the impact of the proposed work beyond the scientific community to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.