* 2108636
* Collaborative Research (RUI): Understanding Sheath Formation in Electronegative and Electropositive Multiple Ion Species Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Greg Severn, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 318,198.00

The common states of matter on Earth are solids, liquids and gases. Putting
energy into gases can produce the fourth state of matter known as plasma, which
can consist of electrically charged particles and neutral atoms and molecules,
all acting collectively. While uncommon on the Earth, plasma makes up more than
99% of the visible matter in the universe. Where plasma comes in contact with
other material boundaries, a thin region called the plasma sheath usually forms
near the plasma boundary to balance charge particle flow from the plasma to the
boundary. Experiments to be performed under this collaborative award will
improve our understanding of plasma sheaths and associated phenomena that is
fundamental to understanding all bounded plasmas. Plasmas to be studied in this
work are similar to those used in the etching of semiconducting materials to
make computer chips, in plasma space propulsion satellite engines, and in
experimental plasma fusion devices. The majority of experimental studies will be
carried out at the University of San Diego, a primarily undergraduate
institution; Morgan State University will support undergraduate students to
collaborate with the University of San Diego and will begin developing an in-
house plasma related research laboratory. The award will also support outreach
activities to promote engagement of students with diverse backgrounds in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments to be carried out principally at
the University of San Diego will address important questions associated with
sheaths and the Bohm Criterion in multiple ion species plasma, both
electropositive and electronegative, many for the first time. In previous work,
anomalous sheath edge velocities were discovered while testing the Bohm
Criterion in two ion species plasma. This effect has now been theoretically
explained via the introduction of ion-ion streaming instabilities. As a result,
many different aspects of sheath formation must be reevaluated in light of the
new theory. Moreover, there are as yet no such corresponding measurements for
electronegative plasma with multiple ion species. This project will pursue
experiments to perform such measurements, and measurements that determine the
presheath and sheath plasma potential profiles with emissive probes. Ion
velocity distribution functions associated with ion acceleration will be
determined with tunable diode lasers using the laser-induced fluorescence
technique. The award will also support transfer of cutting edge research
techniques to enhance investigation of atmospheric pressure micro-plasma effects
on nanoparticle fabrication at Morgan State University, to improve plasma
diagnostics for use by the wider plasma science research community, and to
stimulate teaching and learning in classrooms and teaching laboratories for
undergraduate and graduate students at the participating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.