* 2108493
* Collaborative Research: Understanding exoplanets orbiting fully convective stars with the Habitable-zone Planet Finder
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Paul Robertson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 119,789.00

The team will use the Habitable-zone Planet Finder (HPF), a Doppler spectrometer
on the 10-m Hobby-Eberly Telescope, to conduct a survey of Class M red dwarf
stars within 8 parsecs of Earth, as well as stars smaller than Class M4 further
from Earth. The team will attempt to identify exoplanets in these systems from
characteristic radial velocity (RV) color fluctuations in light emitted by the
host stars. The exoplanet population around these smaller stars is poorly
understood. The team seeks to answer the question of what exoplanetary systems
look like around fully convective stars, and whether there is an increase in the
fraction of super-Earths around lower-mass host stars. The team hopes to build a
population of targets for follow-up imaging by upcoming Extremely Large
Telescopes. The team will conduct a variety of outreach activities, including a
teacher workshop at the MacDonald Observatory, mentorships at UC Irvine for
students from under-represented groups, and participation on the HPF blog. The
team will also train graduate students as part of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HPF survey will provide data principally to
answer two questions. First, the team will determine the occurrence rates for
exoplanets orbiting fully-convective stars as a function of planet size and
orbital period. Previous exoplanet surveys have shown that M dwarfs typically
host small planets, and there is tenuous evidence that the frequency of larger
super-Earth and Neptune-sized planets increases for mid-to-late M stars.
However, these surveys are still dominated by early-M subtypes (more massive
stars); this survey will offer empirical evidence for the planet population of
the fully-convective end of the M type. Second, the team will tackle the problem
of stellar jitter. Astrophysical noise, or "jitter," originating from stellar
magnetic activity is rapidly becoming the limiting noise source in RV
measurements, and M dwarfs are no exception. However, fully convective stars
have poorly understood magnetic dynamos and very red spectral energy
distributions. This means both the magnetic phenomena on their surfaces and the
observables used to diagnose them may differ from those of Sunlike stars. With
its stable instrument profile and NIR wavelength coverage, HPF will provide
critical insights into jitter phenomena and support sophisticated models of its
contribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.