* 2108238
* DISES: Influence of Community Forestry on the Dynamics of the Integrated Socio-Environmental Systems
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Richard Bilsborrow, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,599,793.00

Forests are extremely important because they serve as homes for millions of
animals and plants. Those organisms live, provide people with wood for building
houses and for cooking, and they cool the climate by absorbing carbon dioxide.
Unfortunately, forests continue to be cut down, especially in poor countries. To
prevent forests from further decline, people in some communities are protecting
them with what is called Community Forestry. In community forestry programs
people in a village work together to decide what to do with their forests. About
a third of the forests in poor countries are managed this way. However,
community forestry does not always work. This project will find out why some
villages in Nepal are successful in community forestry while others not. The
researchers will work closely with local stakeholders to improve their forest
management strategies that can benefit communities worldwide. In addition to
this impact on forestry the project will train graduate and undergraduate
students and leave a lasting legacy in Nepal. The United States will
economically benefit from this research as a result of better community forest
management through resource preservation and reduced carbon dioxide levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to study how can be
improved to better preserve the forests and support the lives of forest-
dependent people. To achieve this goal, this research will address the following
questions: (1) How do community forestry practices affect people’s livelihoods
and their social interactions? (2) How do those practices influence rural out-
migration? (3) How do they affect land-use? (4) How has COVID-19 influenced
rural people’s livelihoods and their dependence on community forestry? (5) How
has community forestry influenced the ecosystem’s provision of goods and
services? The researchers will interview households about their forest
management practices, the origin of management rules, and the role of community
members in making rules. They will also be surveyed to determine detailed
information about their agricultural practices, out migration patterns, and if
community forestry has helped buffer COVID-19 impacts. Remote sensing data
collected by satellites, in situ hydrological data on the ground, and
statistical, ecological and hydrological models will also be used to estimate
how much water forests use, and how much carbon dioxide they absorb from the
atmosphere. Eventually an Integrated Modeling System will be developed to study
the interactions among forests, human activities, and the ecosystem goods and
services the environment provides. This project will advance theory on common
pool resource management, rural out migration, as well as the land use and
forest-ecosystem service relationship. The new knowledge to be gained from this
research will be highly valuable when developing new policies for sustainable
community forestry in Nepal and other countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.