* 2108668
* Collaborative Research: Investigations of Quasar Variability with High-Cadence Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jonathan Trump, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 84,903.00

This project will investigate the inner workings of quasars, which are
supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies that are pulling in large
amounts of material. The material forms a hot disk around the supermassive black
hole as it falls and emits across the entire electromagnetic spectrum at
extremely high luminosities, making these objects visible across the entire
observable universe. Using an unprecedented dataset containing observations of
thousands of quasars, this project will uncover details about the inner
environments of quasars, which are important for understanding the relationship
between the supermassive black holes and the galaxies they live in. This
understanding is important for determining how galaxies form, evolve, and
resulted in the universe that we see today. In addition, this project will
provide support for a black-hole themed summer camp at the University of Arizona
and a summer bridge program for physics students at the University of
Connecticut; both of these programs specifically recruit and target students
from groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
nature of the interaction between supermassive black holes (SMBHs) and their
host galaxies is one of the major unanswered questions in studies of galaxy
formation and evolution. Quasars are prime targets for investigating these
questions; however, the inner regions of quasars are difficult to characterize
due to their small angular size. Variability in quasars can be used to learn
about the environment surrounding the SMBH from a variety of different angles,
thus providing critical information for studies of AGN feedback and galaxy
evolution. The proposed project will leverage high-cadence and long-duration
spectroscopic monitoring from the SDSS III/IV Reverberation Mapping Project and
the SDSS-V Black Hole Mapper Reverberation Mapping Project, which are obtaining
hundreds of spectral epochs for thousands of quasars. This project will make
full use of these data to: (1) Measure properties of quasar accretion-disk winds
by studying the variability of broad absorption features in quasar spectra. This
will measure the energy contained within these outflows, which allows us to
determine whether these outflows can provide significant feedback to the quasar
host galaxies; (2) Measure ensemble variability characteristics of a variety of
quasar emission lines over a variety of different timescales, which provides
information on physical conditions of the quasar broad-line emitting regions and
identifies the false-positive rate of searches for binary black holes; (3) Do a
systematic search for "extreme" variability events, which will allow us to
distinguish between different models of accretion disks and energetics. The
results from this study will allow us to better characterize the inner
environment and accretion physics governing the activity of quasars, allowing us
to better understand their interactions with the galaxies in which they
reside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.