* 2108949
* RUI: Phenazine Chemistry as a Means of Assembling Multifunctional Pi-conjugated Organic Materials.
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Brian Northrop, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 370,349.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Brian H. Northrop of Wesleyan University will
develop new synthetic approaches into semiconducting organic materials using
phenazines as building blocks. Phenazines are cyclic organic molecules
consisting of carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen. The alternation of pi-bonds (double
bonds) in these systems enables the molecules or polymers to conduct electrons.
Just like traditional semiconductors such as silicon, these materials can become
conductive when one applies a voltage--as in transistors--or irradiate them with
light--as in photovoltaic cells. In this work, experimental and theoretical
chemistry will be used to prepare a family of phenazines derivatives containing
different functionalities and reactivities. Optimized derivatives will then be
assembled into various 1D- and 2D-structures potentially creating materials with
unique opto-electronic properties. Successful preparation of new phenazine based
materials would have potential long term scientific impact for the design of
optoelectronic materials, optics and sensing. Students associated with this
project will ve exposed to interdisciplinary research and, as such, be well
positioned for career paths in the academic, industrial or government sectors.
An introduction to polymers program and summer bridge program will be created to
reach middle school students and introduce them to research in STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will focus on experimental and theoretical investigations of phenazines
and the use of phenazine assembly in the design and synthesis of well-defined,
pi-conjugated organic materials and macromolecules. In the first objective,
experimental synthesis and analysis will be combined with first principles
calculations to investigate the formation and aromaticity of simple phenazine
derivatives, as well as the impact of functional groups on the favorability and
reversibility of phenazine condensation reactions. The second objective will
focus on the preparation of a library of ortho-phenylenediamine and ortho-
quinone functionalized building blocks that will be used in the controlled
assembly of one-dimensional multifunctional phenazine derivatives and oligomers.
Finally, in the last objective, new knowledge from fundamental and one-
dimensional phenazine studies will be applied to prepare monodisperse, two-
dimensional phenazine polygons, ladders, and grids. Incorporation of phenazine
units into conjugated framework is a synthetic strategy that has not been
extensively explored in the field of conjugated materials. Consequently, new
fundamental chemistry knowledge will be generated that could lead to design of
interesting pi-conjugated materials and advancements in understanding of how
phenazine affects their physical and optoelectronic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.