* 2108234
* Collaborative Research:  The Condor Southern Sky Survey (Plus Northern Extension)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Shara, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 176,636.00

Very dim galaxies challenge our understanding of how galaxies formed. Yet it is
hard to study such galaxies using normal telescopes. The problem is that normal
telescopes use a “secondary” mirror to bounce light from a “primary” mirror onto
an eyepiece or a camera. This secondary mirror blocks the primary mirror and
distorts the image. Here the investigators will use a new type of telescope that
is made by combining several “refracting” telescopes to form one larger
telescope. A refracting telescope does not require a secondary mirror. So,
images from a refracting telescope are clearer than images from a normal
telescope. This new telescope is designed to study very dim galaxies. The
telescope will be used to study the Milky Way and other galaxies. The telescope
will also be used to search for Earth-like planets orbiting white-dwarf stars.
The telescope will also be used by educators and for public outreach. And the
telescope will be used by faculty and students at historically black colleges
and universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Condor is the name for a set of six off-
the-shelf refracting telescopes with six off-the-shelf CMOS cameras that form an
array telescope. The investigators plan to locate the telescope initially in New
Mexico fpr a Condor Northern Survey, then relocate to the Rio Hurtado Valley in
Chile in June 2022 and initiate the Condor Southern Sky Survey. Condor is
equipped with broad- and narrow-band filters and can acquire data at a cadence
of 1 min. The science includes studying the incidence of very-low-surface-
brightness galaxies and galaxy features across a variety of galaxy environments,
and discovering transiting Earth-like planets in the habitable zones of white
dwarfs. The project includes allocating 20% of the available observing time to a
broader community that includes 10% of the total to investigators at
historically black colleges and universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.