* 2108681
* Development of Stereospecific Controlled/Living Radical Polymerization Using Rationally Engineered Chain-End Capping Agents
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Mingjiang Zhong, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 449,999.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Mingjiang Zhong of Yale University will
develop new methods for the efficient preparation of polymers with control of
stereochemistry. Stereochemistry of polymers originates from the orientation of
pendant groups attached to the main backbone and has a significant influence on
important materials properties, including mechanical stiffness, toughness,
thermal behavior, crystallinity, and solubility. Tuning the stereochemistry of
polymers can dramatically change the properties and therefore can lead to new
applications of many polymers. However, currently existing methods to achieve
control over stereochemistry are somewhat limited in scope; there is room for
new methods development. This project aims to establish methods that are
compatible with a broader scope of building blocks compared to traditional
approaches, that can be carried out in environmentally friendly solvents, and
that provide pathways for stereocontrolled access to new functional materials.
The research activities affiliated with this project are expected to have
broader scientific impact in the synthesis of mechanically robust materials, as
well as materials with important biomedical uses. The associated teaching,
mentoring, and outreach activities will create educational opportunities for a
diverse group of trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes new
approaches to synthesizing isotactic polymers via radical polymerization. Lewis
acid-tethered stable radical species will be synthesized to control polymer
tacticity via confined chain end conformation in controlled/living radical
polymerizations. An array of stable radical species will be explored, across a
range of reaction solvents and tethered ligands with the goal of expanding the
space of polymerizable monomers. The Zhong research team will also investigate
polymerization mechanisms with the aim of developing a deeper understanding of
this catalytic system. Among the mechanistic features to be examined are
included Lewis acid coordination to monomer units, chain end conformation during
radical addition, and the kinetics and thermodynamics of the radical
deactivation process. The successful development and deployment of these
catalysts would be significant, particularly because they have the potential to
provide a new approach to the important problem of stereocontrol in radical
addition. This research also has potential industrial chemical implications due
to the advantages of radical polymerization over polymerization conditions that
require acidic or basic conditions, with radical polymerization approaches
generally exhibiting greater functional group tolerance and milder reaction
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.