* 2108009
* Tip-Enhanced Molecular and Quantum Cavity Nano-Optics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Markus Raschke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 372,783.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Markus Raschke and his group at the University
of Colorado are developing a technique called tip-enhanced strong coupling
(TESC) as a new approach for measuring and controlling the properties of single
quantum mechanical particles that are strongly coupled with light. The
researchers form a very small cavity between a very sharp metallic tip in a
scanning probe microscope and a mirror surface to trap light in a region of
space containing the single particle. Tuning the cavity size with atomic
precision allows the team to control the interaction between light and matter in
order to form light-matter hybrid states that are described by cavity quantum
electrodynamics (cQED). Their approach overcomes traditional limitations in
cavity size, number of particles being probed, and temperature requirements for
the measurements. The work provides a fundamental understanding of the
properties of strong cavity-emitter interactions and enables room-temperature
control of quantum coherent interactions, enabling new forms of single-molecule
spectroscopy, quantum sensing, and control of photochemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes advantage of the newly developed
approach of tip-enhanced strong coupling (TESC), which provides a pico-cavity
mode volume controlled with atomic precision between a scanning plasmonic tip
and the sample substrate. The resulting coupling strength exceeds decoherence
even at room temperature to individually address, dynamically tune, actively
control, and image single quantum emitters that are strongly coupled with light.
Through photoluminescence measurements, TESC is used to probe colloidal quantum
dots and solid-state defects in 2D materials as model quantum emitters in order
to establish the single emitter-single photon limit and to demonstrate
entanglement, optical nonlinearities, and photon blockade in strong coupling.
Extending into the femtosecond time domain, adiabatic femtosecond nano-focused
TESC measures the competing relaxation pathways of these emitters using coherent
four-wave mixing. In combination with variable temperature TESC of solid-state
emitters, and low-temperature tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) as a probe
of intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution, the work leads to a
quantum-state-resolved fundamental understanding of decoherence to coupled
internal and external electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom. The work
thus helps answer the question of the fundamental limit of engineering quantum
coherence of electronic wavefunctions, phonons, and vibrations in chemical
systems – information pertinent to any form of solid-state-based quantum
technologies. To achieve its goals, the project includes diverse graduate and
undergraduate training, workforce development through cQED integration into the
course curriculum, and industry collaborations to accelerate quantum emitter
development for quantum information applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.