* 2108340
* Collaborative Research: Identification of Lignin-derived Ligands Associating With Iron
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Rene Boiteau, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 225,000.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the NSF
Division of Chemistry, Yu Yang of the University of Nevada, Reno and Rene
Boiteau of Oregon State University are studying iron complexes derived from
lignin-based organic compounds. Iron oxide-associated organic carbon is one of
the largest reservoirs of carbon on the Earth’s surface. Predicting changes to
the size of soil carbon reservoirs and sustainably managing soil and water
quality is an important challenge. A rigorous understanding of the chemical
nature of iron-organic carbon complexes has the potential to assist scientists
in this endeavor. So far, the origin and formation mechanism of soil organic
carbon in complex with iron remain poorly understood. As a primary precursor for
soil organic carbon, plant-derived lignin can be degraded into compounds that
may bind to iron oxides. This project aims to uncover the chemical nature of
lignin-derived ligands for iron. Soil carbon is an important part of the Earth's
carbon cycle, and an element of this cycle that is highly relevant to climate.
Graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students will be engaged in this research at
both institutions. Leveraging an NSF-funded Innovations in Graduate Education
project, a summer camp module will be developed focusing on environmental
chemistry relevant to sustainability, to increase the representation of first-
generation students and underrepresented groups in graduate studies in
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project sets out to develop targeted and
non-targeted methods to detect and quantify lignin-derived ligands and their
iron complexes by liquid chromatography together with high resolution
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry. The method will be developed and validated with a set of known
lignin degradation products and used to characterize the iron-binding products
formed by microbial degradation of lignin in pure culture and soil incubation.
It is expected that these studies will help elucidate the chemical nature of
biopolymer (lignin)-derived iron ligands and their complexes and provide
insights into the chemical mechanisms that fractionate soil organic carbon,
ultimately governing soil organic carbon stocks. Such understanding is critical
for developing predictive models for the nature and form of soil-constrained
organic carbon. The methods developed in this project are expected to be broadly
applicable for the investigation of other biopolymer (cellulose, cutin, and
others)-derived ligands in soil and aqueous
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.