* 2108402
* A Systematic Census of AGN Variability
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Stanislav Djorgovski, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 638,136.00

Astronomical surveys are monitoring the night sky and looking for changes in the
brightness of stars, galaxies, and asteroids. These surveys produce vast amounts
of complex data, so machine learning techniques are being developed to analyze
modern data sets. This team will use machine learning and time series techniques
to identify active galactic nuclei and catalog the different ways in which their
brightness can vary. Future sky surveys can draw on these results to sort out
the different models that are developed to explain the variability. This work
forms the basis for real-world student projects in data science summer schools.
More broadly, the machine learning techniques could be applied to similar
collections of time series in other fields, such as neuroscience, seismology,
and climate science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active galactic nuclei (AGN) form one
of the largest populations of variable astronomical sources and play a key role
in our understanding of accretion physics, relativistic physics, galaxy
evolution, and large-scale structure. However, their variability is not simple
and remains poorly studied in comparison to other more regular sources, partly
due to a lack of appropriate statistical tools and methodologies. A new
generation of sky surveys is enabling systematic studies of astrophysical
variability, and more sophisticated analyses are now possible through machine
learning that can reveal details of the nonlinear nature of the variability. The
team will conduct a statistical study of AGN variability employing the Catalina
Real-time Transient Survey and Zwicky Transient Facility data sets. These
surveys have produced time series data for millions of known and potential AGN
spanning almost twenty years with hundreds of observations per source. The team
will construct a highly accurate and complete catalog of AGN based on continuous
time autoencoders applied to multiband multiepoch photometry, thus combining
both color and variability information. Using this, they will systematically
identify AGN flares at optical and mid-IR wavelengths and define flare families
based on characterizable properties. They will also use deep learning models to
provide novel non-parametric discriminating features in the data set. This will
establish the knowledge base and methodologies for AGN studies with LIGO and
Rubin Observatory. Data products from the project will also form the basis for
student projects in various data science and astronomy summer schools. This
award addresses/advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.