* 2108060
* RUI: Biosynthetic Diversification of Diketopiperazine Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Amy Lane, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2024
* USD 324,000.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Amy Lane from University of North Florida (UNF) aims to decipher
Nature’s methods for creating a group of molecules known as
2,5-diketopiperazines (DKPs). These naturally occurring compounds offer a
variety of applications in agriculture and other commercial enterprises.
Microorganisms assemble DKPs through enzyme-catalyzed reactions, in which
ubiquitous chemical building blocks are transformed into unique DKPs. Dr. Lane
and her team seek to develop a molecular-level understanding of these enzymes to
unleash the potential for biocatalytic synthesis of the next generation of DKPs.
This project will be integrated into undergraduate education, with the project
acting as a vehicle for providing hands-on research training to undergraduates.
Impact on the future STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
workforce will be magnified beyond direct research participants via the Creating
Leaders in Multidisciplinary Basic Science (CLIMBS) program. The CLIMBS program
implements professional development workshops as “ladders” to prepare UNF’s
diverse student population for the pursuit of careers in science and to
facilitate their entrance into graduate programs as a first step on that
journey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyclodipeptide synthases (CDPSs) catalyze the
formation of DKP scaffolds from two aminoacyl-tRNA substrates. These DKP
scaffolds are structurally diversified and equipped for biological function via
tailoring reactions. Nearly all of the &gt;800 experimentally-characterized or
bioinformatics-predicted CDPSs originate from bacterial gene clusters that also
encode predicted DKP tailoring enzymes with diverse and unknown functions. These
cryptic biosynthetic pathways are predicted to yield a plethora of uniquely
functionalized DKPs, but remain poorly explored relative to pathways yielding
other common natural product classes. The goals of this project are to establish
molecular-level understanding of selected biosynthetic pathways that contain
CDPSs and to diversify DKP natural products obtained from these pathways. To
accomplish these goals, the Lane research group will apply an in silico-in vitro
approach to characterize molecular details of DKP isomerization, develop an in
vivo biosynthetic platform for the assembly of DKP analogs from unnatural amino
acids, and establish isotope-labeled metabolomics approaches to identify new
DKPs. This work is expected both advance fundamental understanding of
diketopiperazine biosynthesis and yield strategies to more fully unleash the
power of mechanistically-guided synthetic biology in natural product
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.