* 2108440
* Collaborative Research: Tidal disruption of near-Earth asteroids
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Katherine Kretke, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 09/30/2024
* USD 295,472.00

This collaborative project between Southwest Research Institute and the
University of Maryland College Park studies how gravitational forces can reshape
or tear apart near-Earth asteroids (NEAs). “Rubble-pile” asteroids (which are
loose collections of material) and comets are known to reshape or come apart,
through a process known as tidal distortion and disruption, as they pass close
to planets. This research team will use computer simulations with inputs from
observations to examine how tidal disruption changes the population of NEAs.
They will address topics such as how many fragments are created, what their
orbits are, and how many odd shapes can be attributed to the process. This will
provide important insight into their history and potential futures and has
relevance to planetary defense. The broader impacts leverage the interest of the
general public in NEAs to continue a long-running public outreach program and to
build an accessible toolset and lesson plan for wide
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Near-Earth asteroids are some of the closest and
therefore best-studied objects in the Solar System, yet it is not known how
pervasive the effects of tidal disruption could be among NEAs. This research
team will model the interaction of rubble-pile asteroids having close flybys of
terrestrial planets. They will determine whether their soft-sphere discrete code
can produce some of the irregularly shaped NEAs, re-process their surfaces, and
alter the size and orbital distribution of near-Earth asteroids. Through
accurate modeling of the surface interactions between particles, this group will
capture the effect of frictional forces and irregular shaped constituent pieces
for a complete suite of tidal disruption models. Testing over the entire range
of possible encounter scenarios (close approach and velocity) for the
terrestrial planets, including a range of spin states (spin axis orientation and
spin rates) and internal structure (large interior blocks), will be used to
create a catalog of outcomes necessary to estimate how widely this process has
altered the near-Earth population and be able to estimate the bodies most likely
to have been affected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.