* 2108589
* The Astrophysics of Near-Earth Supernova Explosions
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Brian Fields, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2024
* USD 354,017.00

Supernova explosions play a central role in cosmology, astrophysics, and
elementary particle physics. There is now solid experimental evidence of at
least one supernova explosion within 300 light years of Earth within the last
few million years, from measurements of the short-lived radioisotope iron-60 in
widespread deep-ocean samples, as well as in the lunar regolith and in cosmic
rays. This is the first established example of a specific dated astrophysical
event outside the Solar System having a measurable impact on the Earth. A
research group at the University of Illinois will interpret these data as they
systematically develop the astrophysics of this new field. The implications span
much of astrophysics and beyond, informing topics including local supernova and
star formation rates, the nature and history of the local environment of the
Sun, cosmic-ray astrophysics, and even paleontology and biological mass
extinctions. The scientists are also dedicated to bringing their science to the
public through multiple types of public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will involve a theoretical study to (1) determine the allowed range of
supernova distances and epochs, (2) study mass, nucleosynthesis, and dust
formation properties of the supernovae, and (3) develop models for the
propagation, evolution, and survival of charged supernova dust in a magnetized
medium, in order to understand the observed duration of supernova debris
fallout. The results will have implications for supernova explosion models, for
supernova remnants, and for dust production in high-redshift galaxies. The
outreach activities will include three efforts: (1) bringing astronomy and
astrophysics to college-level students in a local state prison, using research
to spark discussion and interest. (2) leveraging the April 8, 2024 solar eclipse
as an opportunity to bring astronomy and astrophysics to the public and to
illustrate how the cosmos intervenes in our lives in ways often imperceptible
but sometimes dramatic, and (3) giving frequent public talks on campus and in
schools, churches, and community groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.