* 2108419
* Multiscale Phenomena in Plasmas from Collisional to Collisionless Regimes
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Uri Shumlak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

This project seeks to develop a numerical model of a plasma - a gas of
electrically charged particles - that will combine a very detailed description
of plasma processes on small scales with a coarser description of large scales.
Scientific understanding is advanced through the development and application of
mathematical models that accurately describe natural phenomena. The highest
fidelity models provide the most accurate description but are often too
difficult to solve. Simplified models are easier to solve but can fail to
capture the relevant interactions that dictate a systemâ€™s evolution. This
project seeks to develop a hybrid model that stitches together high-fidelity and
low-fidelity descriptions. The low-fidelity component is applied to all domains
where the model is formally valid, and the high-fidelity component is applied
only where it is absolutely required. The hybrid model will be applied to study
the evolution of magnetized flowing plasmas, similar to the situation that
occurs as plasma flowing from the Sun interacts with Earth's magnetosphere.
Understanding these interactions can provide predictions about energy transfer
between spatial scales that can ultimately impact GPS and communication
satellites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a new approach to
explore multiscale phenomena in plasmas and to investigate the magnetized
Kelvin-Helmholtz instability (KHI). Plasmas inherently exhibit multiscale
physics that originate from the large differences in electron and ion masses of
the constituent species and from the long-range and short-range interactions
that are produced by electromagnetic fields and collisions. However, capturing
the large separation of scales in simulations remains an outstanding challenge.
Collisionality expresses the relative importance of long-range and short-range
interactions and can play an important role in determining the spread and
coupling of scales. Models that are accurate in the highly collisional regime
fail in the collisionless regime, while models that are accurate in the
collisionless regime are computationally prohibitive in the collisional regime.
Exploiting the computational efficiency of multi-fluid models and the high-
fidelity of kinetic models, a hybrid approach will be developed to couple the
models through domain decomposition to explore multiscale phenomena. Continuum
representations for the fluid and kinetic models will facilitate coupling
through moments of the probability distribution functions of the constituent
plasma species. The magnetized KHI is known to develop macroscale plasma
structures whose details depend on microscale physics. The hybrid model will be
applied to study the magnetized KHI to gain insight into the interplay between
the multiple scales that ultimately drive transport and dictate the partition of
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.