* 2108134
* Differentiating the Two Complementary Flavins in a Bifurcating Electron Transfer Flavoprotein
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Anne-Frances Miller, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 12/31/2024
* USD 458,896.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Anne-Frances Miller and her team at the University of
Kentucky are examining how bacteria have managed to optimize their energy
efficiency. Science has advanced to the point that it is now possible to supply
all the energy needed by mankind, from wind and sunlight. However, these are
intermittent, low-density sources that need to be 'stepped up' to power
appliances such as hair driers. It turns out that bacteria possess enzymes
capable of producing concentrated power from readily available fuel sources.
These enzymes employ a mechanism wherein pairs of electrons are obtained from a
cheap abundant fuel, but only one of the electrons is allowed to run 'down-
hill'. The enzyme somehow harnesses this favorable process to drive an
unfavorable 'up-hill' reaction that yields a much more potent electron carrier
than the starting one. To enable design of materials able to do the same, the
proposed research seeks to learn how nature does this. Flavin molecules related
to the vitamin riboflavin, bound in proteins as cofactors are central to the
mechanism. The planned research seeks to elucidate how the protein adjusts the
flavin's reactivity. Flavins are yellow and fall into the larger chemical
category of pigments. The broader impact of this work will be to develop a
course for non-chemists that will employ fiber art and dyeing activities to
explain core chemical concepts. This hands-on learning approach is designed to
reach audiences who do not find book- and lecture-based courses compelling.
Thus, the proposed work aims to engage a larger audience in the fun and
curiosity of chemistry, and to harness chemistry in larger service to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to learn how bifurcating
electron transfer flavoproteins (ETFs) tune the reactivities of their two
flavins to cause one flavin to execute single electron transfers only, but the
other flavin to have a very high energy semiquinone state that causes transfer
of one electron to be tightly coupled to transfer of the second. A specific
hypothesis is that the pyrophosphate group built into flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD) could have agency in modulating the activity of the flavin.
The proposed work also addresses the nature and lessons inherent in a novel
state of the ETF that is proposed to involve cooperation of both flavins. The
research integrates computational, spectroscopic, electrochemical, and
biochemical strategies. To develop computational approaches and enable
interpretation of flavin optical spectra in terms of underlying electronic
structure and reactivity, a systematic approach is proposed, beginning with
covalently modified flavins. Once validated, computational approaches would then
be employed to infer the electronic perturbations produced by different protein
sites in which flavins are bound. While flavin spectroscopy is at the center of
the proposed research, the proposal exploits pigments more generally as vehicles
to make core concepts of chemistry accessible to non-scientist audiences. A lab
and lecture course on plant pigments in fiber arts will be developed into a
modular on-line course, including guidance for hands-on activities. The team
will assemble execution kits that rural schools or homeschoolers will be able to
borrow, in order to follow along with recorded demonstrations and presentations.
This approach seeks to overcome barriers that prevent many people from engaging
with chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.