* 2108736
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Galaxy and its White Dwarfs with the HET Dark Energy Experiment
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Keith Hawkins, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,761.00

This research team from the University of Texas Austin and Baylor University
plan a new analysis of existing observations from the Hobby-Eberly Telescope
Dark Energy Experiment (HETDEX) to better understand the history of star
formation in the Milky Way galaxy. While HETDEX is primarily being used for the
study of dark energy, the investigators have repurposed the survey for Galactic
Astronomy, embodying the phrase ‘one person’s trash is another person treasure’.
The investigators will work together to engage, empower, and recruit
underrepresented groups in astronomy at various levels. At the undergraduate
level, the investigators will focus on training underrepresented minority
students through the TARUS program at UT Austin. At the community-wide level,
both investigators will continue to participate in the regular outreach, e.g.,
by public lectures, and create a new ‘Stars of the HETDEX survey’ outreach
night.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use the spectra of more than
100,000 stars observed within HETDEX to: (1) deliver atmospheric parameters for
those stars, (2) use the derived atmospheric parameters to constrain the
assembly of the stellar halo, and (3) conduct a deep survey of white dwarfs, the
end products of a star's lifecycle, to constrain the timescale of formation. The
unbiased and deep (15&lt; G magnitude &lt; 22) nature of the HETDEX survey makes
it extremely powerful in piecing together the assembly of our Galaxy when
compared with other spectroscopic surveys. A pilot study of the data has
indicated that radial velocities can be measured and that the spectra can be
used to find metal-poor stars. The investigators will significantly expand upon
this pilot study by: (1) confirming candidate FGK-type metal-poor stars
identified in HETDEX using their advantaged access to higher-resolution
instruments at McDonald Observatory; (2) deriving stellar parameters using the
HETDEX spectra of FGK-type and White dwarf stars, and (3) using those
metallicities to measure halo properties in an unbiased
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.