* 2108128
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021:  How spatial and temporal variation in environment and soil fungal diversity shapes plant phenotypes
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Benjamin Lee, Lee, Benjamin R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The majority of plants in temperate forests
rely on interactions with soil fungi (called arbuscular mycorrhizae, AMF) to
acquire important resources necessary for growth and survival. Scientific
understanding of these interactions has so far been limited to relatively short-
term studies, but with new advances in methodology, the field is now poised to
leverage information about these relationships extracted from decades- to
centuries-old museum (herbarium) specimens. In this project, the fellow will use
museum specimens, combined with new field sampling, to 1) identify large spatial
and temporal patterns in plant-fungi interactions; 2) link these patterns to
drivers of global change; and 3) investigate how these relationships affect
important plant traits linked to overall performance. Results from this work
will improve our understanding of how global change affects these critical
relationships, inform museums about best collection practices, and lead to the
development of important educational outreach in both museum and traditional
classroom settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To complete this work, the fellow will
sequence mycorrhizal genomes from a combination of historical herbarium samples
and newly collected field specimens of various Trillium species from across
eastern North America. The fellow will then use hierarchical Bayesian modeling
approaches to assess how climate, geographic distribution, and presence of
allelopathic invaders (i.e., garlic mustard) affect AMF community composition
and, consequently, how AMF composition affects important plant traits such as
leaf area and foliar nitrogen content. Broader impacts resulting from this work
include collaboration with museum educators and highlighting the importance of
museum collections. The fellow will also develop educational outreach materials
targeted for classroom and academic settings. This research will provide the
fellow with new research collaborations as well as training in herbarium
methodology, high-throughput genetic sequencing, invasive species modeling, and
scientific communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.