* 2108266
* Catenated, Singlet Fission, and Semi-conducting Cyclic Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Adam Veige, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 645,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Adam S. Veige and Brent S. Sumerlin of
University of Florida are developing new synthetic approaches for the
preparation of functional conjugated polymers. Conjugated polymers are a unique
class of polymers that contain long carbon chains with the repeating unit
consisting of an olefin group bearing a carbon-carbon pi-bond. Such groups bring
unsaturation to a chemical compound and are very commonly found in many natural
products, such as cholesterol and fatty acids. In the case of conjugated
polymers, when these pi-bonds are broken they create positive and negative
charges along the polymer chain allowing them to conduct electricity. Since
conjugated polymers contain tens of thousands of pi-bonds, their conductivity
can sometimes surpass that of common metals such as copper or aluminum. In this
research, a tungsten catalyst will first be used to prepare conjugated cyclic
polymers which have the ability to interlock within themselves like beads on a
string. These polymers will then be further modified synthetically in order to
study and improve their optical and electronic properties. Polymeric materials
prepared in this research have potential applications in the areas of molecular
electronics and energy absorbing materials. The research activities associated
with this award are also directed at broadening participation and enabling the
training of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in polymer
chemistry. The outreach event “Halloween Molecular Mania” provides an attractive
strategy to generate interest in science to participating high school students,
local teachers and their parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
the use of tungsten-catalyzed ring expansion metathesis polymerization for the
synthesis of various types of cyclic polymers. In the first goal, catenated (pi-
bond interlocked) cyclic analogues of polyacetylene will be prepared and
characterized. Special focus will be placed on detailed reaction kinetics and on
the use of imaging (atomic force microscopy) and rheological studies to provide
conclusive evidence of catenation. Induction of a long-lived singlet fission is
to be achieved by attaching conjugated chromophores to cyclic polymers in the
second goal. Singlet fission is a spin-allowed process, which could lead to long
sought improved photo-conversion efficiencies with these linear pi-conjugated
polymers. Lastly, the research team aims to achieve low barriers to
configuration isomerization in the prepared cyclic polymers. This will be
explored to synthesize semi-conducting cyclic polymers via an intramolecular pi-
bond shift. This research has the potential to yield new knowledge in the area
of cyclic polymers and provide mechanistic understanding for further catalyst
design. Furthermore, access to semi-conducting cyclic polymers would provide
important new opportunities to probe the fundamental principles of electrical
conductivity in organic materials. This research also has the potential for long
term scientific broader impacts on the fields of solar energy-harvesting and
energy conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.