* 2108944
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Cosmology and Astrophysics with MachinE Learning Simulations (CAMELS) to maximize the science return of next generation cosmological experiments
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Angles-Alcazar, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 361,091.00

The Cosmology and Astrophysics with MachinE Learning Simulations (CAMELS)
project leverages recent major advances in computational galaxy formation to
produce the largest suite of cosmological simulations with full baryonic physics
designed to train machine learning algorithms for a broad range of applications,
including thousands of cosmological and feedback parameter variations. This
project will use this unique dataset to study how to maximize the science return
from next generation cosmological surveys. Although the surveys will constrain
the value of the cosmological parameters with unprecedented accuracy, achieving
this goal requires overcoming two major obstacles: (1) the optimal summary
statistic is unknown, and (2) a lot of the information is on scales
significantly affected by baryonic processes that are still poorly understood.
CAMELS will (1) develop neural networks to help extract the most cosmological
information, and (2) perform thousands of simulations over a wide range of
parameters to quantify uncertainties in baryonic effects. All CAMELS data
products will be publicly available, to enable research and engagement by the
broader community. The team will work to increase the participation and success
of women and underrepresented minorities by providing dedicated mentoring and
early access to research, through three programs for undergraduate students: (1)
a summer research program co-organized by the National Society of Black
Physicists and the Simons Observatory; (2) the AstroCom NYC program, joining
other mentors from the City University of New York, the American Museum of
Natural History, and the Flatiron Institute; and (3) the new Colors of
Astrophysics program at the University of
Connecticut.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upcoming experiments such as DES, DESI, LSST,
WFIRST, SKA, and Euclid will improve our understanding of fundamental physics
and the origin and fate of the Universe. CAMELS will help to determine the
optimal summary statistic to apply to the non-Gaussian density fields observed
in most cosmological surveys, and to quantify uncertainties in subgrid models
for key astrophysical processes such as feedback from stars and massive black
holes, which limit the use of hydrodynamic simulations. The neural networks and
thousands of simulations that will be used by CAMELS will produce a distinct
qualitative improvement over previous work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.