* 2108795
* Exploring Acoustic Disruption of Lipid Assemblies for Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Theresa Evans- Nguyen, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2024
* USD 453,760.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Theresa Evans-Nguyen and Venkat Bhethanabotla and their groups at
the University of South Florida are devising ways to improve analysis of lipid
assemblies critical to extracellular signaling. The roles of discrete lipids in
these assemblies are not well understood. Furthermore, because lipids aggregate
so readily, it is difficult even to identify and quantitate the individual lipid
constituents of such assemblies. Mass spectrometry (MS) offers a powerful
analytical tool which could provide a great deal of useful information if
aggregation challenges could be overcome. To that end, this project focuses on
using controlled acoustic waves to disrupt lipid aggregation, thereby
facilitating MS analysis. The principles developed in this project should be
extendable to other non-specific assemblies and amenable to coupling with
current MS sampling methodologies. The research involves a cross-disciplinary
effort between the fields of chemistry and engineering, and is expected to
strengthen STEM recruitment programs through both
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of this research is the use of novel
surface acoustic wave (SAW) technologies in the MS workflow. In one modality,
SAWs can already lyse extracellular vesicles known as exosomes. Also, as has
been previously demonstrated by the team, one can use SAWs to mitigate
biofouling from non-specific binding on microfluidic sensors. By extension, SAWs
may be feasibly tuned to not just disrupt but further disintegrate bilayer
membranes as model aggregates. In a second modality, SAW nebulization (SAWN)
exhibits a distinct ionization capacity for both polar and non-polar lipids. By
coupling to corona discharge (CD), the South Florida team has achieved
comparable efficiency to electrospray ionization (ESI). Thus, the employment of
SAWN-CD for the simultaneous analysis of non-polar cholesterol and polar
phospholipids comprises a specific capability for which ESI falls short. SAWs
are known to effect disruption of extracellular vesicles and to mitigate non-
specific biofouling. In this work, SAWs are used to disintegrate model bilayer
membrane vesicles into individual lipid components and, through SAW nebulization
(SAWN), to facilitate MS ionization of both polar and non-polar lipids by
coupling to corona discharge (CD). Specific objectives are: (1) formulation of
liposomes as model aggregations to enable a systematic evaluation of SAWs; (2)
investigation of SAW disruption parameters to disintegrate lipid assemblies; and
3) investigation SAW nebulization parameters to achieve simultaneous ionization
of polar and non-polar species. Thus, through this investigation, the team aims
to develop a method that can be applied to extracellular vesicles, allowing them
to be directly sampled by mass spectrometry, vastly short-cutting traditional
analysis methods for such complex assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.