* 2108763
* SPT-SLIM: A Line Intensity Mapping Pathfinder for the SPT
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Erik Shirokoff, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 926,325.00

Modern cosmology has revealed a wealth of information about nature of the
Universe. Two mysteries endure. Inflation, which caused the rapid expansion of
the very early Universe, and Dark Energy, which is important in the way the
Universe expands today. These phenomena are studied by measuring the distance
between galaxies over time. Line intensity mapping is a new technique that will
allow for even more sensitive such measurements, but to make such measurement
requires a new kind of instrument. This instrument consists of a camera in which
every individual pixel is a spectrometer. The South Pole Telescope Line
Intensity Line Mapper will demonstrate a novel technology that uses
superconducting circuits built on a silicon wafer and cooled to 0.1 degrees
above absolute zero. The South Pole is one of only a few places on Earth where
such observations are possible. This program will provide U. Chicago students
with hands-on training in cutting-edge instrumentation and thin film
fabrication, which have applications in a wide variety of fields. Through Design
Apprenticeship Program connecting the Chicago South Side artistic community with
University of Chicago research laboratories, local teenagers will learn and
apply design and construction skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measuring the large-
scale structure of the early Universe is key to understanding the nature of dark
energy and inflation. Performing these measurements by targeting atomic and
molecular emission lines also probes the astrophysics of the first stars and
galaxies. This project will demonstrate a new technique that will deploy a
millimeter-wavelength integral field unit (IFU) to the 10-meter South Pole
Telescope (SPT). The SPT Summertime Line Intensity Mapper (SPT-SLIM) will
include 18 dual-polarization pixels, each coupled to a spectrometer with
resolving power of R ~ 300, covering the 150 GHz atmospheric window and will
observe during the Austral summer season. SPT-SLIM is sensitive to carbon
monoxide (CO) line emission from high-redshift galaxies (0.4 &lt; z &lt; 2.8).
This instrument will provide unique capability in the new field of line
intensity mapping (LIM). SPT-SLIM will demonstrate that multi-pixel on-chip
spectrometers meet this need and develop the necessary observational strategies
and data analysis techniques using actual on-sky data. In one month of
observation at SPT this pathfinder instrument will detect the CO power spectrum
at 10-sigma and constrain the molecular gas fraction in the full population of z
~ 2 galaxies. SPT-SLIM will also be a powerful tool for future pointed
observations of individual galaxies, efficiently identifying redshifts of
sources identified in continuum surveys over a wide range of cosmic history.
This award addresses and advances the science objectives and goals of the NSF's
"Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.