* 2108150
* Towards a Greener Approach for Chemical Synthesis of Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Paramjit Arora, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Paramjit Arora of New York University will work toward the development
of a catalytic approach for the synthesis of peptides. Peptides are increasingly
becoming attractive therapeutic candidates but their synthesis remains
inefficient and atom-uneconomical. Contemporary peptide synthesis utilizes a
solid phase approach, where the amino acid links of a peptide chain are added
one at a time, in a specified sequence. This technique revolutionized peptide
synthesis when it was introduced, but as currently implemented it is a highly
wasteful process, with typical reaction conditions utilizing excess equivalents
of the coupling agents–up to fivefold–for every amide bond synthesized. Dr.
Arora’s work seeks to establish a catalytic approach to the construction of
amide bonds from readily available starting materials. In the new approach, the
use of excess coupling agents is replaced with optimized catalysts operating
within an efficient, “green” catalytic cycle. If successful, this approach will
have important implications for peptide, protein, and polymer synthesis for
technological and pharmaceutical applications. This research will provide
valuable training to students at the interface of organic chemistry and chemical
biology. Students engaged in the project will gain broad experience in molecular
design, conformational analysis, organic synthesis, and biochemistry, and learn
to design compounds with practical applications in biomedical research. In
collaboration with Spelman College, the PI will establish an undergraduate
research course at that university to train Spelman students in peptide
synthesis and allow the students to evaluate the potential of the designed and
synthesized peptides as antibacterial agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this project is to develop new methods for amide bond synthesis that are both
atom-efficient and sustainable. There is an urgent need for methods that do not
require excess reagents and are mild enough to avoid epimerization of
stereocenters adjacent to the activated carbonyl group. In this project, amide
bond formation is accelerated by organocatalysts that transiently enforce a
hydrogen-bonding-mediated intramolecular reaction between the carboxyl and amine
termini of two fragments. The new approach engages the substrates through non-
covalent and covalent interactions to reduce the entropic penalty of organizing
the optimal transition state for catalysis. The project includes significant
educational and outreach activities: the integration of new laboratory
experiment modules based on the science of the project within undergraduate
chemistry courses at NYU and Spelman College, including organic, and inorganic
chemistry, and biochemistry, highlighting the essential interconnectedness of
the chemistry subdisciplines. The project will support a collaboration with
Spelman College – a top HBCU (historically Black college/university) with
students eager to engage in cutting edge research. Professor Arora will develop
a chemical biology course that does not require extensive resources but enriches
the curriculum with cutting-edge research-based projects and that provides
opportunities for students to expand their knowledge of state-of-the-art
chemistry techniques, including peptide chemistry, molecular modeling,
structure-activity relationships, and bioorthogonal
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.