* 2108391
* DISES: Governance across Space: Discovering Principles of Equity and Sustainability to Conserve Migratory Species within Telecoupled Social Environmental Systems
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2027
* Laura Lopez Hoffman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,599,425.00

Birds and bats often migrate over very long distances crossing international
boundaries and countries with differing regulations and policies affecting their
migrations. With the significant decline in migratory species it is important to
understand the potential social and environmental factors that impact their
journey and evaluate potential means to mitigate these declines. It is
increasingly recognized that social and ecological processes in one place can
systematically affect societies and ecosystems in distant locations. Connections
that link these processes among such locations are known as telecouplings, and
all connected locations are part of a telecoupled system. Such systems have
influenced human societies throughout history. For example, in the late 1800s
Austrian hunters protested when Italian farmers drained wetland habitats for
migratory waterfowl, thereby impacting hunting in Austria. Recently, Asian
demand for soybeans has led to deforestation and the disruption of Indigenous
livelihoods in the Amazon. Many of the world’s environmental problems are now
understood as phenomena of telecoupled systems, and the scientific tools now
exist to quantify them. Because telecoupled systems often span vast distances,
and cross multiple international boundaries, today’s major challenge is in
developing appropriate governance systems. Addressing telecoupled environmental
problems may require governance that links ecological and societal phenomena in
one location with management in other locations (i.e., telecoupled governance).
This award addresses this need through studying telecoupled systems of migratory
birds and bats and the associated governance systems. The research will identify
the conditions that lead to telecoupled governance. Then the research will
explore if and when telecoupled governance results in more ecologically
sustainable and societally equitable outcomes. Finally, the award will engage
governmental and nongovernmental entities to develop practical approaches for
incorporating the principles of equity and sustainability into conservation of
migratory species. Students will be trained using week-long, immersive Science
Communication Workshops at Biosphere 2. Researchers will engage local
stakeholders, resource managers, and decision- makers through surveys and in-
person and online interviews, focus groups and panels. The project outcomes will
produce design principles for telecoupled governance with decision-makers and
stakeholders at an interactive workshop in Mexico City at the conclusion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award uses a strong theoretical framework
based on teleconnections and socio-ecological systems concepts as a foundation
for convergence science that merges social science theory with applied
environmental sciences and advances the new discipline of social-environmental
systems. The award integrates current approaches to evaluate the governance of
local socio-environmental systems with approaches that fully describe how these
systems are socially and ecologically connected across space. In so doing, the
investigators overcome weaknesses in existing social and environmental science
research approaches and enable: (i) social science research that more accurately
accounts for the teleconnected ecological structure of many socio-environmental
systems, and (ii) environmental science research that more powerfully accounts
for the cross-scale institutional and socio-economic factors that shape
ecological and equity outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.