* 2108856
* Parameterization and Reduction for Nonlinear Stochastic Systems with Applications to Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Honghu Liu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 113,763.00

The dynamics of the oceans exhibits several large-scale persistent currents,
including the Gulf stream and the Kuroshio in the middle latitudes as prominent
examples. Together with other currents in low and high latitudes, they transfer
substantial amounts of heat and momentum from the tropics to the polar regions,
influencing local and global climate. The balmy jet of seawater also carries a
great potential for producing clean offshore carbon-free energy. To understand
the spatial and time variabilities of such currents is thus of vital importance
for our society. In this project, the investigator will analyze the interplay
between intrinsic nonlinearity and extrinsic stochastic forcing in shaping the
observed variabilities. To disentangle such interactions and to analyze the
impact of noise on dynamical and statistical behaviors of the governing systems
are still grand challenges for many practical applications. To address these
questions, the investigator will establish a new paradigm for the
parameterization and the effective reduction of stochastically forced nonlinear
dissipative equations, such as those governing large-scale oceanic flows. The
proposed approach relies crucially on a dimension reduction methodology
developed recently by the investigator and his colleagues. The knowledge gained
in this project is expected to bring new understanding of the fundamental
mechanisms of large-scale climate patterns. The award will also provide
opportunities for the involvement of graduate students in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dimension reduction methodology adopted and
further developed in this project is based on a new stochastic parameterization
technique for the unresolved small-scale dynamics of the underlying nonlinear
stochastic partial differential equations. The investigator will derive explicit
formulas that approximate the small-scale dynamics in terms of both the large-
scale dynamics and the history of the noise path, leading thus to low-
dimensional stochastic equations involving only large-scale variables. Such
reduced equations are able to capture key dynamical features of the original
stochastic systems and are much more accessible both theoretically and
numerically. The impact of noise on both pattern formation in the classical
Rayleigh-Benard convection and time-variability of the double-gyre wind-driven
ocean circulation will be studied within the proposed theoretic framework. The
parameterization formulas of unresolved small-scale dynamics are rigorously
justified in the context of stochastic invariant manifolds. These formulas will
be extended in this project to handle parameter regimes that are away from the
onset of the first instability using a variational framework. The
parameterization is pathwise in nature, which is very well suited for cases when
one is not only interested in statistical quantities but also trajectory-wise
dynamical behaviors. The formulas involve the history of the noise, which
introduces memory into the corresponding reduced equations. This memory effect
plays a fundamental role for the reduced equations to capture both qualitatively
and quantitatively the dynamical and statistical features of the original
system, and it has already been illustrated to be responsible for achieving good
modeling performance even in situations that are known to be challenging for
other traditional methods to operate. These reduced systems will help us
understand better the impact of noise on the studied systems, which are
otherwise computationally too expensive to obtain. By studying these reduced
models subject to various types of noise, the proposed approach will also bring
insights into possible ways of further improving the underlying stochastic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.