* 2108002
* DISES: Between maintenance and transformation: a socio-environmental systems framework for restoration decision-making under climate change
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Tyler Scott, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,599,937.00

This project will develop a framework for understanding the range of responses,
and their potential drivers, in restoration decision-making under climate
change. Following an extreme event such as a drought, storm, or heat wave,
restoration actions might seek to recover and maintain a historically
representative state. Alternately, restoration actions might seek transformation
to a new state that is anticipated to be more robust to future extreme events
with climate change. Both outcomes represent adaptation to climate change, but
with distinct management goals for the end state. Therefore, by analyzing the
drivers of restoration outcomes on a continuum from maintenance to
transformation, this project will identify drivers of adaptive capacity to
climate change framed in terms of concrete, actionable goals. In addition, by
focusing on marine systems, this project will benefit society by informing
active restoration efforts. With fishery declines and closures, public agencies,
NGOs, fishing organizations, and citizen groups are implementing novel
restoration interventions. Partnership with these entities throughout the
project will account for community and management needs in project activities
and inform time-sensitive management decisions. The project advances STEM
educational training at three institutions, and broadens the participation of
groups historically underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will explore kelp forests off the California coast as a model system to
evaluate environmental and social drivers influencing efforts at restoration.
Following a series of marine heat wave events, California kelp have recently
experienced unprecedented decline, with associated increases in kelp-consuming
urchins impeding kelp recovery. Kelp declines are associated with declines in
biodiversity as well as declines in recreational and commercial fisheries that
are vital to the associated coastal communities. The goal of this project is to
characterize the drivers of maintenance and transformation outcomes in different
socio-environmental system (SES) components and explore their interactions
through three integrated approaches. First, empirical investigation will
characterize the drivers of ecological, social, and institutional capacity to
respond to extreme events with a combination of oceanographic analysis,
ecological field studies, and interviews and a survey of resource users, other
stakeholders, managers, and regulators. Second, informed by this empirical
characterization, a dynamically coupled SES model will explore how the
achievement of identified management goals on the maintenance-transformation
continuum depends on uncertainty in system components and the relative time
scales of ecological recovery and social response. Third, linking the SES model
to governance network analysis will indicate how SES network configurations
affect the ability to realize goals on the maintenance-transformation continuum
in fragmented institutional contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.