* 2108771
* Collaborative Research: Evaluation of the Fundamental Photochemical Mechanisms Driving Carbonyl Sulfide and Carbon Disulfide Formation in Sunlit Natural Waters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amisha Shah, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 319,266.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Amisha Shah and Christina Remucal of Purdue University
and the University of Wisconsin-Madison, respectively, will study chemical
reactions involving the element sulfur that occur at the surface of natural
waters. These chemical reactions are important because they can produce small
molecules containing carbon-sulfur (C-S) bonds that can then move into the
atmosphere above. Once in the atmosphere, the small molecules can participate in
other chemical reactions that impact climate warming and cooling. It is clear
that exposing such waters to sunlight helps form the carbon-sulfur species, but
the details of how the process occurs remains unclear, especially with regard to
how other chemical compounds in water impact the process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Drs. Shah and Remucal will investigate
the chemical mechanisms for production of carbonyl sulfide and carbon disulfide
from precursors in natural waters. At present, models of the global sulfur
budget for the production of these gases from these sources are inconsistent. In
particular, sunlight is known to enhance production of these organosulfur
species, but the mechanism for this enhancement remains unclear. The primary aim
of this study is to develop a better understanding of the fundamental chemical
mechanisms responsible for the photoproduction of carbonyl sulfide and carbon
disulfide in natural waters. These goals will be met by conducting different
types of lab-scale experiments using a reactor that simulates sunlight
illuminating a water sample containing a variety of chemical precursors and
reactants. Outcomes of this project will include outreach to the scientific
community, students, and the public to educate them on the role aquatic
chemistry and photochemistry processes have on the climate. The researchers will
also engage in outreach to middle and high schools and provide research training
to undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.