* 2108916
* Laboratory Chamber Studies on Gas-Phase Photooxidation and Aqueous Chemistry of Phenols and Methoxyphenols in Biomass Burning Organic Aerosol Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Rodney Weber, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 570,349.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry Nga Lee Ng and Rodney Weber at Georgia Tech and their students will
study the formation of organic aerosols (tiny particles suspended in the air)
from biomass burning emissions in the atmosphere. Understanding how these
particles form is important for evaluating their impact on climate and human
health. During fires, the decomposition of woody tissues in plants at high
temperatures releases a significant level of volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
including phenolic compounds. The team will investigate how these phenolic
compounds react under atmospherically relevant conditions to form organic
particles, as well as the ability of these particles to absorb light. The team
will also develop and implement an instruction module on particles from biomass-
burning smoke to expose middle school students in the greater Atlanta area to
new scientific concepts related to wildfires and air pollution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenols and methoxyphenols are a significant part of non-
methane organic compounds emitted from biomass burning. The oxidation and
further chemical processing of these important biomass burning emissions has not
been systematically studied under realistic ambient conditions. Through
comprehensive laboratory chamber experiments, this project will investigate
secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation from gas-phase oxidation of a set of
phenolic compounds under different reaction conditions and their subsequent
aqueous-phase processing. The optical properties of aerosols will also be
characterized. Results from this study will provide fundamental data to
parameterize the gas-phase and aqueous-phase chemistries of phenolic compounds
released into the environment and provide enhanced information on the aerosols
that they form. These data will, in turn, be useful to scientist developing
atmospheric models designed to account for such organic
aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.