* 2108900
* Applied Harmonic Analysis Methods for Non-Convex Optimizations and Low-Rank Matrix Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Radu Balan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2024
* USD 305,000.00

This project promotes the progress of science by expanding the area of applied
harmonic analysis both in mathematics and in applications. The research
addresses complex optimization problems that are intractable by current super-
computers. The projects broaden the two-way communication between mathematics on
one side and engineering and computer science on the other side while promoting
teaching, training, and learning. The PI will train graduate students for a
globally competitive STEM force through internships in industry and government
labs. The project increases the existing partnerships with industry while
offering opportunities to explore mathematics of real-world applications and to
create novel solutions to existing problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
contains two thrusts. The first thrust develops homotopic methods for non-convex
optimizations. In particular, the project will focus on low-rank matrix
estimation, such as the case in the phase retrieval problem, and quadratic
assignment problems, as in graph matching problems. The homotopic method extends
the original search space (the phase space) by one continuous parameter that
trades between the target non-convex objective function and a carefully chosen
convex penalty term. A path tracker is initialized at the global optimizer and
gradually evolved towards the global optimum of the non-convex objective
function. The research will obtain guarantees of optimality for this method. The
second thrust relates to geometric and functional analysis of low-rank positive
semi-definite matrices. The program studies various metrics and Lipschitz
embeddings of these metric spaces. Preliminary results show a rich and complex
collection of metrics on this semi-algebraic variety. In particular, one such
measure is related to optimal expansions into sums of nonnegative rank-one
matrices. It turns out this decomposition is directly related to the analysis of
compact integral operators with kernels in certain modulation spaces. These
results will be extended to finite-dimensional
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.