* 2108651
* High Resolution Multi-Object Fiber-Fed Spectroscopy with Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detectors
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Mazin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,015,551.00

This project seeks to develop a new detector technology, called Microwave
Kinetic Inductance Detectors (MKIDs), that would permit a spectrograph to be
built that can take the spectra of many objects at the same time. An MKID
detector also allows the color of all arriving light to be determined without
the need for additional optics that result in some of the light being lost. This
device has applications across and even beyond astronomy, from detecting life on
planets around nearby stars to looking at the chemical compositions of stars in
the Milky Way and nearby galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectrographs with
spectral resolution R&gt;10,000 are one of the most important tools for nearly
every discipline in astronomy, but design has been nearly static for the last
several decades. A high-resolution spectrograph usually contains a collimator,
echelle grating, cross disperser, and finally a camera and science detector. The
2-d nature of the resulting light (echellogram) makes use of long slits
practical but prevents spectral coverage of more than about a single order at
the high multiplex factors demanded by modern spectroscopic observations. This
means that observations with these instruments are limited to medium or low
(R&lt;6,000) resolution, or very narrow spectral ranges at higher resolution,
and this can preclude in depth chemical abundance analysis of the targets. This
project proposes to build a testbed for new type of high-resolution multi-object
spectrograph (HRMOS) using Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detectors, or MKIDs.
MKIDs can determine the energy of each arriving photon without added read noise
or dark current, and with microsecond temporal resolution. The wavelength
discrimination of photons enabled by using MKID detectors removes the need of
the optical cross disperser allowing the resulting echelle spectrograph to have
a considerably simpler optical design. It allows the simultaneous measurement of
the full echellogram of the output of many fibers using a series of parallel
linear strips of MKIDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.