* 2108921
* Diagnosing Astrophysical Plasmas Using Laser-Driven Nucleosynthesis in Far-From-Equilibrium Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bjorn Hegelich, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

This project will study fusion reactions in a hot dense plasma by using
ultraintense lasers. All elements of regular matter around us stem from fusing
together light elements, starting with hydrogen as the lightest, into
successively heavier elements, like carbon, oxygen, aluminum, iron, and nickel,
which are synthesized in the cores of stars, like the sun. Hydrogen atoms fuse
to form Helium, two helium atoms fuse to form beryllium, and so on. Heavier
elements like copper, silver, gold, or uranium, are formed via nucleosynthesis
within burning shells of massive stars and in supernova explosions. In almost
every case, these nuclear fusion processes happen in a hot, dense plasma
environment. Up to now, measurements of the nuclear fusion reactions using
accelerators have not included these plasma backgrounds. This may have led to
significant observed discrepancies between the expected amount of elements and
those inferred from astronomical measurements. These discrepancies also
influence our understanding of stars and their evolution as well as the use of
these processes in fusion technologies. By using ultraintense lasers, this
project will create fusion reactions in a hot dense plasma and measure the
fusion processes. For a few trillionth of a second the laser will create a
billion-degree hot plasma and accelerate atoms to the required energies to cause
them to fuse. By measuring the different escaping particles, it is then possible
to understand both the plasma conditions and how they influence the fusion
reactions. This data can then be used to improve nuclear and stellar models and
improve our understanding of the universe and maybe even help to develop
controlled fusion technology here on earth, providing an infinite clean energy
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project computes and measures plasma-induced
corrections to fusion reactions between light nuclei in far-from-equilibrium
plasmas with the aim of increasing neutron flux and reaction rate in controlled
laboratory conditions. The primary reaction of study, deuteron-deuteron fusion,
is known as promising for laser-driven neutron sources and has been shown to
carry information about the plasma in the neutron spectrum. The project includes
theoretical, computational and experimental efforts. The theory effort will
compute corrections to nuclear reaction rates and observables from plasma
conditions. Numerical simulations will compare laser and target parameters to
optimize energy transfer to deuterons. Simulations will also provide the
distribution of electrons and deuterons as inputs to the fusion cross sections
and their plasma-dependent corrections, as well as reaction volume and
confinement time. The experiment plan begins with improving plasma and neutron
measurements at the Texas Petawatt using neutron and plasma diagnostics
developed recently. The project will then break new ground by scaling up
stepwise to experiments at the Extreme Light Infrastructure-Nuclear Physics
(ELI-NP) facility in Romania. The extensive suite of photon and neutron
diagnostics available at ELI-NP will enable greater improvements in precision
and angular coverage and may allow searching for secondary nuclear reactions.
The project will conclude with analysis of the experimental data in light of the
theory and simulation progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.