* 2108186
* Creating metastable clusters and assemblies and characterizing their intermolecular interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* S Alex Kandel, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 11/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. S. Alex Kandel of the University of Notre Dame
is exploring how molecules self-assemble as clusters and as monolayers on
surfaces. A combined experimental and theoretical approach is devised where
experiments probe self-assembly of molecules and the data obtained is used to
tune the theoretical calculations to ultimately obtain realistic models for how
molecules self-assemble and provide insight on the role of intermolecular
interactions in the process. A special focus of the project is on amino acids,
which are the basic building blocks of proteins, because it is the interactions
between amino acids is what determine the structure and thus the function of
these essential biological molecules. While the interactions of individual amino
acids are simple, extended amino acid systems such as proteins rapidly become
challenging with increasing size. The project seeks to improve theoretical
models of amino acids, advancing our understanding of these fundamental
molecules, while at the same time improving computer simulations of a wide range
of biological processes. In the course of conducting the project, graduate,
undergraduate and high-school students will be trained in advanced scientific
research methods. Instrument development for this project places an emphasis on
rapid prototyping and three-dimensional printing, in order to make reproduction
of scientific tools inexpensive and simple, and thus accessible even for those
in the community without access to extensive scientific infrastructure,
including undergraduate institutions and high schools. Plans and instructions
for assembly for all instruments will be published freely online. Also a
publicly available website containing the entire scientific output of the
laboratory has been organized using a browsable and searchable database.

The research activities of this project explore molecular self-assembly into
clusters and monolayers on surfaces. The emphasis is on non-equilibrium self-
assembly, where multiple metastable structures form as the result of kinetic
controls. This is in contrast to typical self-assembly experiments, which
generally seek to prepare the system in a single, thermodynamically stable
state. The goal is to use the multiple metastable structures produced to draw
inferences about a larger region of the intermolecular potential energy surface
than is ordinarily probed by experiments. Because of this, the research affords
the possibility of refining and improving polarizable force fields to be used in
large-scale simulations of strongly interacting molecules. On the experimental
side, clusters and monolayers on surfaces will be studied in ultra-high-vacuum
and at low temperature using scanning tunneling microscopy. As a complementary
technique, electrospray ionization mass spectrometry will be employed to study
gas-phase cluster ions, as past results have shown that there is often
coincidence between preferential formation of a particular cluster size in the
gas phase and the observation of that cluster size on the surface. Experiments
will probe self-assembly of amino acids and related molecules, and will proceed
hand-in-hand with theoretical calculations in an effort to obtain a better model
of intermolecular interactions in these systems. Ab initio calculations will
initially be used to obtain parameters for molecules of interest for the AMOEBA
force field, and comparison of experimentally observed structures to those
arising from simulations should allow parameters to be adjusted to better
capture the effect of intermolecular interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.