* 2108032
* WoU-MMA: An Integrated Time Domain System for Discovery and Fast Follow-up of Gravitational Wave Events and Other Transients
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* David Sand, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2024
* USD 875,403.00

Detection of the cosmic collisions of black holes and neutrons stars are
happening on a regular basis with specialized experiments (such as the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory; LIGO), but astronomers struggle
to identify the associated explosions because the positions are poorly localized
on the sky. To locate the transient target in a large area on the sky requires
fast reaction, machine learning techniques, and coordination between different
teams and robotic telescopes. This project will develop the Arizona Time Domain
System, a set of software tools and robotic telescopes designed to be able to
follow-up quickly on reports of explosions. The system will interrogate streams
of incoming data from telescopes and experiments around the world, parse them
for interesting targets using machine learning techniques, and then react in
real time to observe and gather data on the explosion. This sequence occurring
with little or no human intervention. The resulting reduction in time between
discovery of a new supernova or other cosmic explosion, and the characterization
of that event will lead to new scientific understanding. The project plans an
interaction with Pima Community College that will teach astronomy oriented
computer programming to students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of multi-
messenger astronomy has been energized by the discovery of electromagnetic
emission from the binary neutron star merger GW170817, along with the discovery
of further neutron star mergers during the third LIGO/Virgo observing run. To
address open questions related to kilonova emission, more counterparts must be
discovered, preferably at early times in order to distinguish between
theoretical models. This project will build the Arizona Time Domain System
(ATDS), an integrated set of tools to facilitate the discovery and follow-up of
gravitational wave counterparts, in conjunction with two search telescopes. ATDS
will provide significant discovery potential for LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA’s fourth
advanced detector run (O4) and beyond. The ATDS will connect telescopes and
alert data streams to an in-house transient broker that will send promising
candidates to a newly built telescope observation manager that will rapidly
institute photometric and spectroscopic follow-up This open source program will
integrate several new, unproven and largely conceptual time domain tools into
one of the first truly integrated time domain systems that will significantly
advance our ability to respond to new gravitational wave events and their
candidate counterparts. Such integrated systems will be essential for maximizing
the science from both multi-messenger astrophysics and other large time domain
surveys. All the tools and software developed as part of this program will be
open source, benefiting the entire astronomical community. This project advances
the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.