* 2108311
* White Dwarf Stars Under the Influence of Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Clemens, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 530,312.00

White dwarf stars represent the final evolutionary state for ~97% of the stars
in the Universe, including our own Sun. In the century since their discovery
they have provided insight into fundamental physics, stellar evolution and
interactions, and the ages of Galactic stellar populations. Observations across
the past decade also suggest that 25-50% of white dwarfs host remnant planetary
systems, as evidenced by the presence of recently accreted metals in their
atmospheres. A small fraction of these polluted white dwarfs host gas and dust
disks consisting of debris from disrupted exoplanetesimals, and some show
evidence for ongoing electromagnetic interaction with a planetary remnant. These
discoveries provide new possibilities to enhance our understanding of the
elemental history of our Galaxy, the nature of exoplanetary systems, and the
influence of planets on stellar evolution. A research team at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill will conduct a spectroscopic survey of the coolest
metal-polluted (types DZ or DAZ) white dwarfs from the Gaia map of the Milky Way
Galaxy. They will use their results to address a well-known conflict between
lithium abundances as inferred from main-sequence stars and the expectations of
Big Bang nucleosynthesis. The work will find new white dwarfs that can address
this “Cosmological Lithium Problem” and explore early Galactic element
abundances via ancient analogs to Solar System meteorites. In collaboration with
their education and outreach partner Morehead Planetarium and Science Center
(MPSC), the investigators will bring the excitement of exoplanetary science to
the public by developing a challenge for the "Launch Lab," MPSC's new
interactive tinkering space that lets visitors explore problems drawn from
current research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Galaxy’s elemental history is
currently measured primarily from the photospheres of main-sequence stars, but
this can be especially unreliable for lithium, which is consumed at relatively
low temperatures. In the Solar System, planets, asteroids, and especially
meteorites offer an alternate means of inferring the primordial composition of
the solar nebula. This method has not hitherto been applicable outside our Solar
System, but polluted white dwarfs offer a path to extend it to other Galactic
systems and epochs. The researchers will also study DZs and DAZs that are
actively accreting planetary debris via observable disks, which typically show
Doppler-broadened calcium emission associated with the precession of an
elliptical gas disk. The project includes further discovery and monitoring of
debris disks to help understand the formation, evolution, and dynamics of relic
exoplanetary systems. Finally, the researchers will study white dwarfs with
evidence for electromagnetic interaction with a remnant planet, and explore the
effects of planets and mergers on the evolution of white
dwarfs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.