* 2108984
* DISES: Multi-scale modeling of interactions between climate change, air quality, and social inequalities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Mark Budolfson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,513,258.00

Air pollutants and greenhouse gases share emission sources, including through
the combustion of fossil fuels (coal, oil, natural gas). Therefore, climate
policies aimed at reducing greenhouse gases will produce the ‘co-benefit’ of
also reducing air pollution, which is responsible for millions of deaths per
year globally. However, little is known about how these co-benefits in air
quality are likely to be distributed across populations, and how this
distribution depends on choices between leading climate policy options. As one
example, electrifying the transport sector will likely have much different
implications for populations living near major roads – often disproportionately
minorities and people of lower socioeconomic status – compared to a policy
focusing on power plants. No systematic research has yet quantified these
relationships and it is unclear which ways of pursuing climate policy will best
achieve society’s health and equity objectives. This project will investigate
these complex socio-environmental dynamics through a two-step process. First,
the co-benefits of different climate policies as related to air quality will be
estimated, along with how those policies will differentially impact health
across socioeconomic subpopulations. Then that information will be used to
examine how climate policy decisions may be optimized using models that include
other aspects of the broader system, such as economic and demographic change, as
well as the impacts of climate change itself.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human system and the atmospheric system are
inextricably linked. Humans produce emissions, emissions alter the atmosphere,
and the atmosphere in turn affects society, for example through exposure to air
or water pollution, property damage from storms and wildfires, and impacts on
agricultural yields and ecosystems. The level of anthropogenic emissions is
modifiable through policy choices, which are themselves a complex output of
interactions between social and ethical subsystems. This project will model the
dynamics of this highly integrated system, with a focus on feedbacks between
climate policy, air quality, and equity. The air quality ‘co-benefits’ of
climate policy are important because of their policy relevance, given that these
benefits are large, begin immediately, and occur locally. These impacts will not
be uniform across regions in space or time, and so it is important to determine
how climate action might alleviate or exacerbate existing inequalities in air
pollution exposure. These relationships will be examined through novel air
quality modeling and improvements to leading cost-benefit climate policy models.
The goals are to : [1] Conduct multi-scale modeling to determine how air quality
will change as a result of different climate policies, and how those changes
will differentially impact socioeconomic subpopulations within cities, regions
and countries; [2] Incorporate the newly estimated relationships into leading
climate policy models; [3] Analyze optimal policy relative to different
objectives that society might endorse. These objectives have numerous broader
impacts that include reducing income inequality, alleviating health disparities,
ensuring equitable burden sharing between nations, and intergenerational
justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.