* 2108123
* Side-Chain Driven Assembly of Polymer Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Natalie Stingelin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Natalie Stingelin and Dr. Anna M. Österholm
of Georgia Institute of Technology are studying fundamental processes that
underlie the assembly of polymer semiconductors. The local arrangements of these
long chain macromolecules dictate important photophysical, electronic and
electrochemical processes in this broad class of materials. All of these
processes are important in a range of optoelectronic device platforms, such as
LED (light-emitted) screens, wearable electronics, and even bioelectronics. In
this research, semiconducting polymers will be prepared in which the main
polymer backbone is decorated with side-chains of different lengths, densities,
and polarity. Optoelectronic properties will then be investigated to gain
further understanding on how they depend on side-chain arrangement and
subsequent backbone ordering. As opposed to conventional synthetic approaches,
this research will use electricity and blending with surfactants to manipulate
and control side-chain assembly. Relevant physical processes associated with
polymer dynamics will be investigated using a plethora of sophisticated
experimental tools. They include linear and vibrational spectroscopies, thermal
analysis, and electrochemical measurements that allow for rapid evaluation of
polymer assembly motifs. This project will create a highly multidisciplinary and
diverse research and education environment for students where they will be
exposed to academic and industrial perspectives, national laboratories, as well
as national and international collaborators. The research team will also partner
with the Georgia Tech’s Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics, the
Georgia Tech Polymer Network, and groups such as Women in Materials Science and
Engineering (WiMSE) and Women in Chemistry (WiC) to develop a set of diversity-
supported programs focusing on preparing underrepresented minorities for faculty
positions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research aims to provide fundamental
insights of the physics underlying the assembly of polymer semiconductors,
focusing on answering the question of what role side-chain design plays in
dictating backbone order/disorder. Particular emphasis is placed on the use of
electrochemical and physicochemical approaches to control the side-chain
interactions and subsequent backbone order in various polydioxythiophenes to
deliver an assembly framework that exploits the sidechain arrangement for
dictating backbone ordering. Side-chain motifs that promote supramolecular
assembly in neat polymer semiconductor systems into solid-state structures with
little backbone distortion will first be identified with a strong emphasis on
chemical structure, side-chain branching point location, and side-chain density.
Electrochemical doping will then be utilized to investigate changes in polymer
assemblies and how they influence both redox and charge transport properties.
Lastly, small molecule additives will be blended with a polymer semiconductor to
examine their effect on backbone conformation. This research will address
fundamental questions in the field of conjugated polymers through extrinsic
approaches rather than the synthetic ones. If successful, the proposed work will
have a major impact on the semiconducting polymer field, particularly
optoelectronic device platforms, such as organic light-emitting diodes, organic
photovoltaics, organic field-effect transistors, as well as emerging
technologies for bioelectronics and neuromorphic
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.