* 2108370
* How does stellar feedback drive interstellar turbulence and molecular hydrogen formation?
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Snezana Stanimirovic, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 410,028.00

Stars are formed in the interstellar medium (ISM) in dense and cold regions that
are rich in different types of molecules. To understand how stars and planets
form, it is essential to understand how their molecules form out of diffuse,
neutral ISM gas. Once formed, stars inject energy into the ISM causing
turbulence, which shakes and stirs the future stellar birthplaces. Astronomers
study the neutral ISM using the 21-cm emission line of atomic hydrogen (HI). The
researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison will investigate how
interstellar turbulence affects the diffuse gas. They will use a new radio
telescope in Australia to obtain HI observations of the Magellanic Clouds. The
project team will also continue with the development of a comic strip for middle
school students, entitled “Galaxy scouts: Spaceventures with Stella and Riley”.
This strip features excitement and products of science in daily life, with the
key goal of enhancing societal scientific literacy. These materials will be
publicly available. By developing the comic strip and three activity books, the
group will provide a unique introduction to STEM disciplines for elementary and
middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the following
objectives. First, to quantify the influence of different astronomical sources
on interstellar turbulence, the project will quantify the level of spatial
variations of HI turbulent properties across the Magellanic Clouds by using a
novel statistical method. Second, to provide direct constraints for numerical
simulations of star formation, the exact modes of turbulent motions and scales
of operations will be mapped across the Magellanic Clouds. This will constrain
the fraction of turbulent energy that shakes, as opposed to stirs, the HI gas.
Third, as molecular hydrogen forms from the atomic hydrogen structures affected
by turbulent motions, the project will test theories that incorporate turbulence
in the molecular hydrogen formation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.