* 2108838
* Functionalization, Supramolecular Encapsulation, and Order in Boron-Nitride Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Matteo Pasquali, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 10/31/2024
* USD 476,448.00

Professors Angel A. Mart√≠ and Matteo Pasquali of William Marsh Rice University
are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop chemical strategies to control
the structure and to impart desirable properties to nanostructures, particularly
boron nitride nanotubes. This is to be accomplished through chemical
modification of the surface, encapsulation of metal-organic complexes within the
nanotubes and surface coverage with surfactants. Boron-nitrides possess a unique
set of material properties that include good thermal conductivity, a large band
gap, chemical inertness, and high tensile strength. Better understanding of
these unique nanostructures and their properties could pave the way for the
development of new sensors, anti-corrosive coatings, and light and robust
materials for a wide range of applications. In the course of conducting the
proposed research, graduate, undergraduate and high school students will be
trained through participation in the project. Particular emphasis is on outreach
toward members of underrepresented minorities at Rice University through
institutional programs and in Puerto Rico through programs such as the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation. In addition, the project includes
collaboration with NASA Langley Research Center and a startup company, BNNT
LLC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boron nitride nanostructures are known to be inert and
extremely stable and resistant to chemical manipulation. This project focuses on
the chemical modification of boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs) and other BN
nanostructures in an effort to control their organization and impart properties
for potential practical applications. This goal is to be achieved by studying
unexplored functionalization techniques such as the Vilsmeier reaction and the
photo-decomposition of diazonium salts to functionalize BN nanostructures under
mild conditions. Functionalization is designed to tune the surface properties of
the BN nanostructures to modify the surface energy and dispersibility and/or
achieve exfoliation. The BNNTs will be loaded with metal complexes and metal
oxide nanoparticles to produce hybrid structures, and allow for the tuning of
the properties of BNNTs and the encapsulated group. This research will also
address the organization and self-assembly of BN nanostructures through attempts
to form liquid crystalline phases by utilizing a number of surfactant
preparations. The structure of the surfactants around the BNNTs will then be
investigated using small angle neutron scattering. New scientific and
technological advances and applications based on BN nanostructures are expected
to be realized in the course of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.