* 2108308
* DISES: Resilient Socio-Environmental Systems: Indigenous Territories in the Face of Change
* GEO,RISE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2025
* Robert Walker, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 998,682.00

Indigenous peoples are capable of conserving their natural environments in the
face of significant development pressures. Nevertheless, little is known about
the conservation efficacy of their social-environmental practices. The study
addresses this issue through a partnership with an Indigenous nation to
ascertain how they have been able to achieve cultural and biodiversity
conservation, even with threats arising from resource extraction and large-scale
infrastructure projects. Thus, the study provides information critical to
tropical forest conservation. Research results on climate change mitigation
strategies will be broadly disseminated among Indigenous communities. Since
Indigenous peoples manage 40 percent of protected areas globally, the potential
conservation impact is great. The study builds local capacity by training eight
Indigenous research technicians, and it empowers Indigenous communities by
facilitating the design of territorial management plans that foster long-term
Indigenous resilience in the face of development pressures. In addition, the
study supports a post-doctoral researcher and promotes diversity by training
three graduate students from historically under-represented populations. This
study enhances cross-cultural learning by partnering undergraduate students
through online "virtual exchanges" and summer field courses. A robust science
communication strategy ensures that study results will inform both academics and
the general public about how Indigenous social-environmental practices shape
contemporary conservation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on
the Indigenous territory (IT), an integrated socio-environmental system capable
of maintaining sustainable interactions between a human population and the
physical environment. ITs can be resilient to external threats by virtue of
biocultural heritage: the language, knowledge, and practices Indigenous peoples
use to sustain the ecological integrity of their homeland environments. The
study problem resides in our incomplete knowledge about how such resilience
functions, and the goal is to fill this gap. Specifically, we seek insight into
the responses of ITs to development pressures that spark encroachments on
Indigenous lands but also make available the goods, services, and jobs of a
market economy. At what point does IT resilience attenuate, precipitating the
loss of biocultural heritage and ecosystem degradation? How do ITs sustain
system integration as development pressures mount? The study team will address
such questions with its Indigenous partners, which is subject to threats from
resource extraction and infrastructure development that are similar to those
impacting the entire region. The study integrates ecology, socio-environmental
modeling, human geography, and spatial sciences. It will collect data via
ecological assays, scientific surveys, and key informant interviews. Analytical
techniques include both quantitative and qualitative methods. The study
contributes to systems theory by conceptualizing the IT as an integrated socio-
environmental system, and it enhances an understanding of IT
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.