* 2108526
* RAPID: Real-time Forecasting of COVID-19 risk in the USA
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Lauren Gardner, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

In an effort to support decision making by governments and individuals related
to the COVID-19 pandemic, the researchers will develop a set of epidemic
forecast models to accurately assess the risk presented by COVID-19 in the
United States at county, state, and national levels. The models will build on
epidemiological data from the CSSE team’s publicly available COVID-19 tracking
map, along with anonymized mobile phone data, demographic and socioeconomic
information, climate and seasonality factors, and various health and behavioral
metrics. The modeling framework will be flexible, and thus able to provide
decision support for various policy needs and mitigation strategies. The team
will make concerted efforts to maximize the model’s usefulness to decision-
makers and ensure the successful translation of modeling outcomes into useful
actions. In the short term, the model outputs generated by the team will
contribute to the CDC’s COVID-19 national forecasting efforts through the
COVID-19 Forecast Hub. In the long term, the systems engineering approach to
this research effort will contribute to the establishment of a robust, vetted
set of tools that can be used for epidemic forecasting, prior to and during the
next pandemic. This project will also support the training of graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The forecasting model will utilize an empirical machine
learning approach that combines disparate data inputs into a meaningful
predictive model using a combination of raw data and novel metrics generated in-
house as inputs. The research team will explore, evaluate and compare the
performance of different statistical methodologies for answering different
proposed modeling objectives, in addition to developing new techniques to
further improve predictive capabilities such as ensemble approaches and input
clustering. Various combinations of methodologies and research objectives will
be considered and optimized to find the best pairing. The team will make a
concerted effort to continually validate the model based on observed data, and
in response, continue to refine the model to both increase the accuracy of the
predictions and infer the most important factors driving the outbreak, thus
improving our general understanding of COVID-19 transmission risk. The proposed
modeling effort will simultaneously build on the research team’s ongoing data
collection effort that supports the JHU CSSE COVID-19 Dashboard and data set,
and thus enable the team to further improve the quality of the data, as well as
improve the communication, documentation, and management of the dataset, which
has become the authoritative source of COVID-19 case and death data globally
serves as the foundation for national and local level COVID-19 modeling
conducted by dozens of research teams, governmental organizations and public
health agencies around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.