* 2108593
* Employing Atomically Precise Colloidal Synthesis to Reveal the Roles of Stoichiometry, Strain and Electron Density in Metal Phosphide Electrocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Scott Geyer, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 78,399.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Scott M. Geyer of Wake Forest
University is developing new methods to make very small catalyst nanoparticles
that convert carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas that contributes to climate
change, selectively into chemicals valuable to industry. To better understand
the way in which the nanoparticle surface promotes the creation of a specific
chemical, methods to control the spacing between metal atoms using small amounts
of phosphorus are being developed. Metal layering is also being pursued to
further control the interaction of the catalyst with carbon dioxide while also
limiting the amount of precious metal required for high catalytic activity. The
chemical methods developed have the potential to result in efficient catalysts
and impact the important field of reductive electrocatalysis, while also
contributing to the broader area of renewable approaches into value-added fuels
and industrial chemicals. Through this research, undergraduate and graduate
students will learn how to synthesize and characterize catalytic nanoparticles.
Dr. Geyer will continue to engage and educate the broader community about
sustainable energy by coordinating a local after school program that provides
students with hands on experience collecting and converting energy into tangible
products such as sound, movement, and chemical fuels. This program also brings a
mobile research laboratory on site so community members can work with scientific
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on using colloidal
synthetic methods to probe the role of stoichiometry and heterostructure on the
selectivity of metal phosphide nanocrystal catalysts toward the carbon dioxide
reduction reaction. For example, the development a reliable core/shell synthesis
method for metal phosphides is expected to provide a route for epitaxial growth
to achieve stoichiometric transfer between the core and shell materials.
Further, developing copper phosphide and silver phosphide as exchange templates
should provide an alternative synthetic route to novel materials and establish
the role of stoichiometry in achieving efficient cation exchange. Understanding
how stoichiometry impacts selectivity using experimental and computational
methods has the potential to enable more rational design of selective catalyst
surfaces. Developing robust metal phosphide core/shell synthetic techniques may
open a wide range of new heterostructure catalysts of interest for carbon
dioxide reduction as well as for other electrocatalytic reactions such as
hydrogen reduction, nitrogen reduction, and oxygen
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.