* 2108839
* Modeling and Simulation of Interacting Wings: Collective Dynamics in Inertial Fluid Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Anand Oza, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 279,999.00

This project aims to understand how collections of flapping wings propel and
interact through a fluid medium, such as water or air. Many living and non-
living objects propel themselves by moving a set of propulsors (wings, fins, or
a tail) that are attached to a main body. While there has been substantial
progress in understanding how microscopic objects (such as bacteria) interact
through slow fluid flows, little is known about how macroscopic objects (like
fish) are affected by the relatively fast flows they generate. The new
mathematical models constructed in this project will be used to assess how fluid
flows affect the speed, energy consumption and stability of a collection of
flapping wings traveling in different formations. The insights gained from this
research have the potential to impact the biology and engineering communities.
Specifically, recent experiments have suggested that fish and birds may travel
in orderly formations in order to save energy, but the role of fluid flows in
mediating schooling and flocking remains poorly understood. On the engineering
side, the design of autonomous underwater vehicles is often inspired by the
flapping mechanics of fish, and this project could inform new design and control
principles. The project will train undergraduate and graduate students in
mathematical modeling and physical applied mathematics, giving them tools that
can be broadly applied to problems arising in the natural sciences and
engineering. Moreover, the beautiful displays exhibited by animal collectives
can readily be appreciated by the public, making the project suitable for
outreach initiatives conducted by the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical models of varying degrees of
fidelity and complexity will be constructed and analyzed to probe different
aspects of the wings' behavior. A key challenge is that flapping wings generate
long-lived fluid flows in the form of complex vortical structures. This leads to
temporally nonlocal hydrodynamic interactions between the constituents, wherein
the forces between wings at a given time depend on their past positions and
velocities. A nonlinear discrete-time delay-difference map, which explicitly
models the wings' shed vortices, has been validated against recent experiments
and will be used to assess the dependence of a formation’s speed, energy
consumption and stability on geometric parameters. Conformal mapping and
integral equation techniques will be used to represent two- and three-
dimensional flows, respectively, and to assess the influence of wing shape.
Furthermore, a continuum PDE theory for a dense collective of wings in a high
Reynolds number flow will be systematically derived from the aforementioned
models. Traveling wave solutions of the continuum theory will be characterized
through numerical simulations, and the emergence of positional and orientational
order will be assessed. The goals are to determine the extent to which
hydrodynamic interactions alone can account for the spatiotemporally complex
formations observed in dense collectives of flapping objects, and to uncover
novel emergent phenomena that have been conjectured to arise in systems
influenced by inertial fluid flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.