* 2108458
* Development of a Trace Gas Detector using Cavity Ring-Down Detection of Two-Photon Absorption
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kevin Lehmann, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 474,886.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Kevin Lehmann and his research group at the
University of Virginia are working to develop and implement a new laser-based
method for the selective detection of trace gases. The method takes advantage of
a unique process called near-resonant two-photon absorption spectroscopy in
order to improve the extent to which different molecules can be distinguished in
complex gas mixtures. The improvements are based on significant increases in
both the selectivity and the sensitivity of the measurement that occur when a
molecule simultaneously absorbs two photons, with one of the photons having an
energy that is very close to, but not exactly the same as, one of the vibrations
of the molecule. The experiments use an optical cavity that traps the light
between two mirrors in order to increase the signal strength. Cavity-enhanced
techniques for trace gas detection, especially a method known as cavity ring-
down spectroscopy, allow the identification and characterization of molecules in
many applications, including ultrahigh purity manufacturing, drug purity and
lifetime monitoring, environmental monitoring on both local and global scales,
medical diagnostics, and even the time-dating of archeological samples. The
research team led by Professor Lehmann is using the new two-photon approach to
overcome important complications that have limited the size of the molecules
that can be distinguished using traditional cavity-enhanced methods, potentially
leading to significant increases in the range and complexity of samples that can
be analyzed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves development of new
trace gas detection methods based on near-resonant two-photon absorption cavity
ring-down spectroscopy (TP-CRDS) in the infrared spectral region. Measurements
to detect small molecules, such as nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide, provide
important tests of the underlying theory of the technique and the detection
limits compared with the predicted shot-noise limit. Test measurements include
detection of trace levels of nitrous oxide in synthetic air samples with
realistic minor components that are present in ambient air in various
environments. Additional measurements examine the two-photon absorption spectra
of more complex molecules, such as trans-butadiene. Wide-bandwidth scans survey
the two-photon absorption spectra of these larger molecules for the first time,
providing experimental spectra of the pure gases at low pressure for comparison
with simulated spectra based on anharmonic frequency predictions from electronic
structure calculations. The wide-bandwidth survey scans use two detection
methods, one based on absorption and one based on emission. In the first case,
absorption of infrared light in a multipass Herriott cell is measured based on
amplitude or frequency modulation of a counter-propagating wave. The second
method detects infrared emission of the sample induced by two counter-
propagating waves in order to selectively distinguish two-photon absorption from
Lamb dips, based on opposite sign of the signal in the two cases. Measurements
covering the spectral region of the fundamental C-H stretching vibrations of
polyatomic molecules have the potential to reveal the composition of mixtures of
hydrocarbons that cannot be distinguished by their one-photon absorption spectra
due to spectrally overlapping bands. Overall, this new approach to trace gas
detection using near-resonant two-photon absorption spectroscopy holds the
promise of more sensitive and more selective detection, including detection of
isotopically distinct species and identification of larger molecules in more
complex mixtures than current methods allow. These developments could have
impact across many areas, including atmospheric science, industrial and
environmental monitoring, and radiocarbon dating. The research project also will
provide advanced training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate research
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.