* 2108811
* Reactivity of Organic Radicals in the Atmospheric Aqueous Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jesse Kroll, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 549,147.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professors Jesse Kroll and William Green will pursue experimental and
modeling studies of fate of reactive chemical species in small droplets in the
atmosphere. Organic (carbon- and hydrogen-containing) compounds are emitted into
the atmosphere from a wide range of sources, including vehicles, wildfires, and
plants. These compounds can have major impacts on air quality and climate,
because in the atmosphere they undergo chemical reactions, forming products that
such as ozone and fine particle matter. Many of these reactions occur in the gas
phase, but some occur within liquid water droplets suspended in the air (cloud
droplets, fog droplets, and fine particles). However, the organic chemistry
occurring in water droplets is generally poorly understood. Therefore, this
project addresses the chemistry of organic radicals (key reactive species in
organic oxidation reactions) within liquid water. Laboratory studies will
involve the generation of radicals and measurements of their reaction products,
and computational studies will focus on predicting rates and products of the
chemical reactions. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in this
research, and the team will participate in MIT-wide research opportunity
programs aimed at students from traditionally underrepresented groups. The
software generated will be made widely available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic
peroxy (RO2) and oxy (RO) radicals will be generated in the aqueous phase by the
photolysis of radical precursors, allowing for control of their chemical
structure and concentration. Products will be measured in real time using
aerosol mass spectrometry and chemical ionization mass spectrometry. The
products of such radical species have received considerable study, though
primarily in the gas phase and bulk organic phase. The chemistry of such
radicals in aerosols has received substantially less study, mostly limited to
pulse radiolysis experiments that used gas chromatography to measure reaction
products. Initial work will focus on optimizing techniques to generate these
radicals. Subsequent studies of the chemistry will be carried out first in the
bulk aqueous phase and then within suspended submicron droplets. In parallel,
computational work (rate coefficient calculations and chemical kinetic modeling)
is expected to provide insight into underlying mechanisms and will help
generalize results to a wider range of reactions and conditions. Aqueous-phase
radical chemistry may be substantially different from that in the gas phase: the
presence of liquid water can dramatically affect the kinetics and thermodynamics
of elementary reactions, as well as introduce new reaction pathways that cannot
occur in the gas phase. The unique chemical environment of deliquesced particles
introduces additional chemical effects, associated with gas-particle
partitioning and high ionic strengths. This work will investigate all these
effects, via laboratory and computational studies of aqueous-phase radical
chemistry, with the aim of improving our understanding of the fundamental
reactivity, atmospheric fate, and ultimate impacts of these important radical
intermediates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.