* 2108470
* Turning up the Heat: Using Ram Pressure Stripping in Clusters to Understand Star Formation in Extreme Conditions
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Greg Bryan, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 283,719.00

Large systems of galaxies, such as clusters, are usually surrounded by satellite
galaxies. These satellites are often stripped of gas as they move around the
cluster, resulting in less gas that can be converted to stars. However, there is
evidence that low mass galaxies may not be stripped as quickly as suggested by
cosmological models, and some observational studies have found that this
stripping actually causes star formation. This project lays out a plan to
understand how the interaction of a satellite galaxy with its host affects star
formation by using a set of computer simulations. This project will support a
student in Columbia University’s Bridge to the PhD program, involving the
student in the research program and providing mentoring and training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will investigate the star formation properties of
galaxies that have become satellites of more massive systems. These galaxies are
interacting with the diffuse, hot halo gas of the host system, a process known
as ram pressure stripping. The results of these numerical simulations will be
used to address (i) the mechanisms by which low-mass galaxies respond to ram
pressure stripping and how they quench, (ii) the conditions that are most likely
to give rise to induced star formation versus rapid quenching, and how they
compare to the increasingly large observational samples of so-called Jellyfish
galaxies, which show signs of ram pressure stripping, and (iii) the use of high-
resolution ISM-scale simulations will show, in detail, how the interstellar
medium reacts to ram-pressure stripping. The answers to these questions will
allow for a better understanding of how star formation operates in extreme
conditions and may lead to better models of star formation in all conditions.
The lack of underrepresented minorities (URM) in Ph.D. programs will be
addressed in this project by supporting a URM student in Columbia’s successful
Bridge to the Ph.D. program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.