* 2108465
* A Uniform Survey of TESS M dwarf Planets with MAROON-X
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jacob Bean, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,031,453.00

The team will use the MAROON-X spectrograph on the Gemini North observatory to
conduct follow-up spectroscopic observations of all TESS candidate planets
around M-dwarf stars. They will find orbits for these planets, as well as masses
and densities to high precision. The team will also attempt to determine the
mass fraction for M-dwarf planets in the Earth – Super-Earth regime (1 – 10
Earth masses). One of the objectives of the work is to identify interesting
targets for follow-up by future large ground-based and space-based telescopes.
At the conclusion of the work, the MAROON-X instrument will transition from
being a guest instrument on Gemini North to being a facility instrument. The
team will train a post-doc, and provide research opportunities to undergraduates
from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use the
MAROON-X instrument to make radial velocity observations of TESS-observed M
dwarf stars at V-band magnitudes of at 16 where planetary transits are recorded.
The combination of the radial velocity data, at a precision of 30 cm/sec, with
the transit information will allow inference of the planet’s mass to within 10%,
allowing for inference of the planet’s bulk composition. The team will observe
38 planets, of which 20 are potentially rocky. These measurements should allow
for the first statistical analysis of planets in the 1-10 Earth mass range
around M dwarf stars, which make up 75% of the stars in our galaxy. MAROON-X has
been commissioned, and is currently operating as a guest instrument at Gemini
North.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.