* 2108790
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Inversion Approaches to Partial Differential Equations: Theory, Algorithm Development, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Nathan Glatt-Holtz, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2024
* USD 141,000.00

The project will contribute to a new and rapidly developing area of applied
mathematics rich with applications for modeling and challenges for rigorous
mathematical analysis. This research will yield important new methods for
modeling chemical mixing, biologically active fluids, and geophysical systems.
Improving methods for these domain settings will provide more effective tools to
address important problems such as the spread of pathogens or pollutants or to
quantify the degree and type of climate hazards. The investigators will develop
new methodologies for calibrating and designing effective measurement strategies
of these various fluid systems, which simultaneously resolve degrees of the
inherent uncertainty in these measurements. This project involves the training
and active participation of a number of graduate students and other earlier
career scientists. The cross institutional and cross disciplinary nature of this
project will provide unique opportunities for the participants.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in computational infrastructure combined with novel
mathematical formulations and newly discovered algorithms have allowed the
extension of the Bayesian approach to new classes of physics-constrained inverse
problems. Solutions typically take many times the computational power of a
single solve of a nonlinear forward map based on a partial differential
equations (PDEs) where the estimation concerns a function rather than a finite
collection of numerical values, namely where we are interested in estimating an
infinite-dimensional unknown parameter. The investigators will undertake a
research program at the intersection of stochastic and functional analysis,
high-performance computing, nonlinear PDEs, and fluid dynamics. Specifically,
the investigators will (1) consider a series of physically motivated PDE inverse
problems with infinite-dimensional unknowns; (2) develop novel algorithms
adapted to efficiently sample from infinite-dimensional measures; (3) develop
the ergodic theory for certain classes of infinite-dimensional Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms to rigorously assess rates of convergence in
sampling target posterior measures; and (4) analyze consistency in the large
data observation limit for infinite dimensional models. The project contributes
effective frameworks for the measurement of turbulent fluid flows from sparse,
irregular data while developing sampling methods of broader interest across
computational statistics and data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.