* 2108244
* Renewal of “Understanding Gravity at the Smallest Scale”
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Giorgio Gratta, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 526,001.00

Understanding the nature of gravity at microscopic distances is one of the most
important open problems in fundamental physics. Although General Relativity
provides an extremely well-tested framework for describing gravitational effects
at large distances, its connection with quantum mechanics and other fundamental
interactions remains elusive. Indeed, the development of a quantum theory of
gravity that can be incorporated into the Standard Model of fundamental
interactions is a central goal of physics, with broad implications for our
understanding of particle physics and the mysterious nature of the "dark energy"
that appears to permeate the universe. Many theories attempting to provide a
consistent microscopic framework for gravity (e.g., those involving extra
dimensions) predict that gravity could deviate from the familiar inverse square
law at sub-millimeter distances. Such deviations are extremely difficult to
measure experimentally due to the small strength of gravitation and the presence
of residual electromagnetic interactions. This grant funds the continuation of
an experimental program in this area that has just started providing
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous measurements at these distance scales
have employed techniques derived from human-size devices in which mechanical
springs are used as part of force sensors. In the last few years, with the
support of the NSF, the PI has developed a drastically new technique, using the
light field of a laser to confine and measure the motion of micron-size quartz
microspheres. In the last year the first full search for deviations from the
inverse square law in the 10 micron range has been completed. While not yet
competitive with the most sensitive measurements, this represents the first
demonstration of the new technique that more directly measures forces at the
range of interest, instead of extrapolating with objects that are larger than
such range. In addition to this, the systematics are expected to be very
different from those of other measurements and there are indications that
background force models will soon be within reach. Additionally, the new
technique used has been found to have many other applications in other areas of
fundamental as well as applied physics. In the first category are searches for
millicharged particles or tests of neutrality of matter, while inertial
navigation and vacuum technology are examples of the
second.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.