* 2108467
* WoU-MMA: High-Energy Emission from Neutron Star Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kohta Murase, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 478,283.00

The detections of the collision of two neutron stars by the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) has ushered in the era of multimessenger
astronomy. Subsequent observations of gamma rays and X-rays have provided
additional information about these events. This project will model these events
using computer simulations to connect high-energy emissions for binary neutron
star mergers with detailed physics of the events. The project will also create
summer research opportunities for six undergraduate students from the
California-Arizona Minority Partnership for Astronomy Research and Education
(CAMPARE) and Cal-Bridge programs. The computational tools developed in this
project will be made publicly available. This award advances the goals of the
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will perform
numerical relativity simulations of binary neutron star mergers including all of
the physics necessary to predict and interpret high-energy emission for these
events: general relativistic gravity, resistive magnetohydrodynamics with a sub
grid model for small-scale turbulent dynamo action, and neutrino emission and
absorption. This simulations will be followed by detailed microphysical
calculations of the production of high-energy photons and neutrinos, which will
enable the joint interpretation of gravitational wave, thermal and non-thermal
electromagnetic, and high energy neutrinos from merging neutron stars. As part
of this project, the team will develop a new open source general-relativistic
resistive MHD solver. In addition to the support of six undergraduates from
CAMPARE and Cal-Bridge, the simulation data and the computational tools
generated in this project will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.