* 2108938
* Uncovering the Seeds of Star Clusters across the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Cara Battersby, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 388,858.00

Before our Sun was formed, other stars created the heavy elements that make up
our planet and are important for the chemistry of life. The investigators will
study how this process varies in different parts of our galaxy in order to
better understand our cosmic origin. They will use data from a survey of star
forming regions in our galaxy obtained with the Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) telescope. This survey, called ALMAGAL,
gives us a better view of how stars are born across our Galaxy. The investigator
will expand the reach of this scientific investigation by developing an
educational tour entitled Zooming in on Star Formation across the Galaxy and by
using the web-based World Wide Telescope (WWT). Incorporating these new data
into WWT ensures broad, long-lasting access to the community, and educators can
easily incorporate these items into lesson plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
stars in the Universe formed in a clustered environment. However, lack of
spatial resolution has limited our ability to observe the individual star-
forming cores within young star clusters. Understanding the process by which
dense proto-clusters fragment into star-forming cores and the role that Galactic
environment and evolutionary stages plays is of utmost importance, The
investigators seek to develop a predictive theory of star formation that can be
applied throughout the cosmos. The ALMAGAL survey will reveal cloud
fragmentation on core scales (0.01 pc) across the Galaxy. The ALMAGAL survey,
which combines the high angular resolution (1000 AU or better) and large sample
size (more than 1000 dense clumps) required to understand proto-cluster
fragmentation across Galactic environment and evolutionary stage. The
investigator will use this unprecedented sample to measure whether the star
formation process varies as a function of Galactic environment or evolutionary
stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.