* 2108140
* The Inner Workings of Starbursts and Their Winds
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alberto Bolatto, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 550,178.00

Astronomers have realized since the mid-1990s that the star formation in the
Universe has not been constant, and that in fact, the star formation rate per
unit volume has steadily decreased since attaining a peak at z ~ 2. While still
not completely understood, this is thought to be due to a combination of a
steady decrease in the inflow of pristine gas from the Cosmic Web, a more
efficient mode of star formation in the past, and the effects of large-scale
galactic winds from regions of intense star formation. This research centers on
high spatial resolution sub/millimeter wavelength line and continuum
observations of local starburst galaxies, where high efficiency star formation
and associated wind-driven outflows occur, in order to better understand the
physical processes driving star formation at its peak epoch (i.e., "cosmic
noon"). This project will support two research graduate students and one
undergraduate student, the latter participating in a side project working to
increase STEM participation among minority
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using high angular resolution sub/millimeter
and radio observations of the local starburst galaxies NGC 253, M82, and NGC
4945, this project will advance knowledge of the physical processes that shape
their evolution. A key goal of this research is a better understanding of the
physics of star formation â€œquenching" through (e.g.) observationally
constraining the entrainment of cold gas in galactic scale wind-driven outflows
powered by starbursts and the physical conditions in the outflowing gas that
influence its fate. The research team will also measure basic properties of
young, massive starburst clusters and improve our knowledge of the fraction of
stars that form in them and determine how molecular gas properties vary among
starburst galaxies. All these results will lead to more physically realistic
numerical models of galaxy evolution. The researchers will place these results
in the context of main sequence galaxies at the peak of cosmic star formation by
comparing the physical state of the local starbursts with spatially resolved
molecular properties in a new large galaxy sample
(DYNAMO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.