* 2108180
* Counting the Unseen: Massive Black Hole Demographics from Tidal Disrution Events
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anil Seth, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,637.00

One of the major scientific discoveries of the last two decades is that large
galaxies and their central super-massive black holes (BH) have evolved together,
with each directly influencing observable properties of the other. Whether less
massive galaxies have similarly coevolved with central BHs, or indeed, what
fraction even possess them, is still an open question due to the difficulty in
detecting intermediate mass (&lt;100,000 solar masses) BHs. A promising approach
to detect and quantify these objects utilizes the brief outbursts of light
emitted during a tidal disruption event (TDE), where a BH's strong gravitational
tidal forces shred a star passing too close to it. The primary aim of this
project is to use existing color, stellar mass, and central stellar density
measurements of low mass galaxies within 20 Mpc to model the expected frequency
and luminosities of TDEs that the upcoming Vera C. Rubin Observatory are
expected to detect by the thousands. These observations will reveal the fraction
of low-mass galaxies that host BHs, their masses, and more broadly the primary
formation mechanism of central BHs. The project will support a graduate student
as well as undergraduate outreach interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whereas
intermediate mass BHs are exceedingly difficult to detect either kinematically
or through their accretion signatures, TDEs represent a robust alternative
technique. However, using observed TDEs to constrain black hole “demographics”
requires accurate predictions of these events as a function of galaxy
properties. To first order, the parsec scale density of stars in the immediate
vicinity of a BH is the key parameter for accurately predicting TDE rates, and
such spatial scales can only be revolved for galaxies within ~20 Mpc. In
galaxies less massive than the Milky Way the central densities on these scales
(and thus TDE rates) are dominated by nuclear star clusters. This project will
use nuclear density measurements combined with present-day stellar mass
functions to constrain the TDE rates for a range of BH mass distributions and
occupation fractions. These predictions can then be compared to data from the
Zwicky Transient Factory (ZTF) and the upcoming Vera C. Rubin Observatory to
determine the BH demographics in galaxies as low as 100-million solar masses for
the first time. Two additional projects will also predict TDE rates in stripped
nuclei surrounding massive galaxies and attempt to explain the apparent
“overabundance” (roughly one of every three) of TDEs in post-starburst
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.