* 2108536
* Illuminating Galaxy Formation with the Atacama Cosmology Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Hill, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2024
* USD 483,459.00

A central goal of extragalactic astrophysics and cosmology is to find answers to
questions like: How do galaxies affect their environments? What processes are
responsible for shutting off star formation in galaxies? To answer these
questions, this research will use a new technique to probe the ionized gas
distribution in and around galaxies identified in the NSF-funded Advanced
Atacama Cosmology Telescope survey and the Dark Energy Survey, resulting in an
improvement of nearly two orders of magnitude over current knowledge. This will
set the stage for a further significant increase in sensitivity to follow from
the Simons Observatory and the NSF-funded Vera Rubin Observatory, both coming
online in the early 2020s. As part of this investigation, the PI will mentor a
student from the Columbia University Bridge Program, a two-year post-
baccalaureate program that increases the participation of students from under-
represented groups in STEM Ph.D. programs, and a summer undergraduate student
through the Simons-NSBP Scholars Program, a partnership between the Simons
Observatory and the National Society of Black
Physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After several 3 to 4-sigma detections in the
past decade, measurements of the kinematic Sunyaev-Zel’dovich (kSZ) signal are
now set to dramatically improve in precision as a result of the NSF-funded
Advanced Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT) survey and its overlap with large-
scale galaxy surveys, particularly the Dark Energy Survey (DES). This project
will develop the “projected-field” kSZ estimator, building on the PI’s recent
first detection using this tool. Crucially, unlike other kSZ estimators, this
approach does not require a spectroscopic redshift for each galaxy. Application
of this estimator to data from ACT and DES to measure the projected-field kSZ-
galaxy cross-correlation will result in ~60-sigma measurements of this quantity
using data already in hand from these surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.