* 2108657
* Collaborative Research: The Massive and Distant Clusters of WISE Survey 2
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mark Brodwin, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 101,571.00

The team will search for galaxy clusters and protoclusters in the distant
Universe, back to the time when the first clusters were forming, allowing for
detailed studies of the most massive galaxies in the universe at the time when
they were rapidly growing. The program is based upon catalogs created by NASA’s
Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE), a space-based observatory that
performed an all-sky survey in the infrared. Combining the WISE data with
catalogs from the Dark Energy Camera (DECam) on NSF’s Blanco telescope at Cerro
Tololo Interamerican Observatory in Chile will allow the team to determine where
the first clusters are forming in a 3D volume of the universe. The project also
includes a joint virtual public viewing night program at both institutions using
remote observing from the Rosemary Hill Observatory. This plan enables public
engagement during the pandemic and will expand the reach of public observing
programs in both states post-covid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
detect and characterize the massive galaxy cluster population at 0.5&lt;z&lt;2
over 10,480 sq. degrees, building upon a previous cluster survey by the same
team, which focused upon galaxy clusters at z~1. The resulting cluster sample
will enable detailed investigations of the evolution of massive galaxies in the
most overdense environments since the epoch of peak star formation and rapid
mass assembly. By extending the redshift baseline to z = 2, the project will
reach into the era of protoclusters, in which the first massive clusters are
just forming and embedded in larger scale protocluster environments comprised of
dense filaments and less massive groups that will be accreted by the central
clusters at later times. A combination of DECam and WISE data will be used to
compute Bayesian photometric redshift probability distributions for the WISE
galaxy sample and then to detect cluster scale overdensities within a
3-dimensional data cube. The PIs will foster the career development of the
students working on this project.. The team will initiate and run a joint
virtual public night program at their institutions using remote observing from
the Rosemary Hill Observatory. This plan enables public engagement during the
pandemic and will expand the reach of public observing programs in both states
post-covid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.