* 2108290
* Mechanisms of Hydrogenase Function
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brian Dyer, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Brian Dyer of Emory University will study how hydrogenase
enzymes work to catalyze the interconversion of protons and hydrogen, thereby
very efficiently producing molecular hydrogen, itself an important fuel. Indeed,
this enzyme-catalyzed reaction is perhaps the most basic electron and proton
transfer reaction relevant to molecular fuel production. In biological systems,
this interconversion takes place with extraordinary rates and little energy
loss. The hydrogenases will serve as ideal models for understanding the basic
principles of efficient catalysis of multi-electron, multi-proton chemistry for
generation of solar fuels. Storing solar energy in molecular fuels requires new
catalysts that can efficiently perform chemistry that involves several electrons
and protons to generate high-energy, chemical bonds. While the structures of
hydrogenases are known, their mechanisms remain poorly understood. Also, the
structure of the metal active sites in hydrogenases has been exactly reproduced
in some synthetic model complexes but these complexes have failed as catalysts,
which highlights the importance of the protein architecture that surrounds the
active site of the hydrogenases. The results of this research on the
hydrogenases can inform the design of better catalysts for making solar fuels.
The research will provide an opportunity to broadly train students in an
interdisciplinary setting, pursuing questions that are relevant to renewable
energy science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge in studying hydrogenase
enzymes lies in elucidating the mechanistic basis for the high catalytic
efficiency of these oxidoreductases. There are both practical questions here,
due to the difficulty of resolving the molecular processes for enzymes with kcat
&gt; 1000 s-1, and conceptual questions, due to the complexity of the structures
and dynamics that orchestrate the electron and proton transfer reactions. In
this work, the Dyer research team will develop a general methodology for the
study of fast electron and proton transfer reactions and a framework for
understanding proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) in the oxidoreductases.
The newly developed methods will be general and in principle could be applied to
any catalytic redox reaction. The fundamental mechanistic questions to be
answered for the hydrogenases are also relevant for the broader class of
oxidoreductases, particularly for those enzymes that activate small and stable
molecules, such as CO dehydrogenase and nitrogenase, which catalyze the multi-
electron reduction of carbon dioxide and nitrogen, respectively. The research is
expected to contribute to the elucidation of fundamental factors that control
low-barrier proton and electron flow and provide a foundation for understanding
PCET mechanisms in enzymes and in synthetic catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.