* 2108603
* Characterization and Commissioning of the iLocater Spectrograph
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Justin Crepp, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,230,475.00

This project will complete the construction of a new instrument named iLocater
that will search for exoplanets using a large telescope in Arizona. iLocater is
an instrument called a spectrograph that spreads out the incoming light from
stars and searches for the tiny color changes caused by planets moving in orbit
around their star. The instrument compensates for the distorting effect of
Earthâ€™s turbulent atmosphere and can use small optical fibers to bring light
from the telescope to the spectrograph. This feature allows scientists to see
both the color changes caused by planets and the effects of the changing surface
of stars which enable discovery and study of even smaller exoplanets that can
currently be detected. iLocater is designed to be extremely stable to allow the
detection of the incredibly small color change caused by planets to be measured.
iLocater will undertake studies of exoplanetary systems to characterize their
properties and assess their potential to support life. The project will supply
training for graduate students in developing instrumentation and also summer
research opportunities for undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
performance of modern Doppler instruments is dominated by the effects of stellar
variability, an effect that imprints the signature of surface inhomogeneities
and stochastic motions onto stellar spectra. Such astrophysical jitter imposes a
noise floor by creating temporally changing asymmetries in the absorption lines
of stellar spectra. This project will complete building a Doppler precision
radial velocity instrument that uses adaptive optics (AO) and single-mode fibers
(SMFs) on a large telescope to achieve high spectral resolution
(R=132,000-273,000). The instrument, named iLocater, will be installed on the
Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) in Arizona and operates at the diffraction limit
at near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths (YJ-bands). The NIR bandpass is well suited
to AO performance, is expected to be less susceptible to stellar variability,
and provides access to the peak radiation of late-type stars where the Doppler
amplitudes of planets are substantially larger than those orbiting G-type stars.
The combination of high spectral resolution and high spatial resolution (41 mas)
will facilitate novel research directions, such as studying planets orbiting
close separation binaries. On completion iLocater will be available to many US
astronomers who are within the LBT community for 30 nights/year and there will
be public access to the iLocater data products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.