* 2108623
* Next-Generation Optical Contrasts for Characterization of Biological Tissue, Hard Matter, and Cultural Heritage Objects
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Martin Fischer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 510,420.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Drs. Martin Fischer and Warren Warren at Duke University
will develop optical microscopy techniques to investigate the three-dimensional
structure and function of a wide range of materials, including biological tissue
and pigments used in historical artwork. Traditionally, these complex materials
pose severe challenges for optical imaging and often the samples need to be cut
open to investigate layers below the surface. Newly developed imaging methods
allow for three-dimensional imaging without sample destruction and the
investigators are developing techniques to extend the range of chemical
contrast, the depth of imaging, and the ability to interpret the results. This
development has the potential to detect microscopic changes in skin and artwork
during the onset of deterioration, which could aid in early diagnosis and better
choice of treatment options. The methods developed by this program benefit
academic research and could lead to a device of great interest to biomedical
researchers and conservators alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple ultrafast
laser pulses can interact with matter via a wide range of nonlinear processes.
The investigators have pioneered an imaging method, pump-probe microscopy, that
turns such interactions into detectable contrast for imaging with low average
power at high speeds and they have demonstrated applications in biological
tissue, historical artworks, and engineered materials. The signals acquired with
this microscopy method depend on many parameters, such as the laser pulse
wavelengths, inter-pulse delay, relative polarization, and detection direction.
The range of parameters presents a challenge due to the complexity of the
response, but also an opportunity for recording images using multiple parameters
to provide different contrast types and a diverse and comprehensive view of the
sample. The investigators are developing a pump-probe microscopy platform that
can efficiently, safely, and rapidly acquire multi-modal, multi-parameter data
sets that provide images with molecular specificity for biology and cultural
heritage. Specifically, the investigators and their team will pursue the
following research goals: (i) systematically investigate and model the
dependence on imaging and sample parameters (i.e., wavelength, polarization,
scattering angle) to separate the complex set of nonlinear optical interactions
and decompose the images into fundamental components; and (ii) develop a
coherent femtosecond pulse shaping and detection approach for efficient multi-
modal and multi-parameter acquisition. The research seeks to develop a
microscope that will be able to non-invasively extract comprehensive molecular
and structural information in biological tissue and historical
artwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.