* 2108359
* Glow Discharge Optical Emission Coded Aperture Spectral Imaging Elemental Mapping (GOCAEM) for Ultrahigh Throughput 3D Surface Analysis of Nanoscale Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Gerardo Gamez, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 411,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Gerardo Gamez at Texas Tech University is studying and developing
Glow Discharge Optical Emission Coded Aperture Spectral Imaging Elemental
Mapping (GOCAEM), which is a novel method for analyzing and measuring chemical
elements on surfaces. A variety of fields, including materials, geological, and
biological sciences, use elemental mapping to gain an improved understanding of
naturally occurring systems or improve performance of manufactured systems.
However, current elemental mapping techniques suffer from lengthy sample
analysis times or accessibility restrictions, which limits their use to a small
group of systems. GOCAEM leverages the ability of glow-discharge spectroscopy to
overcome such limitations (&gt;1000x faster vs typical EM techniques) and
incorporates compressed sensing spectral imaging strategies to offer greatly
improved abilities, offering advantages that allow analysis of challenging
systems, such as nanoscale materials. Thus, fast, routine diagnostic three-
dimensional elemental mapping of many nano-structured surface systems is a real
possibility with this approach. Outcomes from the project will have an impact on
many fields, especially those relying on ultra-thin films and nanoparticle
materials, which is in alignment with serving the needs and vision of the
National Nanotechnology Initiative. The project will take place at a designated
Hispanic Serving Institution, which provides an uncommon opportunity to reach
underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). Multidisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
researchers include those with instrument development, plasma spectroscopy,
imaging, nanomaterials characterization, and surface analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enable elemental mapping
(EM) of nanomaterials via glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy (GDOES).
GDOES has been initially developed as an alternative elemental mapping technique
that offers significant (several orders of magnitude) improvement in analysis
time compared to typical techniques. GDOES also gives access to significantly
faster three-dimensional elemental mapping protocols through sputter sampling
and its high-throughput two-dimensional elemental mapping. Nevertheless, the
depth resolution is still limited by the two-dimensional elemental mapping time;
thus, significant gains must still be achieved to reach the highest depth
resolution (~nm) and limits of detection offered by GDOES. We will develop Glow
Discharge Optical Emission Coded Aperture Spectral Imaging Elemental Mapping
(GOECAEM), where hyperspectral imaging enabled by compressed sensing (CS)
strategies will achieve the required gains in depth resolution and limits of
detection. CS is a recently developed measurement strategy that represents a
paradigm shift in sampling. It allows employment of compression protocols
(typically reserved for software data processing) during the data acquisition
step: this results in significantly improved data collection efficiency and
measurement time required. Coded aperture compressed sensing hyperspectral
imaging will be developed and implemented using spatial light modulators and
array detectors. As such, high throughput three-dimensional elemental mapping of
nano-structured materials will be sought here with the development of methods
for two different types of materials. The three main objectives of the proposed
research are 1) design and construction of GOECAEM instrumentation; 2)
development of 3-dimensional GOECAEM enabled methods for ultra-thin film
materials characterization at the nanoscale; and 3) development of GOECAEM-
enabled methods for nanoparticle characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.