* 2108223
* Leveraging Ion Mobility and High Resolution Mass Spectrometry to Probe Neuropeptide Modifications in Environmental Stress
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lingjun Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2024
* USD 435,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Lingjun Li and her group at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison are developing new analytical measurement tools to probe environmentally
induced changes in neuropeptides. Specifically, the Li group seeks to exploit
state-of-the-art analytical methods (mass spectrometry and ion mobility
spectrometry) using chemical “tags” to enhance sensitivity and throughput during
characterization and quantification of signaling peptides and their
modifications in response to copper toxicity and hypoxia (oxygen deprivation)
stress of cells. The technology being developed is expected to be transferable
to the study of other biological systems. The molecular insights gained from the
proposed studies have the potential to enhance understanding of normal and
dysfunctional biology involving neuronal peptide signaling. This project
provides excellent training opportunities for students who are interested in a
career at the interface between chemical measurements and neuroscience. Dr. Li
also works to bring awareness and participation in these research activities
through partnership and outreach with high school internship programs that help
to stimulate students’ interests in the STEM field at an early
stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Li group seeks to develop an innovative
analytical platform that integrates microseparations with ion mobility-mass
spectrometry (IM-MS) and high-resolution MS to probe dynamic changes and
structural effects of novel post-translational modifications of neuropeptides
involved in copper toxicity, hypoxia, and hypercapnia. Specifically, Professor
Li and her team are pursuing the following research goals: (1) to employ design-
of-experiment algorithms and higher-plexing chemical tags to expand analytical
throughput for neuropeptide quantitation; (2) to couple rapid capillary
electrophoresis separation with IM-MS for comprehensive neuropeptide analysis in
copper toxicity and hypoxia/hypercapnia; (3) to combine “collision-induced
unfolding” IM-MS with surface plasmon resonance and molecular dynamics
simulation for in-depth structural and conformational analysis of peptide
epimers and their interaction with receptors; and (4) to construct a large-scale
collision cross section (CCS) database for neuropeptide isoforms and
glycosylated neuropeptides to facilitate functional discovery and evaluation of
novel glycosylated neuropeptides. The research seeks to advance measurement
science and accelerate its application to solve challenging biological questions
regarding the functional roles of signaling peptides in the regulation and
adaptation to heavy metal toxicity and hypoxia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.