* 2108081
* A Holistic View of Gas, Dust, and Metals in Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Karin Sandstrom, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 350,845.00

The gas between stars is part of the interstellar medium (ISM) and is
fundamental to understanding how galaxies evolve. However, the gas often can
only be studied by indirect methods, and the most widely used tracer is emission
from carbon monoxide (CO). This project will advance the understanding of CO and
dust as tracers, using new observations of nearby galaxies from the Hubble Space
Telescope, the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array, and other
facilities. The team will study the CO emission from the ISM of the Magellanic
Clouds, as well as the ISM in the centers of nearby galaxies. They will conduct
a series of summer workshops designed to help transfer students moving from
community colleges to UC San Diego. Transfer students are a diverse, highly
motivated group, disadvantaged by the compressed timeline after transferring,
and removing these barriers is a key step in broadening the participation of
under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indirect methods are needed
because most of the hydrogen molecules are too cold to produce emission lines.
Calibrating CO emission as a tracer requires understanding several parameters:
the dust-to-gas ratio as a function of metallicity, the relation between dust
emission and dust mass at a given temperature, and the conversion between CO and
hydrogen, all of which vary with conditions in the ISM. The new observations
will be brought together to create an applicable prescription for dust
emissivity, dust-to-gas ratio, and conversion factor, as a function of
environment. This will allow assessment of the ISM gas content over the full
range from the Milky Way to distant high-redshift galaxies, and help to remove
inescapable systematic uncertainties intrinsic to the current approach. The work
should yield new insights into the physical state of the ISM in galaxies,
including the arrangement of molecular clouds and their response to galactic
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.