* 2108028
* Diverse Evolutionary Power of Nucleic Acid Libraries Carrying Different Information Content
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Elisa Biondi, Foundation for Applied Molecular Evolution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 426,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Elisa Biondi of Foundation for Applied Molecular
Evolution, Inc. will study chemical systems that could have served as precursors
to the replicating macromolecules, such as RNA and DNA, found on Earth and other
places where life could exist. The macromolecules that make up current life on
Earth are composed of only a small subset of all possible chemical building
blocks. Dr Biondi aims to provide insights into how only a small subset of
molecules evolved and persisted into the current macromolecular systems. Using
the power of in-vitro evolution (evolutionary experiments performed in the
laboratory), Dr. Biondi’s laboratory will characterize potential prebiotic
systems to provide insights into how the information density in the system (the
number of building blocks), information amount (the minimum length of the
polymer needed to display minimal activity), and information diversity (the
types of building blocks and/or chemical groups) affect the performance and
persistence of potential prebiotic systems. This project will provide
fundamental intelligence on the information density requirement for an evolving
nucleic acid library and shed light on many fundamental questions regarding the
limits and ways in which prebiotic molecular evolution took place on our planet
or others. Additionally, results from this project will provide precious
information to the large community of scientists who make use of in-vitro
evolution to develop molecular tools applied in fields such as biomedicine,
diagnostics, genetic engineering, and bioremediation. Dr. Biondi’s outreaching
activities will focus mainly on encouraging undergraduates, especially women and
underrepresented minorities, to pursue STEM careers. Moreover, Dr. Biondi will
participate in focus groups centered on the issue of women in science and will
continue her virtual encounters with 3rd to 5th grade students to introduce them
to astrobiology and general sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate what types of nucleic acid chemical systems are more suited for
evolution towards catalytic functions and might have served as precursors of
contemporary catalysts. The work will compare laboratory in-vitro evolution of
nucleic acid libraries with different information density using biochemistry
tools and high-throughput sequencing data. The chemical diversity of nucleic
acid libraries will be adjusted with the Artificially Expanded Genetic
Information System (AEGIS), developed in Dr. Biondi’s laboratory. First, three
parallel in-vitro selections of RNA-cleaving DNAzymes able to cut an RNA
substrate will be performed. The starting libraries will include a 25N random
region and primer binding sites (pbs) composed of either standard or AEGIS DNA,
flanked by standard DNA. A third selection will use libraries with a standard
25N region, but AEGIS in the pbs, which have been shown at FfAME to improve
self-pairing and yield cleaner PCRs. With this method, by removing some
laboratory biases that have taunted the field for&lt;br/&gt;decades, it is
expected that the work will not only improve the output of selection
experiments, but also to gain extra insights into sequence-based fitness
evolution previously “buried” under techniques biases. In the next phase,
initial experiments will be repeated with starting libraries carrying 19, 30,
40, and up to 45 random positions. These analyses will provide another level of
information once biochemical and high throughput sequencing results for each
selection will be compared: it is expected that not only will libraries with
different information content evolve and explore the sequence space differently,
but that a length difference in sequence options will also provide different
evolutionary routes. Further, outputs of selections performed with libraries
carrying different types of modifications inside the random region, primer
binding sites, or 5’ and 3’ ends of the molecules will be compared, with the
goal of obtaining a comprehensive view of which groups and which combination of
molecules have the best fitness towards a specific function. Metrics for
selection comparison will include number of cycles required to achieve function,
catalysis parameters (kobs, kM, kcat, turnover rates), and sequence fitness and
enrichment values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.