* 2108018
* Collaborative Research: Visible Reflectivity of Jupiter and Saturn. Implications for Giant Planets Thermal Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Liming Li, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 32,457.00

Jupiter and Saturn are the two largest planets in the solar system and they are
both thought to generate significant heat internally. To measure the difference
between heat absorbed from the sun and heat generated internally, it is
important to determine how much heat is reflected by the clouds in the
atmospheres of these planets. This project will use data gathered from
spacecraft to measure the reflectivity of clouds in Saturn and develop a model
for Saturn including the rings and the shadows of the rings. The project will
incorporate undergraduate students in all aspects of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use raw image data from the
Planetary Data System to derive 1-3 micrometer flux from Cassini data. With this
data, they will determine cloud scattering properties for Saturn and upgrade
their 3D Saturn model to include the new cloud scattering properties. The
project would also validate the model with data and existing models for Jupiter
provided by the collaborating institution, the University of Houston. The
project will also work on porting the 3D Saturn model from IDL to Python and
make it publicly available on GitHub. The project will also create a summer
undergraduate research program at the University of La Verne. Results of the
research will be incorporated in several of the undergraduate courses at the
University of La Verne.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.