* 2108810
* Collaborative Research: Multifunctional Cross-conjugated Organic Electronic Materials.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Malika Jeffries-EL, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 522,805.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Drs. Malika Jeffries-EL of Boston University and
Aimée Tomlinson of the University of North Georgia are developing tunable
organic semiconductors. These carbon-based materials combine the optical and
electronic properties of conventional inorganic semiconductors with the
processibility of polymers. Thus, they can potentially be used in a wide range
of applications such as chemical/optical sensors, displays, and solar cells. In
this project, the basic chemical structure of a novel molecule with a cross-like
motif will be systematically modified to tailor the resulting electronic
properties. Computational methods will first be utilized in order to identify
the most promising candidates for synthesis and characterization. Synthetic
organic chemistry will then be used to prepare these motifs through a series of
well-established transformations. Finally, the resulting systems will be
characterized using a variety of sophisticated spectroscopic techniques,
concluding with the fabrication of devices. The structure-property correlations
that will result from this research have the potential to advance fundamental
chemistry knowledge in the field of organic electronics. This award provides new
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate student training in materials and
computational chemistry, with an emphasis on low-income and/or first-generation
students. Additionally, a new Boston University Life Sciences Inclusive
Excellence Initiative will be launched which seeks to increase STEM degree
attainment for underrepresented groups. This program will provide training of
faculty in inclusive excellence, with the aim of boosting retention in STEM
majors, and increasing longitudinal outcomes, such as entry into post-secondary
programs or employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will combine
experimental and theoretical approaches to develop new materials based on a
unique class of compounds, cross-conjugated benzo[1,2-d:4,5-d’]bisoxazoles
(BBO)s. Cross-conjugation is especially useful for developing organic
semiconductors as the arrangement of two orthogonal conjugation paths leads to
spatial segregation of the frontier molecular orbitals. As a result, the HOMO
(highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital) can be modified autonomously. Further strategic positioning of the
various (hetero)aromatic rings along the axes of the BBO moiety is expected to
enable tuning of the optical and electronic properties of the system through
extension of the pi-bond network and through inductive effects from the aryl
rings. In this way, it may be possible to tailor cross-conjugated BBOs for use
in specific applications including as non-fullerene acceptors in organic
photovoltaics, and as blue light-emitters and wide band gap hosts for organic
light-emitting diodes (LEDs). This work will be accomplished using a feedback
loop that combines theory, synthesis, spectroscopy, and device fabrication to
identify and generate new materials. This iterative approach should allow for
well-informed access to the target BBOs. Furthermore, the planned structure-
property studies have the potential to advance the rational design of new
conjugated materials with tunable and predictable optical and electronic
properties. This award also will provide new opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate student training in materials and computational chemistry, with an
emphasis on low-income and/or first-generation students. The PIs will recruit
such students through their participation in various activities on their
respective campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.