* 2108612
* Quantum control of nanochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Tamar Seideman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Tamar Seideman at Northwestern
University is developing ways to control nanoscale systems with light. Light can
push the electrons in a molecule around and in turn, exert forces on the nuclei.
The effect is exaggerated near metal nanostructures, which can confine light,
creating intense plasmonic fields that amplify these forces. Professor Seideman
and her group are developing theoretical methods to predict the plasmonic fields
near nanostructures so that they can be used to control chemical reactions, or
the flow of electrons through nanoscale electrical junctions. Their discoveries
could lead to new ways of understanding the nano-domain and to the advancement
of light-driven nanodevices. The project is pursuing several educational and
outreach activities, including participation in programs providing research
experiences for undergraduate students and teachers from under-represented
groups, as well as establishing two international student exchange programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to tackle three interrelated research
challenges. (1) Optical control of conformational motion in molecular switches
will be studied using a finite-difference time-domain approach to compute
plasmonic enhancement; density functional theory and a slab model to determine
the potential energy and polarizability functions; and the Langevin equation to
study time evolution. (2) The control of electron transport in graphene
nanojunctions will be investigated using a non-Markovian framework that includes
the roles of carrier-carrier and carrier-photon couplings. (3) Finally, this
research effort will introduce and explore laser-driven reactive nanochemistry
that takes advantage of the time-invariant nature of the optical field relative
to the rotational period of the molecules. The numerical code that is being
developed as part of the work will be broadly disseminated in the scientific
community enhancing the impact of the work well beyond the Seideman
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.