* 2108366
* Collaborative: RoL: Molecular patterns for redox sensing and signaling in organismic defense
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Leslie Hicks, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 190,251.00

The bacterial diseases of plants lead to substantial crop damage and significant
economic losses each year. Plants activate defense responses locally (i.e., at
the infection site) and systemically when confronted with pathogenic bacterial
infections. The goal of this project is to better understand these plant defense
response pathways and to better understand how plants defend against bacterial
infections in general. This project will be used to provide research experiences
to students from Historically Black Colleges and Universities in MS, NC, and GA.
These partnerships' critical goal will be to generate sustainable long-term
collaborations with faculty, train undergraduate students in STEM research, and
build a pipeline of underserved students for related career tracks. Online
symposia, video lectures and practical workshops will be organized on project-
related themes including plant synthetic biology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the molecular logic and organization of redox signaling
networks is necessary to enhance our understanding of the adaptive system that
governs responses to environmental challenges in eukaryotes. A multi-
disciplinary team with complementary expertise will engage in innovative
experimental and computational approaches to elucidate redox modulated signaling
pathways that underpin synchronous and pulsatile gene activity in plant systemic
immunity. The project consists of three components. First, high-throughput
transcription profiling will identify recurrent spatial and temporal patterns in
the plant immune transcriptome. Second, advanced redox proteomics will identify
oxidative modifications of protein cysteines with a focus on regulatory thiols.
Finally, a theoretical and modeling framework will be generated to conceptualize
and analyze the significance of signal periodicity in plant systemic immunity.
Successful implementation of the project will impact our understanding of redox
processes in information encoding in biological systems and generate methods and
algorithms widely applicable to study redox modifications of proteins and
oscillatory dynamics of biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Plant-Biotic Interactions Program in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.