* 2108774
* Novel Chemical Probes for Selective Tagging of Dimethyl Lysine Posttranslational Modifications and Mediated Protein Protein Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Monika Raj, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 05/31/2024
* USD 458,351.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Monika Raj of Emory University is studying how chemical
modification of specific amino acids in proteins influences their role in
various biological processes and diseases. Modifications to lysine units in
proteins are known to turn on or turn off very important functions inside cells,
which are responsible for cell growth and communication between cells. A deep
understanding of lysine modifications and their influence on interactions
between proteins is crucial to the development of new molecules that disrupt
those protein-protein interactions and may someday serve as therapeutics of
various diseases. However, identifying influential lysine modifications is a
particularly daunting challenge that has yet to be fully met by traditional
biochemical strategies. Dr. Raj aims to develop new approaches that enable
selective chemical labeling of modified lysine units and the linking of protein
partners. These innovative chemical approaches are anticipated to provide a
general strategy to systematically identify lysine modifications and protein-
protein interactions caused by lysine modifications. Furthering impact of the
project are efforts that engage underrepresented individuals across a range of
ages, educational levels, and socioeconomic and cultural backgrounds, and
encourage their active interest and retention in STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics). Those efforts focus on bringing together a diverse
group of graduate and undergraduate students to gain interdisciplinary research
training in organic chemistry and biochemistry. Outreach activities with high
school students (especially women and individuals from underrepresented groups)
will expose them to basic concepts of biochemistry through fun experimentation
and aim to equip them with the social support needed to facilitate the pursuit
of a STEM major in college. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Chemical strategies
successfully target a particular functional group at a single amino acid site in
the presence of reactive amino acid side chains on protein surfaces are limited.
Even more rare are organic reactions that can proceed under conditions mild
enough to label biomolecules without deleterious effects. To address these
challenges, this research project will develop chemical probes based on
oxidative coupling with nucleophiles and nucleophilic substitutions that enable
site-specific incorporation of photoreactive and affinity groups near modified
lysines. This method will be employed for the site-selective labeling of
modified lysine with various cargoes and for capturing protein-protein
interactions mediated by modified lysine units. Abnormal lysine modification of
a protein can trigger its unique interaction with other proteins, thus leading
to a variety of different diseases; however, the chemical methods for selective
detection of lysine modification and associated protein-protein interactions are
still lacking. This research will provide highly selective chemical probes that
can effectively detect modified lysine and capture their protein partners. Thus,
the proposed research has a great potential to further our understanding of how
these lysine modifications and their aberrations regulate various cellular
signaling processes and lead to various diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.