* 2108645
* Collaborative Research: SLINGSHOT: Decoding Dark Matter through Gravitational Lensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brendan Ames, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 371,954.00

The effects of dark matter can be seen in gravitationally lensed systems where
light from a distant galaxy is gravitationally lensed by a foreground galaxy.
Analysis of the resulting distorted, magnified, multiple images of the
background galaxy provide clues to the nature of dark matter. The principal
investigators (PIs) Gleyzer, Ames and Alexander will develop the Strong Lensing
Inference and Generative System for Harnessing Observational Telescope Data
(SLINGSHOT) framework for simulating realistic gravitational lensing images and
applying machine learning algorithms to identify known categories of possible
dark matter substructure. The PIs will broaden participation with a series of
online lectures on machine learning and astrophysics as part of the National
Society of Black Physicists Computational Physics Initiative. The team will also
continue to teach data science concepts with Jupyter notebooks through their
Creative Open Data Environment (CODER) education and outreach project for K-12
teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will establish a baseline
for classification of dark matter substructure morphology using both
conventional (Bayesian) and machine learning algorithms. They will train the
machine learning algorithms in anomaly detection, classification and property
estimation using a library of representative dark matter models. Unsupervised
anomaly detection techniques will identify promising candidate images in a
model-independent manner and localize anomalies for further analysis. The PIs
will use the code to analyze gravitational lensing data from the Hubble Space
Telescope and the Hyper Suprime-Cam on the Subaru Telescope, in preparation to
apply their methods to survey data from the Vera C. Rubin Observatory. The
SLINGSHOT toolkit will be made available to the astronomical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.