* 2108729
* Pushing the Frontiers of Identification and Coverage in High-Resolution Spatially-Resolved Lipidomics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Julia Laskin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 440,440.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Julia Laskin and her group at Purdue University are
developing innovative approaches to characterize biological systems using a
sophisticated analytical imaging technique based on high-resolution ambient
ionization mass spectrometry coupled with chemical separations including ion
mobility and photochemical derivatization techniques. Specifically, methods
being developed by the Laskin group are able to map the distribution of
biomolecules (e.g., in tissues or cells) with high structural specificity, and
with a particular focus on lipids, providing biologists with a new dimension of
molecular characterization critical to understanding biochemical pathways in
living systems. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project
will be trained in a multidisciplinary and collaborative environment, which
provides them with an opportunity to develop skills in instrument development,
quantitative mass spectrometric imaging, data interpretation, development of new
computational approaches, understanding of biological processes, photochemical
reactions, and online derivatization, along with optical and shear force
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses analytical challenges
associated with the chemical specificity of mass spectrometry imaging
experiments. In particular, the Laskin group is developing new experimental
capabilities for isomer-selective ambient imaging of lipids in biological
samples with high spatial resolution. Experimental strategies include ion
mobility separation, online photochemical derivatization, and tandem mass
spectrometry imaging, to enable unique identification and localization of
isomeric species. In addition, advanced data analysis tools are being developed
to enhance the resolution of ion mobility separation and to enable robust
unsupervised image segmentation. By combining these tools with the quantitative
high-resolution imaging capabilities of nanospray desorption electrospray
ionization, the Laskin group seeks to provide detailed molecular maps of
chemical gradients in biological samples with a spatial resolution better than
10 microns. The techniques being developed are expected to substantially enhance
molecular coverage and enable separation and identification of isomeric and
isobaric lipids observed in imaging experiments. They will be broadly applicable
to studying metabolic processes in diverse biological systems including
multicellular aggregates, and potentially even tissues and living
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.