* 2108117
* Physics of Nanosecond-Pulsed Non-Thermal Plasma Generation in Liquid Nitrogen
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alexander Fridman, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 418,430.00

This project will develop new understanding and models of plasmas in liquids.
Plasmas are best known as ionized gases, but recently it was demonstrated that
plasma phenomena can also occur in a liquid phase. In other words, liquids can
also be ionized, just like gases, to create a plasma. Unique non-equilibrium
properties of plasma in liquid medium, such as high densities of electrons, high
energy light emission, and high electron energies within a low temperature
liquid are associated with new opportunities that may have great impact in the
fields of microelectronics, energy systems and novel materials. The focus of
this study will be exploring the fundamental mechanisms of direct ionization of
a dense liquid. This research will be among the first that develops a clear
understanding and a physical model of liquid plasmas using a combination of
targeted experiments and modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a
unique plasma regime in high (liquid) densities and non-equilibrium conditions
provided by fast rising high voltage nanosecond pulses. Streamer discharges
generated directly inside of the liquid phase, specifically in water, have been
investigated by several research groups in the past few years. However, due to
principal difficulties associated with spectroscopic characterization of these
plasmas, no clear explanation of this phenomenon has been formulated to date.
Cryogenic liquids to be used in this study will allow direct optical and
spectroscopic measurements of local electric fields, densities, and temperatures
during electrical breakdown of liquids. These measurements are expected to lead
to developing a physical model of the process. Using experimental tools, two
major hypotheses of fast breakdown in cryogenic liquids will be tested. These
can be broadly described as direct ionization of a liquid and propagation of a
cold “leader” (electrostriction-driven streamers) in a liquid. The combination
of the obtained experimental data with analytical models and numerical
simulations will make it possible to distinguish between the two hypotheses and
improve our understanding of the non-thermal breakdown in
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.