* 2108688
* Redox Cycling Driven Transformation of Manganese Oxide Minerals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Yuanzhi Tang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 493,852.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program of the
Chemistry Division, Yuanzhi Tang and Hailong Chen of the Georgia Institute of
Technology will investigate the impact of repeated oxidation-reduction reactions
on the structure of manganese (Mn) oxides. The studies will utilize the tools of
X-ray diffraction to elucidate key details associated with the change in
morphology, molecular structure and properties of manganese oxides when
subjected to these oxidation/reduction cycles. The project includes developing
high school curriculum materials that integrate environmental, chemical, and
materials concepts. It will promote the training of the next generation of
scientists at the chemistry/geoscience interface and do so with an emphasis on
increasing the participation of team members from underrepresented groups in
science. Drs. Tang and Chen will incorporate the research results into
undergraduate and graduate teaching on environmental and materials sciences. The
research team will develop community outreach activities to showcase mineral and
mineral properties to the general public at the annual Atlanta Science
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manganese oxides exist in nearly all
environmental settings. They have significant influence on the biogeochemical
cycling of many important metals, nutrients, organic compounds, and
contaminants. In natural environments and over long time scales, these minerals
commonly experience many cycles of oxidation and reduction. Still, much remains
unknown about the influence of such cyclic oxidation-reduction cycles on the
structure and transformation of Mn oxides. It is important to fill this
knowledge gap needs in order to develop better predictive models for
understanding the fate of contaminants and nutrients in the natural environment.
This project will systematically examine the structural transformation of Mn
oxides during cyclic oxidation-reduction reactions. The research team will use
electrochemical methods to control the rate and magnitude of electron flow. They
will utilize synchrotron-based X-ray characterization to investigate the
kinetics, mechanisms, and reaction pathways associated with these redox
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.