* 2108103
* Physical Origin of Globular Clusters in the Context of Galaxy Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Romain Teyssier, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 715,257.00

Globular Clusters (GCs) are dense spheroidal associations of hundreds of
thousands of stars that are found in the halos of most galaxies, and which
typically contain some of a galaxy's oldest and most metal poor stars. While GCs
have been observed since the 1600's their origin(s) and overall role in galaxy
formation represent longstanding problems. This research project will undertake
a series of state-of-the-art cosmological hydrodynamical simulations with ultra-
high spatial resolution to directly test a formation model of metal poor GCs
that can be directly confronted by observations with current and near-future
facilities, both at high redshift and in the current epoch. The project will
also support a postdoctoral researcher as well as continuing efforts to provide
computer visualizations of galaxy and GC simulations for the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The working hypothesis of this project is that low
metallicity GCs represent the stripped stellar nuclei of what were initially
nucleated dwarf galaxies (i.e., not just big and otherwise ordinary star
clusters) that formed near the epoch of re-ionization (EoR). The research team
will explore this idea by running many cosmological hydrodynamic simulations at
sub-parsec spatial resolution starting at the EoR of what will become the
analogs of present day galaxies with halo masses of 1.0, 0.1, and 0.01 that of
the Milky Way's. Gas rich concentrations that resemble young dwarf galaxies will
be tagged and their subsequent evolution (star formation, SNe feedback, etc.)
will be followed until z = 6, after which they will be treated as collisionless
particles and evolved forward to the current epoch (z = 0). Observables derived
from a statistically significant sample of simulated GCs include their
kinematics, galaxy wide distributions, chemical abundances and dispersion as a
function of galactic environment, and possible correlations between metallicity
and stellar mass. Comparisons with local low metallicity GCs will test this
formation scenario (e.g., do the simulated and real GCs follow the same
metallicity-stellar mass relation?). The simulations will also allow estimates
of the fraction of nucleated dwarf galaxies as well as the feasibility of
observing GCs at the EoR using the JWST, ALMA and other
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.