* 2108649
* Collaborative Research: A joint theoretical and experimental approach to low-temperature dielectronic recombination data for photoionized astrophysical environments
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Phillip Stancil, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 82,454.00

This research project is a collaborative effort between researchers from three
universities to undertake a combined theoretical and experimental study of
dielectronic recombination (DR) â€“ a key process controlling the charge balance
in astrophysical plasmas ionized by starlight. The researchers will calculate
the rates of DR for astronomically important atomic ions and measure them in the
laboratory to high accuracy for the low temperatures relevant to space. Accurate
DR rates are only available for a handful of elements, so the data generated in
this study will allow astronomers to accurately determine the elemental
abundances and ionization balance in astronomical environments. The
investigators will train students in methods of advanced theoretical and
experimental atomic physics research relevant to astrophysics and contribute to
science outreach activities for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will use large-scale multi-configuration semi-relativistic and fully
relativistic electronic structure calculations to determine high quality DR rate
coefficients, compare them to available semi-relativistic calculations, and
benchmark them to accurate experimental measurements performed in cryogenic ion
storage rings. The project will systematically calculate and benchmark DR data
for isoelectronic sequences with the goal of providing accurate data to atomic
databases and astrophysical modeling codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.