* 2108950
* Studying compact object mergers from a new perspective
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alexander Kutyrev, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 513,716.00

Understanding the electromagnetic signatures of the mergers of binary compact
stellar objects is a critical complement to the nascent field of gravitational
wave (GW) astronomy, and this can help scientists understand fundamental issues
in modern astrophysics: from how ultra-fast relativistic jets of matter are
formed in mergers, to the production of heavy metal elements, from testing
gravity and the behavior of matter in extreme conditions to the expansion of the
universe as a whole. A project at the University of Maryland, College Park
(UMD), will apply new scientific models to a systematic study of GW and related
gamma-ray burst afterglows, to derive new constraints on the jet structure and
geometry, as well as on the rate of events. The research activities represent
outstanding educational opportunities for students, who will be trained in a
number of high-demand astronomy sub-disciplines. The program will also support
the UMD GRAD-MAP initiative to lessen the barriers faced by minority students
who want to enter astronomy or physics graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to provide a
coherent physical picture of compact object mergers and their aftermaths. These
are complex and highly asymmetric astrophysical systems, and the proposed
investigation will provide the foundation for an inclination-aware study of
their electromagnetic emission. By using a complementary stream of data from GW
and electromagnetic observations (from radio to gamma-rays), the project will
map the properties of these mergers across all cosmic times and address the
following three main questions: (1) do all compact object mergers produce
relativistic jets? (2) what is their role in the production of heavy metals? (3)
what is the equation of state (EoS) of matter at extreme densities? These
science objectives will be reached by developing close synergies between
observational astrophysics, nuclear physics, gravitational wave astronomy and
cosmology. The project involves a combination of existing and new observations
of compact object mergers, selected either via gamma-ray burst triggers,
gravitational wave alerts, or large-scale optical surveys. Key features of the
method involve: i) the inclusion of complex structures and dfferent geometries
(collimated versus isotropic) of the relativistic outflow; ii) the inclusion of
a broad range of ejecta morphologies, compositions and velocities; iii) a focus
on the effects of viewing angles on the observed emission; iv) novel
observational tests to the neutron star EoS. This project advances the goals of
the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.