* 2108842
* RUI: Development of Novel Plasmonic Nanotransducers for Solution-based Molecular Imprinted Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Ying Bao, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 366,533.00

With the support of the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Ying Bao of Western Washington University is studying
the development and implementation of a new class of nanoparticle-based sensors,
which detect tiny amounts of biological molecules in solution. Metal
nanoparticles that can be made to have waves of electrons on their surfaces by
shining light on the particles are called plasmonic nanoparticles. The energy at
which the electron waves are formed is dependent on the density of materials
close to the surface of the plasmonic nanoparticles. Small changes in the type
and density of the nearby materials cause a large change in the energy of the
electron waves, that can be measured by the energy of the light absorbed by the
metal nanoparticle. Such plasmonic nanoparticles will be made to detect very
small numbers of protein molecules in solution by creating locations on the
nanoparticles that bind to the proteins in a selective way and by placing these
binding sites at locations on the nanoparticles that give the biggest change in
the energy of the light that is absorbed. The selective nature of these
"nanotransducers" is being achieved by making a molecular mold or imprint of
proteins in a glass-like material. This molecular imprinting process creates
physically robust and low-cost sensors capable of selectively binding to target
molecules. This project will combine the benefits of individual plasmonic
nanotransducers with molecular imprinting and open new avenues in nanosensor
development. The fundamental principles that will be discovered in this research
can be applied by researchers when developing the next generation of new
plasmonic nanosensors, with applications in areas such as clinical diagnosis,
food safety, and environmental monitoring. The project will provide
opportunities for students in the Chemistry Department at Western Washington
University to engage in nanomaterial-related research and gain experience in
materials, environmental, and analytical chemistry. Furthermore, through both a
course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) and summer research
positions, students at a local community college will gain nanoscience research
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop and implement a new class of
anisotropic plasmonic nanotransducers permitting solution-based molecular
imprinted sensing, this project is focused on three main objectives: 1)
Synthesis and fundamental study of novel plasmonic nanotransducers. 2)
Performing molecular imprinting of plasmonic nanotransducers in solution. 3)
Evaluating sensing properties of imprinted nanosensors in solution. Methods for
site-specific deposition of silica on plasmonic nanorods, as well as methods for
controlling growth of nanoscale "tentacle" features will be used and further
modified to produce this novel class of anisotropic plasmonic nanotransducer.
The development of such nanotransducers could address key shortcomings of
existing plasmonic nanomaterials for molecular imprint-based sensing, most
prominently their low stability in solution and limited effective surface area.
Applying molecular imprinting and sensing in solution also has the possibility
to address important restrictions in substrate-based (planar) systems, including
limited numbers of imprinted molecular recognition sites, attrition in the
number of sensors connected to the substrate, reduced refractive index
sensitivity due to immobilization of the nanoparticles, and restricted
flexibility on adjusting the number and types of nanosensors in the sensing
system. The proposed fundamental studies have the potential to provide useful
information for the improved design of nano-transducers and imprinted plasmonic
nanosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.