* 2108728
* Design, synthesis, and evaluation of antimony-based anion transporters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Francois Gabbai, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor François Gabbaï of Texas A&amp;M
University will investigate a class of compounds that may serve as transporter
of negatively charged ions across artificial membranes that resemble those found
in living cells. This project will study how the ion transport properties of
these compounds can be influenced by their molecular constitution or by
application of external stimulations. Altogether, this project will likely lead
to the creation of new fundamental knowledge in the biologically relevant area
of ion transport while contributing to the education of students from diverse
backgrounds. The principal investigator and his group will also engage
elementary school students into the areas of science and technology through
outreach activities involving K-6 students from Spanish/English dual language
programs. Finally, this project will also allow the principal investigator to
remain involved in various service activities, including the mentoring of
socioeconomically disadvantaged high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will investigate both neutral and charged antimony-Lewis acids
for the transport of fluoride and chloride anions across phospholipid membranes
of artificial vesicles. By synthesizing and investigating a structurally
differentiated library of antimony derivatives, this research aims to uncover
the multidimensional relationships connecting the anion transport properties of
these cations in artificial vesicles to the hydrophobicity of their structures,
the Lewis acidity of the antimony center, and the steric bulk present around the
anion binding site. Establishing these relationships will add key elements
needed to gain an understanding of the vast compositional space within which
these transporters can exist, thus enabling the design of new derivatives with
tailored anion transport properties. This project will also explore antimony-
based transporters that can be actuated by external stimuli such as redox agents
or metal ions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.