* 2108367
* Collaborative Research: The Massive and Distant Clusters of WISE Survey 2
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anthony Gonzalez, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 231,104.00

This project is a collaborative project between the University of Florida and
the University of Missouri Kansas City to search for galaxy clusters and
protoclusters in the distant Universe, back to the time when the first clusters
were forming. The survey data will allow for detailed studies of the most
massive galaxies in the universe at the time when they were rapidly growing. The
program is based upon catalogs created by NASA’s Wide-field Infrared Survey
Explorer (WISE), a space-based observatory that performed an all-sky survey in
the infrared. Combining the WISE data with catalogs from the Dark Energy Camera
(DECam) on the Blanco telescope in Chile will allow the team to determine where
the first clusters are forming in a 3D volume of the universe. The technique has
already been tested and has correctly identified known clusters from the IRAC
Distant Cluster Survey. The project also includes a joint virtual public viewing
night program at both institutions using remote observing from the Rosemary Hill
Observatory. This plan enables public engagement during the pandemic and will
expand the reach of public observing programs in both states post-covid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a program to detect and
characterize the massive galaxy cluster population at 0.5&lt;z&lt;2 over 10,480
sq. degrees. The proposed program, the Massive and Distant Clusters of WISE
Survey 2 (MaDCoWS2) builds upon a successful previous cluster survey by the same
team, which focused upon galaxy clusters at z~1. The cluster sample resulting
from the MaDCoWS2 program will enable detailed investigations of the evolution
of massive galaxies in the most overdense environments since the epoch of peak
star formation and rapid mass assembly. By extending the redshift baseline to z
= 2, the project will reach into the era of protoclusters, in which the first
massive clusters are just forming and embedded in larger scale protocluster
environments comprised of dense filaments and less massive groups that will be
accreted by the central clusters at later times. The foundation for this program
is CatWISE, a program to create deep catalogs exploiting the full depth of NASA
Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) data at 3.4 and 4.6 microns. A
combination of optical photometry will be used from large Dark Energy Camera
(DECam) data and WISE photometry from the CatWISE2020 catalog to compute
Bayesian photometric redshift probability distributions for the CatWISE2020
galaxy sample, and then the PZWav code will be used to detect cluster scale
overdensities within a 3D data cube. The PIs will foster the career development
of the students working on this project. This research will be complemented by
the outreach programs. The team will initiate and run a joint virtual public
night program at their institutions using remote observing from the Rosemary
Hill Observatory. This plan enables public engagement during the pandemic and
will expand the reach of public observing programs in both states post-
covid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.