* 2108702
* The temperature of the circumgalactic and intergalatic medium over cosmic time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tae Sun Kim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 392,216.00

In the early Universe, the intergalactic medium (IGM) is largely filled with
diffuse hydrogen and helium gas. The IGM is distributed in a cosmic web of
sheets and filaments, separated by voids. Galaxies form at the intersections of
these structures and are fed by IGM gas falling onto regions surrounding
galaxies called the circumgalactic medium (CGM). Principal Investigators Kim and
Wakker will analyze archival data to study the complex interaction between gas
accretion from the IGM and galactic outflows in the CGM, which controls star
formation efficiency and mediates galaxy evolution. To broaden participation the
PIs will organize a series of research related public talks and develop an
online exhibit through the University of Wisconsin Space Place. The PIs will
also continue to work with local middle and high schools to increase student
participation in the annual Science Olympiad
tournament.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will estimate the temperature and
turbulence of the diffuse CGM/IGM at 2&lt;z&lt;4 by determining the absorption
line widths and column densities of HI, CIV and SiIV ions based on Voigt profile
fitting analysis of ~170 QSO spectra from publicly archived Keck Observatory
Database of Ionized Absorption toward Quasars (KODIAQ) and the Ultraviolet and
Visual Echelle Spectrograph (UVES) Spectral Quasar Absorption Database (SQUAD).
The quasars span the epoch when the cosmic star formation rate triples between z
~ 4 and z ~ 2, and when helium reionization heats the IGM significantly at z ~
3. The PIs will use their results to test theoretical models of the temperature-
density relation of the CGM and the evolution of gas temperature and turbulence
of the IGM/CGM at high redshifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.