* 2108233
* Variability of African Easterly Waves and Their Interactions with Saharan Mineral Dust Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Christopher Thorncroft, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 495,031.00

Just as weekly weather reports for the US focus on warm fronts and cold fronts,
a summer weather report for West Africa might feature African Easterly Waves
(AEWs), weather patterns with troughs and ridges separated by perhaps 1,500km
that move eastward over the Sahel and across much of the downwind Atlantic. The
report might also mention a vast plume of airborne Saharan dust moving along a
similar trajectory to the AEWs. The proximity of Saharan dust plumes and AEWs
suggests that the two might interact, since winds associated with an AEW could
stir up dust and transport it, while solar radiation absorbed by the dust could
cause atmospheric heating that would affect the evolution of the AEW. But the
interaction of AEWs and dust plumes has not been extensively studied, and the
extent to which dust lofted and transported by AEWs in turn affects the AEWs is
not well understood. Previous work by the Principle Investigators (PIs) of this
award shows, in an idealized context, that radiative heating from dust can
contribute to the development of AEWs (see award
#1524767).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award uses a combination of
observational analysis and numerical model experiments to better understand the
interactions of AEWs and Saharan dust plumes. On the observational side the
project takes advantage of the Modern-Era Retrospective analysis for Research
and Applications, Version 2 (MERRA-2) produced by the NASA Global Modeling and
Assimilation Office). MERRA-2 is a valuable resource for the work because it
tracks desert dust based on satellite observations and provides dust optical
depth and radiative heating along with the standard meteorological variables.
The modeling component uses the Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) model in an
idealized configuration to identify unstable modes corresponding to AEWs. The
simulations are performed with and without dust radiative heating so that its
effects on the wavelength, phase speed, and growth rates of the AEW modes can be
assessed. Additional experiments are performed using the Unified Forecast System
model, again with and without dust radiative heating, to assess the influence of
dust heating in a more realistic setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
societal relevance due to its potential contribution to improving weather and
air quality forecasts. Better forecasts of AEWs would benefit the US as well as
the nations of West Africa since AEWs play a key role in generating hurricanes,
including those that make landfall on the eastern seaboard. Saharan dust is also
an intercontinental problem as it affects air quality in Africa, the Caribbean,
and the US. The PIs work with the Africa Desk of the National Weather Service's
Climate Prediction Center to incorporate research results into weekly weather
outlooks and short-range dust forecasts. In addition, the project provides
support and training to a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.