* 2108462
* Single Nanoparticle Photoelectrochemistry: Effect of Electronic Structure and Metal Contact on Hole Transfer Rates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Mario Alpuche, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 06/30/2024
* USD 532,138.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Mario Alpuche at the University of
Nevada-Reno is studying the limits of light-driven reactions at the surfaces of
semiconducting nanoparticles. Nanoparticles are about a million times smaller
than the period at the end of this sentence, and they exhibit unique properties
that make them useful in technologies ranging from consumer electronics to
chemical sensors. Working with his students, Professor Alpuche is using
nanoelectrodes to study chemical reactions taking place at the surface of a
single nanoparticle following the absorption of light. Their discoveries could
lead to new ways of converting sunlight into electricity and chemical fuels. In
addition, the project is training the next generation of scientists in the
development and use of advanced electrochemcial methods. Dr. Alpuche is also
partnering with NevadaTeach, which recruits undergraduate students to become
K-12 science teachers, and through partnership with the Western Alliance to
Enhance Student Opportunity (WAESO) program, he is providing research
opportunities to Hispanic students in Northern Nevada, motivating them to pursue
careers in chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Mario Alpuche's research group
is studying the fundamental electron transfer events that take place at the
surfaces of semiconductor nanoparticles in photo-electrochemical devices. In
their experiments, TiO2 and CdSe nanoparticles are attached to nanoelectrodes
and excited with light, producing electron-hole pairs. While the electrode
detects the photogenerated electrons as a current, the hole in the valance band
can be filled by electron transfer from a molecule in solution, or it can become
trapped at a surface defect site. The photoinduced current is then measured as a
function of electrochemical potential and light intensity. The electron-hole
recombination, hole-trapping, and charge transfer processes are disentangled by
modeling their experimental observations using finite element simulations. In
addition, the group continues to advance the electrochemical instrumentation,
including the fabrication of new electrodes with nanometer dimensions, to
improve the sensitivity of the technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.