* 2108357
* Designing Bright and Fast Fluorophores with Large Stokes' Shifts Based on Superradiant Molecular J-Aggregates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Moungi Bawendi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the NSF division of Chemistry, Professor Moungi G. Bawendi and his team at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology will study and harness fundamental
properties of molecular interactions to develop materials that generate
efficient bursts of light in short timescales that are on the order of a few
hundred picoseconds. Materials that can emit light quickly and efficiently have
a wide range of applications, including deep-space optical communication, high-
speed smart light-emitting diodes (LEDs), and quantum information technologies.
Inspired by the complexity and exquisite efficiency of natural light harvesting
systems, the team will explore how the optical properties of molecules can be
improved by arranging them in nano- and microscale clusters called J-aggregates.
In addition to this research, the team will work to make science more inclusive
by providing opportunities to under-represented minorities and women in order to
help develop their scientific potential and empower disadvantaged communities.
In particular, the team will take part in the MIT ACCESS program that provides
classes and research opportunities to students to help bridge the gap in
transitioning from undergraduate to graduate school. The team will also utilize
complementary programs aimed at K-12 students to convey the excitement of
conducting scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to gain
understanding of fundamental properties that underlie excitonic behavior,
stability, and coupling in interacting molecular J-aggregates to develop
materials with short lifetimes that are on the order of hundreds of picoseconds
and that feature large Stokes shifts and high quantum yields. Traditional
fluorophores are used in a variety of fields and have been optimized for high
quantum yield, large Stokes shift, and favorable absorption cross-section.
However, their application in systems that require a short response time have
been limited due to their inherently long lifetimes that are typically in the
nanosecond range. Coupled molecular J-aggregates have the potential to fill the
need for fast, bright chromophores. The team will investigate how structural
changes and environmental effects alter the excitonic behavior of molecular
aggregates, and what dynamics play a role in interactions between aggregates.
First, the team will study matrix effects and structural changes in nanotubular
light harvesting aggregates, as well as the impact of rigidification through
encapsulation in a silica shell. Second, the team will investigate origins of
non-radiative loss pathways in molecular aggregates and potential ways to
mitigate them. Third, the team will look at the coupling between stabilized
nanotubular aggregates to understand the key dynamics involved in energy
transfer between supramolecular fluorophores. This research has the potential to
lead to a fundamental understanding of the properties that limit excitonic
behavior and interactions of J-aggregates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.