* 2108048
* STTR Phase I:  A Reinforcement Learning-Based Automated Self-Guiding Drilling Tool
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Eduardo Gildin, TEALE ENGINEERING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,499.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program Phase I (STTR) project is to provide an environmentally
friendly, sustainable, and cost-effective access to energy by improving
information flow during drilling processes. The US geothermal energy industry is
expected to grow by 48% to $6.8 billion by 2026 and will benefit from the
significant savings of drilling activities, which currently constitute 40-60% of
the costs of the entire geothermal plant and field development. In addition, oil
and gas (O&amp;G) drilling operations will benefit from faster and cleaner
operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project addresses the
inability to transmit large amounts of data from downhole to the surface by
performing most of the processing at the drill-bit. The proposed state-of-the-
art drilling tool incorporates advanced processing power and intelligence
downhole. It is built on physics-based machine learning algorithms centered on
Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques, used previously in complex problems such
as autonomous vehicles and lunar landing. The system will model the highly
complex drilling environment as a Markov Decision Process, then trained on
supercomputing facilities and validated in a laboratory-scale drilling setup
using off-the-shelf electronics. This project will lead to an automated
sequential decision-making process in drilling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.