* 2108050
* Developing Pulsed Power Driven Turbulent Reconnection Platforms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jack Hare, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new experimental platforms for
studying magnetic reconnection in a magnetized plasma, a gas of electrically
charged particles permeated by magnetic fields. The Earth can be thought of as a
spacecraft surrounded by the solar wind, a swirling sea of hot plasma ejected
from the Sun. The Earth's magnetic field usually protects us from this solar
wind, but intense solar storms can break through and cause significant damage to
the orbiting satellites used for communication and navigation, and potentially
even damage power grids and other infrastructure on the Earth's surface.
Predicting these damaging solar storms is an ongoing challenge, and involves a
detailed understanding of a process called magnetic reconnection, which enables
these storms to explosively erupt from the Sun's surface. Better understanding
of magnetic reconnection using new dedicated laboratory experiments supported by
this award will improve our ability to model and forecast these damaging
storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic reconnection and turbulence are
fundamentally linked processes - instabilities in the reconnection layer drive a
turbulent cascade, and this turbulence in turn efficiently drives reconnection
at smaller and smaller scales. Studying turbulent reconnection layers in the
laboratory is an outstanding challenge, requiring hot plasmas to be created and
sustained, as well as new diagnostics to resolve a wide range of spatial scales.
This award will use a new pulsed-power driven experimental platform to study
different methods of producing a turbulent reconnection layer, with the goal of
understanding how turbulence enhances the reconnection rate with applications to
astrophysical plasmas as well as novel fusion experiments using magnetized high-
energy-density plasmas. A successful platform will enable access to a unique
regime of magnetized plasma turbulence, offering insight into important open
questions in modern theories of plasma turbulence: the existence of critical
balance, the transition from the magnetohydrodynamic to kinetic regime at small
length scales, and the uneven partition of energy between the electrons and
ions. This award is made with support from the National Nuclear Security
Administration within the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.