* 2108383
* Novel Imine Formation by ATP Grasp Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Steven Bruner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Yousong Ding will collaborate with Drs. Steven Bruner and Gustavo
Seabra, all from the University of Florida, to study the mechanism for the
formation of an imine bond (carbon connected to nitrogen by two bonds) by
members of an enzyme superfamily known as ATP grasp enzymes. Imines are
essential to a number of life processes and they are formed during many types of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions. However, little is known about how enzymes in the
ATP grasp enzyme superfamily catalyze imine formation. The ATP grasp superfamily
has about 550,000 members, some of which catalyze reactions for central
biological pathways, e.g., making proteins, cell-walls, and fatty acids. Using a
suite of biochemical, structural and computational tools, the research team will
characterize how two ATP grasp enzymes promote the formation of imines for the
production of complex molecules found in nature and discover new compounds and
processes driven by imine-forming ATP grasp enzymes. This project aims to
deliver novel insights into how nature has devised novel functions in the same
enzyme family and reveal how these enzymes could aid in making complex molecules
for applications in biotechnology. Furthermore, this project will provide
opportunities for training students, particularly women and underrepresented
minorities, in modern scientific techniques, thereby preparing them for advanced
careers in science. Through established collaborations with the Center for
Undergraduate Research, Summer Undergraduate Research at Florida, and the Center
for Precollegiate Education and Training at the University of Florida, this
project will also engage high school and college students in the research and
magnify its broader impacts through outreach activities for high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imine is important as a key reactive
intermediate species in a number of enzyme catalyzed reactions and as an
emerging functional group of bioactive small molecules. ATP grasp enzymes are
known to form the amide, ester or thioester linkage. However, two ATP grasp
enzymes MysC and MysD catalyze imine formation for the biosynthesis of natural
UV protectants mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs), representing new chemistry
for this enzyme superfamily. This project will investigate the molecular basis
for fundamental deviations from the canonical reaction mechanism for ATP-
dependent grasp enzymes that favor imine formation here. Specifically, the
research team will characterize the reaction paths, substrate requirements,
kinetic details, and unique structural features of MysC (Objective 1) and MysD
(Objective 2), and explore new reaction manifolds and processes enabled by the
new chemistry of ATP grasp enzymes (Objective 3). As such, this work will likely
add to our fundamental understanding of the consequences of protein sequence
variation upon protein structure and function. Furthermore, the outlined studies
will likely provide fresh information about the functional scope of the ATP
grasp enzyme superfamily in nature, uncover hidden chemical diversity and
biological processes, and open up longer term applications of these imine-
forming enzymes in biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.