* 2108368
* Localized Chemical Detection with Maintained Single Protein Channel Recordings on Nanoneedle Probes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Ryan White, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 03/31/2024
* USD 405,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, and partial funding from the Cellular Dynamics and
Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
Professor Ryan White of the University of Cincinnati Main Campus is studying new
ways for measuring the release of small molecules at an interface with spatial
resolution on the single biological cell and sub-cellular size scales. This
measurement method is particularly significant in measuring cell signaling where
small molecule messengers travel between cells dictating how they interact with
their neighboring cells and environment. Because of the generality of the
sensing method, the approach can be applied to a wide range of cell types,
including non-neuronal cells in the brain. The proposed approach by Professor
White and his team involves embedding a cellular membrane protein receptor, or
protein channel, at the end of a nanoneedle electrode that can be placed in
proximity to various interfaces for localized detection. In order the achieve
this detection, the project will overcome the major challenge in protein channel
measurements for analytical purposes – the ability to control and maintain a
single channel through the duration of an experiment. The long-term goal of the
research program is to develop probes that create “artificial synapses” to
monitor the dynamics and heterogeneity of the cell membrane and cellular
microenvironment. The work will provide broad impact in measurement science and
new knowledge in the measure of cellular communication in the brain. This impact
will reach a diverse group of students and scientists through the development of
a program targeting the increased and sustained participation of first-
generation college students in undergraduate research, through the creation of a
strong community and culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
proposal is to develop nanoscale ion channel probes for imaging and localized
molecular and ion sensing at interfaces with high spatial resolution (nanometer-
micrometer). The impactful research will expand localized detection abilities to
analytes that are not accessible with current methodologies, because the
analytes are neither optically nor electrochemically active. This need is
particularly significant in measuring cell signaling where messengers travel
between cells, dictating how they interact with their environment. The
measurements enabled by the new method will facilitate discoveries of how
astrocytes, with contacts to the neurovascular system and neurons,
differentially signal between the two which is critical for networked
communication in the brain. Currently, however, there is a lack of generalizable
tools that can measure molecules localized at a cell surface. The use of ion
channel probes for scanning ion conductance microscopy (SICM), where protein
channels are embedded in a lipid bilayer at the end of a probe, is a promising
method to leverage ion channel activity for ion and molecular detection with the
imaging capabilities of SICM. However, major hurdles exist that hinder their
use. To overcome these challenges, Professor White and his team will develop a
new SICM imaging mode that employs metal nanoneedle probes that support ion
channel measurements with dramatically reduced probe size over existing
approaches for localized detection at interfaces. They will demonstrate the
ability to perform localized detection on test-bed inorganic substrates and the
surface of astrocyte cells. These measurements are anticipated to enable the
first direct, localized detection of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) release from
astrocytes. The broader impacts of the work lie in the ability of the proposed
measurement method to provide new knowledge about how biological systems (single
cells, tissue slices) communicate via the release of small molecules. This
impact will reach a diverse group of students and scientists through the
development of a "Pathway to Undergraduate Research" program that targets
increased and sustained participation of first-generation college students in
undergraduate research through the creation of a strong community and
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.