* 2108597
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Molecular Recognition Behavior of Hollow Helices
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Miller, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 80,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry is supporting Professor Bing Gong of the State University of New York
at Buffalo and Dr. Daniel P. Miller of the Hofstra University to synthesize a
series of “host” molecules and investigate their affinity for binding and
recognition of sugar molecules. This research aims to gain a better
understanding of the factors that will lead to specific interactions with
different carbohydrates in order to provide guiding principles for future design
of sugar receptors and sensors. This collaborative project integrates
experiments with theoretical studies and provides a great platform for research
training of undergraduate and graduate students, including students of
underrepresented groups. The research results will be incorporated into teaching
and broadly disseminated to the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
host molecules are aromatic oligoamide foldamers with tunable lengths. The
oligoamides fold into helical coil structures with multiple hydrogen bond
acceptors being directed toward the nanosized hollow core. When embedded in a
lipid bilayer membrane in aqueous solution, the helical coils stack to create
channels through which ions and small molecules flow from one side of the
membrane to the other side. With the numerous H-bonding sites, different sugars
and sugar alcohols are expected to interact with the inner pore of the helical
coil with different affinities. Such interaction, being dynamic and transient,
especially in water, will perturb the ion currents through the transmembrane
pores. This research team will (1) optimize the synthesis of the oligoamides,
(2) perform one- and two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopic studies and X-ray crystallographic structural analysis to
interrogate the interactions between the host and specific carbohydrates to
include monosaccharides, disaccharides, and higher oligosaccharides; (3) examine
the effects of various carbohydrate guests on the transmembrane ion currents
through the helical pores; and (4) carry out computational studies to optimize
host-guest binding and to probe the effect carbohydrate guests have on
transmembrane ion flows through the helical pores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.