* 2108881
* CAS: Ultrafast Affinity Extraction - Fundamental Studies and Use in Environmental Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* David Hage, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor David Hage and his group at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln are working to advance our ability to monitor chemicals in the
environment, including chemicals of importance to national health. Specifically,
new microscale methods are being developed. These methods make it possible to
study and analyze chemical systems that cannot be easily examined by other
techniques, providing new information on the behavior, transport, and biological
activity of pharmaceuticals and other man-made agents. Students working with
these innovative methods are receiving interdisciplinary training in chemical
analysis, chemical separations, and environmental analysis. Curricular materials
on microscale separation methods and environmental analysis are also being
developed by Professor Hage for the further training of students within and
beyond the field of chemical separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to develop and utilize new high-performance separation
methods based on ultrafast affinity extraction to characterize chemical
interactions of species with weak-to-moderate binding strengths. These
interactions are important in determining the transport and activity of many
man-made agents in the environment and in biological systems. The approach
begins with simulations and analysis of model systems to identify suitable
ultrafast affinity extraction conditions for measuring the non-bound chemical
fractions and for use in binding or rate studies. The derived conditions are
then applied to examine the binding in “real” applications (e.g., binding of
common pharmaceuticals with dissolved organic matter, such as humic acids, found
in water). Finally, results are used to develop new formats of ultrafast
affinity extraction to increase the information content and capabilities of this
method in binding and rate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.