* 2108970
* Continuation of Full-Scale Three-Dimensional Numerical Experiments on High-Intensity Particle and Laser Beam-Matter Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Warren Mori, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 433,882.00

The goal of this research is broadly aimed at advancing the understanding of the
complex interactions that occur when intense lasers and particle beams propagate
through plasmas. Very accurate simulations are used to study these interactions,
focusing on developing concrete concepts for new classes of ultra-compact
particle accelerators. Particle accelerators are some of the most complex and
expensive tools used for scientific discovery. They are used to discover the
most fundamental particles in nature, to understand fundamental processes in
biology, to probe and develop materials, and to treat cancer. A plasma, an
ionized gas of charged particles, is sometimes called the fourth state of
matter. When a short pulse of very bright light or a short pulse of a high
current of electrons are sent through a plasma a wake or wave is created. The
crests and troughs in this wake move near the speed of light, and charged
particles can then surf this wake and also accelerate to near the speed of
light. This research will focus on understanding how the laser-plasma
interactions can be controlled to lead to the creation of the plasma wake and
the acceleration of the injected beam to very high
energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use a combination of accurate
simulations and theory to advance the understanding of basic high-energy density
science in the area of intense laser and particle beam plasma interactions, and
on how to manipulate the six dimensional phase space of particle beams using
plasma wave wakefields. This will include production of exotic and bright beams,
and efficient acceleration of positrons. This research relies on the particle-
in-cell method which simulates the trajectories of individual electrons and ions
in the plasma as they interact through their self-consistently generated
electric and magnetic fields and any externally applied fields. This discovery
driven research will also help to provide the understanding needed to develop
plasma-based accelerator stages for use in high energy physics colliders, next-
generation light sources, medicine, and homeland security. This effort blends
basic and discovery driven research with particle-in-cell simulations including
full-scale 3D modeling of current, near term, and far term experiments. The
simulations have repeatedly been shown to provide a test bed for theoretical
ideas and new concepts and a method for guiding ongoing and future experiments.
The research continues to include benchmarking codes against well-diagnosed
experiments and each other. High-fidelity full-scale modeling using the nations
largest computers provides a means to extrapolate parameters into regimes that
will not be accessible to experiments for years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.