* 2108330
* Collaborative Research: Characterization and Optimization of N-Heterocyclic Carbene Functionalized Nanoparticle Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jon Camden, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 377,179.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. David Jenkins of the University of
Tennessee and Drs. Jon Camden and Gina Navoa Svarovsky of the University of
Notre Dame explore the use of N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) chemistry for the
surface modification of gold nanoparticles. Gold nanoparticles, which are
typically stabilized by charged molecules such as citrate or monolayers with
thiol anchoring groups, are used in wide-ranging chemical, biological, and
environmental technologies but use is limited by the inherent instability of the
nanoparticles in water. Drs. Jenkins and Camden are identifying ways to overcome
this limitation by using NHC ligands. To do so, they are using a top-down method
that involves the initial coordination of these ligands to coinage metal ions
before being transferred to gold nanoparticle surfaces. They are using a variety
of characterization tools to evaluate this chemistry and to better understand
what NHC ligands promote enhanced stability of the functionalized gold
nanoparticles. Drs. Jenkins, Camden, and Svarovsky are pursuing a Teaching
Fellows Residency program to create an immersive research experience in the
research laboratories and a Student Engagement in Authentic Science (SEAS)
program that engages middle school students with original scientific
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves the synthesis,
characterization, and transfer of metal NHC complexes to gold nanoparticle
surfaces, the characterization of the resulting bonding and close packing of a
library of NHC ligands on gold nanoparticles, and the subsequent evaluation of
NHC-functionalized gold stability and longevity. All of these studies utilize a
top-down approach wherein the gold nanoparticles are functionalized after
isolated coinage metal NHC complexes have formed in solution. This universal,
top-down strategy is expected to be broadly applicable to gold nanoparticles of
varying shapes and sizes. This approach has the potential to overcome
limitations associated with bottom-up functionalization steps where each
individual reaction is typically optimized for a specific system. Gold
nanoparticles functionalized with heterocyclic carbenes hold promise in the
quest to overcome challenges faced by conventional surface
chemistries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.