* 2108826
* Collaborative Research: Kinetics and Quantitative Spectroscopy for Redox Chemistry of Atmospheric Mercury
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Theodore Dibble, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 59,136.00

WIth support of the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Chuji Wang at Mississippi State University and Theodore
Dibble at the State University of New York College of Environmental Science and
Forestry in Syracuse will combine cutting-edge tools of spectroscopy and
computational chemistry to measure rate constants of several key reactions of
mercury bromide (HgBr) with various atmospheric free radicals, ozone, and
volatile organic compounds. The mechanisms and rate coefficients determined here
will be valuable for atmospheric modelers to improve their analyses of mercury
chemistry at local to global scales. The societal benefit of the proposed
research lies in reducing the impact of mercury on human and environmental
health. Additional anticipated broader impacts of this research include the
training of future researchers in modern spectroscopy and computational
chemistry; advancements in science education via the development of learning
modules in classroom teaching and interactions with local high school students;
public engagement with science and technology via various local science
activities; and the training of undergraduate students recruited from an HBCU.
Outreach activities are planned and involve diverse local communities in both
Mississippi and New York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative team of Chuji
Wang at Mississippi State University and Theodore Dibble at the State University
of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry in Syracuse will
utilize multiple spectroscopic techniques including cavity ringdown spectroscopy
(CRDS) in a specially-designed flow reactor to determine rate coefficients as a
function of temperature and pressure. Absolute concentrations and UV spectra of
reaction products will be measured via CRDS. Computational chemistry will be
used to guide experiments and optimize experimental conditions; and experiments
will help validate and verify computed spectra. Computational kinetics and
quantum chemistry will be used to investigate previously unstudied side
reactions and to extend experimental results to the full range of atmospheric
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.