* 2108202
* RUI: The Tropospheric Oxidation of Biogenic Hydrocarbons: Probing Temperature Dependence and Autoxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Keith Kuwata, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 459,686.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Atmospheric Chemistry Program in the Division of Atmospheric
and Geospace Sciences are jointly funding Professor Keith T. Kuwata of
Macalester College and Associate Professor Stacey A. Stoffregen of the
University of Wisconsin-River Falls and their undergraduate research students to
study chemical reactions of isoprene, the most abundant unsaturated organic
compound in the atmosphere. The fact that isoprene is unsaturated makes it prone
to oxidation by reactive forms of oxygen such as hydroxyl radical (OH) and
ozone. The Kuwata and Stoffregen laboratories use computational methods to
predict all pathways by which isoprene is oxidized by OH and ozone. The ultimate
project goals are to predict (1) the products of the isoprene + OH and isoprene
+ ozone reactions, (2) the rates of key steps in these reactions, and (3) how
these rates vary with temperature. These predictions will guide collaborators
studying the same reactions experimentally and have the potential to improve the
accuracy and precision of atmospheric chemistry models. The undergraduates
working on the project receive research training in a variety of methods and
typically present results at national scientific meetings and at twice-yearly
meetings of the Midwest Undergraduate Computational Chemistry
Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemical reactions under consideration pose
significant theoretical challenges, with reactive intermediates often being
chemically activated and possessing electronic structures with significant
levels of both dynamic and static electron correlation. Predicting the fates of
chemically activated species requires master equation simulations, with
microcanonical rate constants being determined either by Rice-Ramsperger-Kassel-
Marcus theory or variational transition state theory. Use of a composite
electronic structure method such as Weizmann-1 Brueckner Doubles theory provides
an accurate treatment of dynamic correlation, while equation-of-motion spin-flip
coupled-cluster theory provides a reasonable estimate of static correlation. The
Kuwata and Stoffregen laboratories will apply these methods to study the
competition between autoxidation and radical-terminating processes in the OH-
initiated oxidation of isoprene, as well as study the generation of heretofore
unmeasured hydroxycarbonyls in isoprene ozonolysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.