* 2108901
* Collaborative Research: Polar-Polyolefin Block Copolymers via MILRad Functionalization: A Platform for Amphiphilic Nanostructured Material Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Eva Harth at the University of Houston
and Professor Krzysztof Matyjaszewski at Carnegie Mellon University aim to
explore the capabilities of generating anchor units in polymers of plastic
materials during their synthesis and using these "plug-in" units as activators
for further modification of the polymer. This two-step process will result in
polymer chains that are composed of two segments (or blocks) of distinctly
different structures and properties. The unique polarity and solubility of each
block allows the polymer to be used as "stitches" between two immiscible plastic
materials or to form 3-D structures in shapes of spheres, worms and disks. The
two research teams complement each other in their areas of expertise and are
expected to work synergistically to establish chemical pathways to synthesize
these diblock copolymers and study their special properties. An automated
continuous flow approach will be investigated to increase further the ease and
practicability of diblock polymer preparation. The results of this research are
expected to enhance knowledge in how to combine polar and non-polar chains to
gain access to novel materials, and the accomplishments will be communicated to
the public and scientific community. This project will help to prepare a skilled
workforce for the polymer industry by training graduate students and
undergraduates, including students from underrepresented groups, in many aspects
of polymer chemistry, organometallic chemistry and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the two teams will collaborate to
explore block copolymer and nanostructure synthesis based on new methods
development, including a novel radical- and spin-trapping capability, to
integrate olefin, acrylic and ethylene oxide segments into one polymeric
architecture. The generation of macro-radicals through metal insertion/light-
initiated radical polymerization as part of the polymerization pathway will be
utilized to prepare intermediates to promote controlled radical polymerization
via atom transfer radical polymerization and nitroxide-mediated polymerization.
This strategy may open up a new avenue for polar polyolefin di-block and
triblock copolymers via chain extension and is expected to provide convenient
access to block copolymers not yet available using existing methodology or only
available via multi-step approaches. Polymerization-induced self-assembly
processes and crystallization-driven self-assembly will be investigated as
potential approaches to form nanostructures from di- and triblocks composed of
polyolefins and polyacrylates. Continuous flow chemistry will be used to
optimize and scale up polyolefin macro-initiator synthesis and will be used in
support of the synthesis of a diverse set of polyolefin-containing
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.