* 2108749
* Modulations of Periodic Waves in Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mathew Johnson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 198,000.00

This project analyzes the existence and behavior of spatially periodic solutions
to models for viscous fluid dynamics and optical signal propagation, with an
emphasis on the stability of such patterns, that is their ability to persist
when subjected to small perturbations. The study of the stability of a pattern
is of practical interest since only stable solutions are expected to be observed
in nature. Results of this research will provide scientists with new analytical
tools and methodologies to understand observed laboratory experiments in both
fluid dynamics and optical signal propagation contexts, and will lead to
experimental design principles that will be used to better explain patterns
observed in experiments, to predict the presence of new structures and patterns
not previously observed, and to provide insight into the experimental
construction of patterns. Both undergraduate and graduate students will receive
training through research involvement in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project naturally divides into two sets of questions according to their
fundamentally different physical applications. The first set seeks to develop
and analyze new mathematical models relating to buoyancy driven viscous
interfacial wave dynamics, such as magma rising through a porous rock. The
results of this analysis is expected to provide mathematically rigorous
justifications for currently unexplained laboratory observations. The second
relates to the dynamics of optics waveguides and optical resonators and will
resolve several outstanding issues that are of interest to both experimentalists
and theoreticians alike. Importantly, both components involve mathematical work
that can be experimentally tested and compared to laboratory
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.