* 2108448
* Elucidating Fundamental Factors Driving Self-assembly with Guided Interactions in Multicomponent Enzyme Systems Using Model Nanostructured Platforms
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Cindy Berrie, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2024
* USD 508,510.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professors Cindy L. Berrie and Candan Tamerler at
the University of Kansas are investigating factors that govern the assembly and
organization of biomolecules at interfaces. Affinity peptide tags will be used
to selectively direct the self-assembly of biomolecules, including enzymes, onto
material surfaces to create multicomponent bioactive materials organized at the
nanoscale. The metal nanostructure platforms being developed are designed to
enable an understanding of the role of material specificity, curvature, spacing,
and size on the spatially organized self-assembly of biomolecules. The project
will allow biohybrid materials to mimic the exquisite functionality nature has
evolved for complex tasks, which will enable enhanced biosensing, biocatalysis
and biofuel applications as an alternative energy source. In the course of
conducting the project, graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
the growing convergence of nanoscience, biomolecules and biomaterials. In
addition, the research team will carry out outreach and services to the
community at the University of Kansas and local middle and elementary schools
through participation in the Engineering EXPO and the Carnival of Chemistry
events and the development of the “Science Night” program to engage students in
science at an early stage. Public demonstrations on nanolithography and imaging
will be conducted with the involvement of the students working on the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on exploring the fundamental factors
responsible for peptide guided self-assembly of multi-enzyme systems using model
nanostructured platforms to harness their coordinated activity. Nature
exquisitely organizes cascades of enzymes to work in tandem; however, attempts
to artificially assemble such complex systems are hampered by the complexity and
lack of information about the factors governing functional assembly. Emerging
applications from biocatalysis to biosensing, to energy harvesting and biofuels
would likely benefit from assembly of coupled enzymes with cascade-like
activity, and therefore elucidating the factors controlling the assembly of such
complex systems would have wide ranging applications. Specifically, the assembly
of peptide tags, peptide-labeled enzymes, and the co-assembly of coupled enzyme
pairs will be investigated using optical and atomic force microscopy as well as
bioactivity assays to determine the distribution, conformation, and orientation
of assembled biomolecules and how these are affected by the metal nanostructure
composition, spacing, size, and curvature. The scientific broader impacts of the
work include the development of design principles for biohybrid materials for
applications in biosensing and biocatalysis. There are also important elements
of workforce development in the area of nanobiomaterials and of outreach the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.