* 2108511
* Chemical &amp; Biological Interception of Cell-Cell Communication in Gram-Positive Bacteria
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Helen Blackwell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the NSF
Division of Chemistry, Professor Helen E. Blackwell of the University of
Wisconsin–Madison is studying the chemical signals that bacteria use to
communicate with each other. This signaling pathway is extremely important, as
many common bacteria use it to cause infections and disease in humans, animals,
and plants. However, little is known about these signals and how they function.
This NSF project aims to study the chemical signals used by one class of
bacteria, to design and use chemistry to make signals that the bacteria cannot
make themselves, and apply these non-natural signals to activate and inhibit
bacterial communications pathways on demand. This chemical approach will allow
for the signaling pathway to be explored in new ways and in important,
biologically relevant environments, and will provide fundamental new insights
into how it works. This project will have additional broad impacts. It will
provide ample opportunities for training students in modern scientific
techniques, thereby preparing them for advanced careers in science. In addition,
through collaboration with an artist, the project will provide artwork (for
viewing in person and online) that will communicate the presence of bacteria,
their chemical signaling networks, and their global importance to the general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is motivated by the
incredible ability of bacteria to act as a group at high cell number and
initiate behaviors that can have devastating effects on humanity. This process
is called “quorum sensing” (QS). Gram-positive bacteria use agr-type, two-
component signaling systems for QS that are reliant on autoinducing peptide
(AIP) signals. The reliance of common bacteria on a chemical language of small
peptides places organic chemists and chemical biologists in a unique position to
uncover the fundamental principles underlying this communication network and
design new tools to modulate it at the molecular level. Professor Blackwell's
laboratory is making important contributions to the development of non-native
peptides and small molecules capable of either blocking or activating agr-type
QS in the Staphylococci. Many questions remain to be addressed about the
mechanisms and potential utility of these non-native compounds. The current
project seeks to leverage this strong foundation of research and significantly
expand the PI’s program to address several key challenges in the QS field over
the next three years. The following three integrated and cross-disciplinary aims
are to be pursued here: (1) apply chemical synthesis to develop physically
robust, next-generation ligands to target agr-type QS with improved activity
profiles; (2) apply biochemistry to delineate the molecular mechanisms by which
these ligands interact with agr QS systems; and (3) apply modern molecular
biology to advance new methods to expedite the identification and production of
QS ligands (both native and non-native). Together, the results of these studies
have the potential to significantly refine the understanding of agr-type
QS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.