* 2108977
* CDS&amp;E: Combining Nuclear Magnetic Resonance and Neutron Scattering for Determining Macromolecular and Liquid Structure: Towards Development of the Novel NMR-PNS Technique
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* George Thurston, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Michael Kotlarchyk and colleagues George Thurston, and
Pratik Dholabhai at Rochester Institute of Technology are laying the groundwork
for development of a powerful next-generation technique to probe structures and
dynamics of molecules, molecular assemblies, and solutions. The targeted
technique, based on a combination of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) and
Polarized Neutron Scattering (PNS), has the potential to revolutionize the
detailed, molecular-scale information available for a broad variety of
materials, including liquid mixtures, catalysts, nanomaterials, and biological
macromolecules. The information to be gained is crucial for predicting and
rationalizing many processes of industrial, medical, and societal importance.
The PIs are actively engaged in programs seeking to enhance STEM engagement by
students from underrepresented groups, for involvement in interdisciplinary
state-of-the-art research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
calculational modeling as a foundation for future development of experimental
methods. The team is extending the quantum-mechanical density-operator treatment
of NMR-PNS to treat spin relaxation, spin coupling, and the incorporation of
nuclei with any quantum spin. This will enable the prediction and simulation of
PNS cross sections and signal-to-noise ratios for hyperpolarized molecules in
solution and for molecules prepared via specialized NMR protocols. Molecular
dynamics simulations of molecules hyperpolarized in solution via Signal
Amplification by Reversible Exchange (SABRE) are being undertaken to permit
quantitative evaluations of site-site spatial correlations in solution, which
are essential for predicting the PNS signal and for a rigorous statistical
analysis of PNS signal-to-noise. NMR protocols that apply selective pulse-
shaping and sequencing to hyperpolarized molecules will be designed and
simulated, thereby enabling use of the correlation functions to evaluate the
resulting polarized neutron scattering cross-sections. Finally, complete
statistical analyses of putative NMR-PNS protocols for SABRE-hyperpolarized
molecules will be performed. The simulated scattering signals will inform the
design of effective NMR-PNS instrumentation and experiments, including sample
environment, beamline, and detector parameters. The ultimate aim is to determine
structure factors between atomic pairs selected via NMR spin-manipulation, from
sub-angstrom to micron length scales, thereby giving valuable information about
molecular conformations and relative orientations in solution. The SABRE-PNS
methods to be developed are important stepping-stones toward full NMR-PNS and
will be valuable in their own right.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.