* 2108115
* Collaborative Research: Commensal All-sky Imaging of Low-Frequency Transients with EPIC
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Judd Bowman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 646,951.00

Radio telescopes allow astronomers to see energetic events in the universe. New
and planned radio telescopes use thousands of antennas. The antenna signals must
be combined digitally in supercomputers to make images of the sky. Reducing
these computations will reduce the cost of future telescopes. The investigators
have developed an algorithm that is faster and will implement it on the Long
Wavelength Array in New Mexico. Using the images, the investigators will search
for fast radio bursts, a recently discovered phenomenon. This may help identify
the type of objects that make these mysterious bursts. The team will also study
other astronomical objects. They will extend the Research Experiences for Non-
Traditional Undergraduates (RENTU) program. Financial or family obligations can
prevent students from participating in research. This program makes research
more accessible for first-generation and under-represented student groups as
well as veterans. This project addresses the goals of the Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern low-frequency radio
interferometers enable views of cosmic dawn and the time-variable sky. Driven by
the need for wide fields, high sensitivity, and excellent imaging performance,
these telescopes include hundreds or thousands of individual antennas.
Processing so many signals is computationally expensive, particularly for
science objectives that require all-sky imaging and high-temporal resolution.
This project seeks to advance a real-time, all-sky radio interferometer imaging
architecture that reduces the standard computational scaling. The capabilities
of an existing system currently implemented on the Long Wavelength Array station
in Sevilleta, New Mexico will be expanded by improving efficiency and operating
bandwidth, enabling response to external events and triggers, developing a
transient detection module, coordinating commensal observing with other
facilities, and monitoring sources of interest. The imager will be used for
fast-transient studies at low frequencies, including targets such as pulsars,
prompt radio counterparts to gravitational wave events, interplanetary
scintillation, and searches for fast radio bursts. The investigators will also
extend the Research Experiences for Non-Traditional Undergraduates (RENTU)
program at Arizona State University to include the University of New Mexico and
Winona State University. This program serves local students for whom financial
or family obligations prevent from participating in existing research programs
away from their home institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.