* 2108438
* Collaborative Research: Achieving a New Understanding of Solar Flare Termination Shocks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Chengcai Shen, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2024
* USD 118,091.00

A collaborative project between the New Mexico Consortium, New Jersey Institute
of Technology, Dartmouth College, and the Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical
Observatory is dedicated to the study of solar flares. Solar flares are a
priority science area for the 2019 National Space Weather Strategy and Action
Plan. When solar flares impact Earth they effect the near-Earth space radiation
environment and contribute to satellite drag. Solar flares contain two parts –
light and particles. The bright flaring light, the most popularly noted feature
of these events, is followed by a stream of extremely fast electrons and ions.
These particles can reach earth within an hour of the light emission, making
timely prediction of particle events particularly challenging. This project
examines one potential mechanism for the acceleration of particles to such high
energies. It combines multiple state of the models and data from satellite and
ground-based platforms. The research team is comprised of early-career faculty
and students from the four collaborating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses particle acceleration and transport in solar flares.
Specifically, it will address magnetic reconnection driven processes in flare
termination shocks and their role in electron acceleration and transport, and
non-thermal emission. The modeling effort combines large-scale particle-in-cell
and magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations in 2.5D and 3D to model realistic
magnetic field and plasma evolution along with the energy release, particle
acceleration, and transport. Synthetic observations from the combined
simulations will be generated to be compared with microwave, E/UV, and X-ray
imaging and spectroscopic data from the Expanded Owens Valley Solar Array, the
NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory, and Hinode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.