* 2108690
* Phase-Sensitive Chiral Sum Frequency Generation Vibrational Spectroscopy for Probing Protein Hydration at Aqueous Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* E. Chui-Ying Yan, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 435,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Elsa Chui-Ying Yan of Yale University is
studying protein interactions with water on surfaces by developing a new optical
method. Proteins are molecular machineries that carry out biological functions.
Many of them are situated on cell surfaces for critical life processes, such as
cell communication, cell adhesion, and immunological response. These proteins
are excellent targets for drug design and the recent success in developing the
COVID-19 vaccine is an example. In industries, protein stability upon
interactions with surfaces can greatly impact product quality, such as food
packaging and drug delivery systems. Also, proteins are incorporated on surfaces
for making biosensors and molecular devices. Therefore, being able to predict
protein behaviors on various surfaces can help advance fundamental knowledge and
develope new drugs and materials. Nonetheless, proteins on surfaces cannot
function by themselves. Not only do they interact with the surface materials
(e.g., cell membrane and plastic packages), they are also integrated with
surrounding water molecules. These water molecules determine protein structures
and functions, and thus must be considered to fully understand and predict
protein behaviors. Professor Yan will develop a new optical technique with
unprecedented selectivity for detecting water molecules and their interactions
with proteins on surfaces. Combining experimental and computational methods,
Professor Yan will develop approaches to generate detailed descriptions of these
water molecules interacting with various types of proteins on surfaces.
Professor Yan will provide training opportunities to students at various levels
in conducting scientific research and organize students to reach out to a
neighborhood high school to support their STEM education program and hold panel
discussions on STEM career opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop external heterodyne chiral vibrational sum frequency (SFG) generation
spectroscopy to probe protein hydration at interfaces. This method is expected
to have the advantages of being in situ, real-time, and label-free. More
importantly, it will provide unique selectivity to water molecules surrounding
proteins that are in folded chiral structures without interference of background
signals from interfacial and bulk water. The project will construct an external
heterodyne SFG spectrometer to acquire water O-H stretching spectra at the
air/water interface in the presence of proteins that with attention to their
secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structures. Molecular dynamics (MD) models
being constructed at the interface will be used to simulate the phase-resolved
chiral SFG spectra. The comparison of the experimental and computational spectra
in conjunction with analyses of the MD trajectories will allow for extraction of
information about topology and local interactions of water molecules around the
proteins. Finally, the combined experimental and computational approaches will
be used to investigate changes in water structures during protein denaturation
on surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.