* 2108044
* Multi-modal Mass Spectrometric Imaging for Understanding the Biochemical Effects of Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Vincent Rotello, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Richard Vachet, Professor Vincent Rotello, and their
groups at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst are developing new methods to
measure nanomaterials in biological samples. Nanomaterials are important in a
growing number of technologies, ranging from consumer goods and industrial
applications to biomedicine. To properly understand the consequences of such
nanomaterials in each application, new measurement methods are needed that can
report on their distributions and biochemical effects. Professors Vachet and
Rotello are developing new imaging tools that can simultaneously provide both
sets of information for nanomaterials in tissues. The proposed imaging methods
rely on sophisticated laser-based mass spectrometry that can also provide
fundamental information about the interactions of light with nanomaterials. The
new methods developed in this grant are also leading to new ways to
computationally combine data obtained from these new imaging methods and more
traditional microscopy methods, thereby deepening the insight that can be
extracted from these imaging methods. A diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved in the project, and these students will
obtain training in cutting-edge mass spectrometry and nanotechnology, two areas
of broad importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Vachet/Rotello group is developing
new imaging approaches that combine laser ablation inductively-coupled plasma
mass spectrometry (LA-ICP MS) and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization MS
(MALDI MS) to simultaneously track nanomaterials and biomolecules (e.g.
metabolites, lipids) in tissues. They are exploring new multi-modal image
segmentation approaches to more easily identify sub-organ specific molecular
markers. They are also developing new computational methods to fuse images from
LA-ICP-MS imaging, MALDI-MS imaging, and microscopy. Combining images from these
modalities will improve spatial resolution and enhance the chemical information
present in the images. They are also synthesizing new mass tags that can be
conjugated to any nanomaterial to improve multi-modal imaging. New software that
is developed in this project is made freely available to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.