* 2108076
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: AI-Enhanced Exascale Simulations Of The Earliest Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Norman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 463,511.00

Impressive recent advances in accelerating physics-based scientific simulations
using deep neural network-trained surrogate models have stimulated this project,
to use such models to accelerate cosmological simulations of the formation of
the first galaxies, including chemical pre-enrichment by Population III stars.
The surrogate model will be trained on high-resolution adaptive mesh refinement
(AMR) simulations and validated by incorporating it into AMR simulations of
lower spatial resolution. Once validated, this approach will become part of
Enzo-E, the highly scalable version of the widely used Enzo code. A principal
goal is to establish the validity and usefulness of this pathfinding approach,
addressing a frontier problem in astronomy by combining numerical simulations
with machine learning. This technical methodology can be customized for other
astrophysical situations where a vast range of scales inhibits a direct
numerical assault. It will also help to stimulate adoption of surrogate models
in multiple disciplines, and lead to improved science-informed deep learning
neural network designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The surrogate model, to be called
Pop3Net, is composed of several convolutional deep neural networks of custom
design which predict when and where Pop III stars form, and other networks that
emulate radiative and chemical feedback effects. Pop3Net will be trained using
state-of-the-art full-physics simulations of the formation of the first
galaxies. The hybrid Enzo-E+Pop3Net code will be used to simulate the formation
of large ensembles of high redshift galaxies, computing synthetic observations
using the Powderday package, to compare with future data from the James Webb
Space Telescope and the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope. This part of the work
will examine how sensitive galaxy properties are to the chemical enrichment
history of the first galaxies, including supersonic baryon-dark matter streaming
velocity effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.