* 2108286
* DISES RCN: SWISLR - Saltwater Intrusion and Sea Level Rise in rural landscapes: Assessing Risk and Identifying Mitigation and Adaptation Options for Rural Coastal Plain Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Emily Bernhardt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,661.00

This project will bring together a cross-section of disciplinary experts,
community leaders, and policymakers as a research coordination network to
address the problems of rising sea-level and salt-water intrusion into coastal
regions. Nearly all of the North American Coastal Plain is subject to rising sea
levels, land subsidence, more severe hurricanes, and more intense droughts. All
four of these trajectories of change are leading to more frequent and higher
magnitude inputs of marine salts into coastal plain soils. The penetration of
salinity into the coastal interior is exacerbated by groundwater extraction and
the high density of agricultural canals and ditches throughout much of the rural
landscape. The resulting saltwater intrusion and sea-level rise represent
significant challenges for the largely rural landscape and small communities
throughout the North American Coastal Plain. Loss of agricultural productivity
and rapidly changing habitats in conservation areas may differentially impact
disadvantaged rural populations and communities. These environmental justice
issues are multi-generational, involving land availability, bank and agency
lending practices, and race. The community of scholars and practitioners engaged
in research and management of sea-level rise and saltwater intrusion will help
develop plans to adapt to this expanding environmental change. The decisions
that coastal communities make in response to rapid environmental change will
shape the future socioecological trajectory of US coastal plain
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of the Saltwater Intrusion
and Sea Level Rise (SWISLR) Research Coordinating Network is to build an
integrated conceptual scaffolding that will expand the capacity to forecast and
prepare for impacts throughout the rural communities of the Atlantic and Gulf
coasts of North America. In addition to variable rates of sea-level rise across
the outer coastal plain, differences in geomorphic setting, water resources
infrastructure and management, and climate extremes are generating very
different patterns of saltwater intrusion. Documenting both the absolute
magnitude of this rapid environmental change, and the causes and consequences
for its spatial and temporal variation, represent an opportunity to construct
new mechanistic models that link directional climate change to temporally and
spatially dynamic socio-environmental impacts. The diverse effects on various
landscapes provide opportunities to examine modern theories of ecosystem state
change in systems with exceptionally strong socioecological
feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.