* 2108505
* Atomistic Macroscopic Simulations of Collisional Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Murillo, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project will use high performance computing to simulate small amounts of
very hot matter down to the level of individual atoms, using machine learning to
advance current capabilities. Typical mathematical models of matter are
approximate because it would almost always take too much time and computing
power to solve equations that describe what every individual atom does. This
project will push through that barrier by developing methods to simulate small
pieces of matter, including literally every individual atom. The goal is to
provide the most accurate description of matter possible. The focus is on
extremely hot matter -- plasmas -- which creates unique challenges relative to
other forms of matter. An important aspect of this new approach to simulating
matter is that the simulations will observe themselves and learn from their own
mistakes, so that their performance continuously improves by this process of
"machine learning." Machine learning will enable advances that have never been
possible in this area of research. The capabilities developed in this project
will be useful in future fundamental and applied research of societal relevance,
including industrial and national defense applications, and could lead to
advances ranging from understanding how stars age to manufacturing more powerful
computer chips to protecting communication satellites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
deeper understanding of non-equilibrium, heterogeneous non-ideal plasmas will be
developed to allow for the development of improved molecular dynamics (MD)
models. Historically, the computational cost of MD has severely restricted its
use to simulations of very small numbers of particles, typically only 100s to
1000s, with simulations relying on periodicity to mimic a bulk material. This
has restricted modeling to mostly equilibrium, homogeneous plasma physics.
Recent advances in computational methods and machine learning offer avenues to
break through this barrier. As the accessible scales increase, so do important
gradients and entirely new modeling issues appear. Force laws are the key input
to MD, and scientists are now at a juncture where the problems they can tackle
with MD cannot use force laws developed in the past. Further, unique to plasmas,
gradients introduce new physical effects such as mesoscopic electric fields that
can enhance transport, while the potential increase in computational cost
associated with gradients can be severe. In this project, both computational
models and machine learning techniques for non-uniform plasmas will be obtained
to address classes of problems previously beyond the reach of MD. Using these
new methods, mesoscopic plasma instabilities will be atomistically explored in
the presence of electric fields and transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.