* 2108354
* DISES: Modeling interactions between community forest dynamics and local livelihoods amidst institutional changes
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Robert Kennedy, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,598,100.00

Regulators and forest managers have long looked for answers regarding which
institutional arrangements best serve to balance rural development and forest
conservation. One such arrangement, is community forestry where some forest care
and management is handled by local communities. While community forestry can be
an effective in conserving forests and enhancing rural livelihoods, studies also
show that that success is variable. This project will identify the conditions
that lead to positive community forestry outcomes. It will identify the
situations and arrangements that lead to success, across Vietnam, Laos, and
Cambodia. This work important for governments and non-governmental organizations
in the U.S., where forests under community management are increasing in number.
It will also be beneficial in low- and middle-income countries where communities
manage over 25% of forests. This project will train two PhD students and a
postdoctoral fellow in data science and modeling. Course materials will bring
modeling exercises into the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate changes in community forestry arrangements on forest condition and
livelihoods. It will examine the role of institutional variability and social
and ecological conditions in moderating community forestry impacts. It will also
study feedback that drive changes in social and ecological outcomes. The
researchers will build spatial datasets on forest condition and change,
livelihoods, and institutions across three countries in the Mekong Region. This
will be done using satellite imagery, citizen science datasets, longitudinal
national socio-economic datasets, and community forest spatial data. They will
apply a statistical matching research design to test the hypotheses that
community forestry is more likely to maintain and restore forest cover and
biodiversity. The method will also explore the ability of Community forestry to
enhance livelihoods, and how these impacts will be moderated by institutional
variability and baseline social and ecological conditions. They will collect
site-level ecological and social data to validate and refine the resulting
models and examine causal mechanisms leading to varied outcomes. Finally, they
will build models that recognize feedbacks between forest condition and
livelihoods under community forestry. Those models will be capable of predicting
landscape and livelihood changes at various spatial and temporal scales under
changing institutional drivers and ecological
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.