* 2108837
* Modulation of Metalloprotein Activities through Fine-tuning Reduction Potentials
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Yi Lu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 12/31/2021
* USD 561,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Yi Lu from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign plans to modulate metalloprotein activities through fine-tuning
reduction potentials. In the process, the research will contribute to the
fundamental understanding of how to tune reduction potentials and correlate it
with functional properties. Many chemical and biological processes involve redox
reactions, whose efficiency is largely defined by reduction potentials. In
Nature, each metalloprotein covers a certain reduction potential range required
for its function. A systematic understanding of common factors that affect the
reduction potential of different metalloproteins across the entire range of
physiological reduction potentials remains elusive. To address this limitation,
the Lu group plans to engineer the protein azurin to vary the reduction
potential of the copper site to address the question of how tuning reduction
potentials can modulate enzymatic functions, knowledge that would be applicable
to many biological and chemical systems. Dr. Lu will integrate research with
education through developing lecture and lab modules for undergraduate and
graduate courses that incorporate multidisciplinary research results. The PI
will focus on recruiting students from groups underrepresented in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) to participate in the research through
outreach activities and on creating and maintaining a diverse, equitable, and
inclusive culture to allow the recruits to thrive in learning and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the previous success in Dr. Lu’s
lab in tuning the reduction potential of the type 1 copper center in azurin to
span a 2 V physiological Eº´ range with minimal perturbation of the primary
coordination sphere. It focuses on the engineering secondary coordination sphere
interactions, including hydrogen bonding (H-bonding) and hydrophobicity to
modulate metalloprotein activities, including (1) the S-nitrosylation reactivity
of a Cu site and stepwise nitrosylation of a nonheme Fe site in an engineered
azurin, (2) the oxygen reduction activity of the T1Cu center in a small laccase,
and (3) changing the reduction potential of an Fe-S cluster incorporated into
azurin. The pursuit of these objectives is expected to result in deeper insights
into how reduction potentials of metalloproteins can be tuned and how the
functions of metalloproteins can be expanded beyond electron transfer. The new
knowledge could serve as a strong basis for the design of metalloproteins and
metal complexes with predictable reduction potentials that can be used in
applications such as solar energy conversion, fuel cells, and small molecule
activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.