* 2108686
* Isotopic and Elemental Abundances in Stars and Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ian Crossfield, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 334,252.00

Precise elemental and isotopic abundance measurements provide some of the
strongest constraints on the formation and evolution of planets, stars, and
galaxies. In the coming decades they will also inform the search for extrasolar
biosignatures. This team will determine abundances of Sun-like stars, lower-mass
red dwarf stars, substellar objects (brown dwarfs), and exoplanet atmospheres.
The team will use this sample to provide insights on planetary evolution,
stellar ages, brown dwarf interior modeling, planet and star formation, and
models of galactic chemical evolution. They will further develop a craft-based
outreach program to build representations of planets using origami, and they
will contribute to regional science education by developing a traveling
planetarium that will visit communities in rural Kansas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team uses the iSHELL spectrograph on the 3.5m IRTF
telescope to measure elemental abundances of up to 13 elements for each target,
including C, O, Mg and Si. In addition, the team has pioneered the use of this
instrument to measure abundances of 13CO and C18O (as well as 12C16O), thus
providing isotopic abundances of C and O in stellar atmospheres for the first
time. These isotopic measurements have been done for two M dwarfs; the objective
of this project is to extend these measurements to a variety of other objects
that have already been observed, and furthermore to make similar observations
for more objects. As a galaxy ages, nucleosynthesis in massive stars and in
energetic events will lead to subsequent generations of stars having more of the
heavier isotopes of common elements such as C and O than their predecessors.
With a galactic chemical evolution model better understood through these
measurements, the team will be able to independently infer stellar ages from
these isotopic abundances, as well as planetary ages from Mg, Si and other
elements that are commonly found on rocky bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.