* 2108722
* Hierarchical Assembly of Peptide Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jean Chmielewski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 598,361.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jean Chmielewski of Purdue University
will conduct research building unique structures on a nano- to micro-scale using
ball and stick atomic and molecular building blocks. Professor Chmielewski will
study how the size and shape of the prepared structures can be controlled by
changing the building blocks at a molecular level. These nano- and micro-
structures will be developed to ultimately encapsulate protein drugs for
delivery to cells, and to make self-healing materials. Professor Chmielewski
will continue to diligently train chemistry students and work toward improving
the diversity of the chemistry graduate student population at Purdue University.
In this way a new generation of diverse scientists will be available to tackle
the technological challenges of the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaining a
fundamental understanding of the interactions between nanomaterials and
biopolymers, such as proteins and nucleic acids, would have a broad impact on a
number of applications, from tissue engineering to device fabrication. Overall,
the experiments to be conducted under this award seek to expand supramolecular
assembly to the study of peptide-based biomaterial hosts with biopolymer guests
and examine cells and as self-replicating materials. The intellectual merit of
the proposed studies is focused on gaining a firm understanding of the
parameters and mechanisms of macromolecular supramolecular assembly within
peptide crystals, nanotubes and nanospheres. At the end of the proposed funding
period, the Chmielewski team aims to have optimized conditions for the
generation of distinct peptide nano- and microstructures on demand and a basic
understanding of the mechanistic underpinnings of the supramolecular assembly
process. Key areas of study include the interaction of the peptide nano- and
microstructures with biopolymers, and their interactions with cells, and self-
replication of these peptide-based structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.