* 2108287
* Collaborative Research:  LoVoCCS: The Local Volume Complete Cluster Survey
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ian Dell'Antonio, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 431,665.00

The primary goal of this project is to map the dark matter structures in a large
sample of nearby galaxy clusters using data from the Dark Energy Camera at the
Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory. The investigators will study how dark
matter forms structures of various sizes in the clusters. The images will
provide the nearby comparison sample to the more distant clusters that will be
observed with the Vera C. Rubin Observatory and the Nancy Grace Roman Space
Telescope. The project includes programs for student research at the high
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. The outreach programs will take
place in both the Providence Public School system and the south-east Ohio
Appalachian region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distribution of mass in a complete
sample of clusters will be measured via weak lensing, measuring the distortion
of the observed shape of background galaxies due to the curvature of space-time
around the matter in the cluster. This distribution of mass will be mapped and
compared to the distribution of cluster galaxies and X-ray emitting gas. Two-
dimensional maps of the mass will be reconstructed with high enough resolution
to identify individual concentrations within the cluster (“substructures”). In
addition, the effect of these substructures on the estimates of the total mass
of the clusters will be measured. This will determine the mass calibration
biases in upcoming cluster surveys. These observations are similar in depth to
the upcoming observations from the Vera Rubin Observatory, enabling a transient
survey in and behind nearby clusters with the first-year of data from the Legacy
Survey of Space and Time (LSST). The project will make public releases of deep
optical images, catalogs, and maps of the dark matter yearly. These releases are
designed to help other researchers become familiar with the data format and
quality of the future LSST datasets. The investigators will recruit students
into science using proven outreach programs, while partnering with the staff at
Ladd Observatory, the Brown Science Prep program, and the Providence Children’s
Museum. Through these programs, the investigators will introduce fundamental
aspects of astronomy to the large percentage of underprivileged and minority
students in the Providence public school system. A similar outreach program will
be implemented in the historically under-served and poverty-stricken south-east
Ohio Appalachian region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.