* 2108546
* Second-Order Variational Properties of Composite Optimization and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Ebrahim Sarabi, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2024
* USD 194,957.00

This project will study the behavior of solutions to optimization problems,
which appear in applications such as regression models, sparse approximation of
signals, image processing, and sensor location problems. In addition, the
principal investigator will design numerical algorithms that can solve the
optimization problems efficiently. The investigator will exploit various tools
and techniques of variational analysis for these optimization problems with data
that may not be differentiable in the usual way, and study applications in
numerical algorithms. Graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher will
participate in this project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project investigates
second-order variational properties of important classes of composite
optimization problems, including piecewise linear-quadratic composite problems
and different classes of matrix optimization problems. The proposal has three
main objectives. First, the investigator will study parabolic regularity and
twice epi-differentiability of the aforementioned classes of optimization
problems. In particular, the investigator pays special attention to the
augmented Lagrangians associated with composite optimization problems, studies
their twice epi-differentiability, and characterizes the quadratic growth
condition for this class of functions via the second-order sufficient condition.
Second, the investigator will study important stability properties of composite
problems, including strong metric regularity, strong metric subregularity, and
non-criticality of their Lagrange multipliers. Finally, the investigator will
conduct local and global convergence analysis of the augmented Lagrangian method
for important classes of composite optimization problems with special emphasis
on those optimization problems whose Lagrange multipliers are not unique. In
doing so, the investigator mainly relies on the concept of the second
subderivative and its recent developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.