* 2108517
* VERITAS Upgrade for Optical Monitoring of Astronomical Transients
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Juan Santander, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2024
* USD 700,292.00

The Very Energetic Radiation Telescope Array System (VERITAS) is a specialized
observatory located in southern Arizona, specifically designed for “gamma-ray
astronomy”. VERITAS is comprised of four 12m optical reflectors designed to
detect the faint flashes of blue light from very energetic photons (gamma-rays)
interacting in the Earth’s atmosphere. Such gamma-ray photons come from violent
processes in the universe such as exploding stars, super-massive black holes in
the centers of galaxies, and very dense magnetized stars (called neutron stars).
This project will modify the electronics of the VERITAS telescopes to allow
continuous monitoring of optical variations in visible light from astrophysical
objects while also capturing these gamma-ray events, to provide sensitivity to
astronomical sources that are too faint, or vary too rapidly to be detected by
conventional optical telescopes. There are two key scientific programs this
instrumentation advancement will permit. Firstly, a search for optical
counterparts of fast radio bursts (FRBs) – mysterious rapid outbursts of radio
waves originating from very distant galaxies. Secondly, serendipitous
observations of shadows cast by small outer-solar system bodies (typically
beyond the orbit of Neptune) that transit nearby stars. The project plans to be
active in informing the public of their work through an outreach program with
St. Louis City Schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal is aimed at
producing a new type of observatory sensitive to astrophysical phenomena with
very rapid optical variability. Realizing this capability can be achieved by an
improvement of the electronics on the VERITAS (Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array) gamma-ray observatory. Improvements to the VERITAS waveform
digitizer electronics would transform the VERITAS instrument into an optical
observatory with unmatched sensitivity for observations on timescales less than
10 msec. The wide-field of view (3.5 deg) large aperture (12m diameter dishes)
photon-counting detectors, and very high-speed readout (up to 500 MHz) would
make this a uniquely capable instrument for studying the universe in a new
temporal window. A novel approach is proposed whereby the programmable logic on
the FADC boards would be changed in a way to provide high-speed streaming
computation of the light intensity through a photon counting technique. The
modified electronics would allow the system to continue to function as a gamma-
ray telescope, while providing continuous monitoring of optical variability over
the entire field-of-view. The project also plans interdisciplinary transfer of
the technology developed to a cancer detection project at the same
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.