* 2108390
* Gapped ground state phases of quantum lattice systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bruno Nachtergaele, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 428,000.00

The next generation of quantum technologies is poised to exploit new quantum
phases of matter with properties quite unlike the well-known quantum materials
exhibiting superfluidity and superconductivity. Good mathematical models for
most aspects of superconductivity already exist, and superconducting materials
have been successfully applied in many technological applications for decades.
The new phases that will be studied in this project, however, are described in
terms of particle-like entities called anyons, which have properties quite
distinct from the traditional bosons and fermions that describe traditional
materials (including superfluids and superconductors). Anyons are potential
candidates to build quantum memory and other quantum information devices. Anyons
have already been experimentally realized in fractional quantum Hall materials,
and surely still hold surprises to be revealed in further studies. In this
project, the principal investigator (PI) and collaborators will develop
fundamental mathematical techniques required for the effective description of
these new materials. This research falls squarely within NSF's Big Idea 'Quantum
Leap'. Graduate and undergraduate students will be actively involved with the
project and will be offered opportunities to interact with a range of
researchers in pure and applied science and encouraged to pursue internships in
technology companies as part of their education. Thus, the project will help
prepare the workforce for the emerging quantum technology industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research problems to be pursued in this project
fall in two main directions. 1) Stability of the gap above the ground state
under small modifications of the interactions in the Hamiltonian. In particular,
the PI will prove results for the bulk gap (away from boundaries) for systems
with multiple ground states, for lattice fermion models, and for important
classes of models that do not satisfy the usual frustration-freeness condition.
To drop the frustration-freeness assumption will prompt us to develop new
techniques. 2) Spectral properties of fractional quantum Hall (FQH) systems.
Building on their recent work for the 1/3 filled case, the principal
investigator and collaborators will analyze the situation of other filling
fractions. The project will also study the stability of FQH phases and
investigate the derivation of Haldane's pseudo-potential models beyond the
existing 'finite-N' treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.