* 2108339
* Research in Theoretical Nuclear and Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Akif Baha Balantekin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The primary goal of this project at the interface of nuclear physics, astronomy,
and particle physics is to explore one of the outstanding questions in
fundamental physics, namely the role of neutrinos in the origin and formation of
chemical elements. A second goal is to explore the impact of magnetic fields on
element formation. This is very timely since scientists now have access to a
multitude of tools such as state-of-the-art terrestrial telescopes as well as
space observatories, supplemented with neutrino, cosmic-ray, and gravitational
wave observations. These multi-messenger signals will enable us to benchmark and
test predictions. Additionally this research activity contributes to the
training of a highly skilled workforce, both at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison and at the other institutions with which the principal investigator
(PI)collaborates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a study of the
collective oscillations of neutrinos, which are emergent nonlinear flavor
evolution phenomena instigated by neutrino-neutrino interactions in
astrophysical environments with sufficiently high neutrino densities. Most of
the elements heavier than iron are thought to be produced by the capture of
neutrons on seed nuclei such as iron. Presently, it is not known with any
certainty where the rapid neutron capture process (r-process) occurs. Possible
sites of the r-process include matter evaporated from the surface of a hot
neutron star formed following a supernova explosion, the merging of two neutron
stars into a black hole, and accretion disks in gamma-ray bursts. All these
environments contain a very large number of neutrinos. Neutrinos, since they can
convert protons into neutrons and vice versa, determine the neutron-to-proton
ratio in all those environments. Given that collective neutrino oscillations can
significantly impact this ratio and the resulting yields of nucleosynthesis, the
PI and his students will critically examine the validity of mean-field
approximations utilized in current calculations. Tools from quantum information
science, such as the entanglement entropy, facilitate this analysis. The PI will
also compare predictions of different approximations for nucleosynthesis
yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of "Windows on
the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas
for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.