* 2108243
* Janus Liposomes in Motion
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Wei Zhan, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Wei Zhan and his research group at Auburn
University will develop a new type of biocompatible, micromotor based on Janus
liposomes. Janus liposomes are small spherical particles of lipid bilayer formed
by self-assembly in water. Janus liposomes are comprised of two halves with
different structures – hence their name after, Janus, the two-faced Roman god of
change and duality. If successful, this research will yield small-sized objects
that can perform directional motion in response to low electric fields, light,
or biological agents such as cholesterol and enzymes. These stimulus-responsive
moving particles potentially will be useful in several areas, for example, as
biosensors or for targeted cargo delivery. Results of this research will be
broadly disseminated in the literature, but also through internet-based
educational platforms that reach the general public. In addition, the Zhan group
plans to conduct outreach activities such as providing for hands-on science-
related experiences for elementary school students and their
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Zhan group at Auburn University has pioneered
the development of asymmetric Janus liposomes as a new class of lipid-based
assembled nanostructure. In this ongoing research, Janus liposomes will be
designed to contain reactive building blocks that would allow for directional
movement against Brownian motion and viscous drag in water, taking advantage of
their broken surface symmetry and chemical heterogeneity. Three fundamental
driving forces or gateways will be employed to propel these self-assembled
particles: (i) electric fields,(ii) light and (iii) enzymatic reactions (lowers
activation barrier). Together, these efforts will substantially advance
understanding on the mechanisms, capabilities and applications of
active/directional motion of Janus liposomes – an underexplored class of
materials in an otherwise rapidly growing field. Such a systematic approach will
also likely yield insight into building multi-responsive, function-programmable
micromotors. This research is targeting a lipid architecture that has long
served as a prototype of biological cells and has the potential to shed new
light on the function and collective behavior of natural
motors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.