* 2108129
* Ingassing of Hydrogen in the Interiors of Sub-Neptunes and Gas Giants
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sang-Heon Shim, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2024
* USD 320,615.00

The interiors of large planets such as Jupiter, Saturn, or Neptune are at very
high temperatures and pressures. The behavior at the boundary between hydrogen-
rich atmospheres and mineral-rich cores under these conditions is not well
understood. This project will perform experiments on Earth using high-pressure
and high-temperature conditions to determine how hydrogen interacts and is
possibly absorbed into the materials of the core. The results will help answer
questions about the interiors and history of giant planets. The project will
share their results through education at the university level as well as through
public outreach events at Arizona State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will use diamond anvil cells to subject silicates and iron metal alloys
in hydrogen media to pressures up to 100 GPa and temperatures put to 4,600 K.
The resulting reactions will be analyzed using time-resolution X-ray
diffraction. The data from these experiments will help answer these key
questions: (1) Can hydrogen be ingassed to the interiors through chemical
reactions? (2) If ingassed, in what type of chemical forms would H exist (water,
metal alloys, or hydrides)? (3) Can H ingassing alter the mass-radius relations
of planets? and (4) Can such reactions be affected by the metallization of dense
liquid hydrogen and therefore be planet size dependent? The project includes an
undergraduate research program. Teaching modules for calculating mass-radius
relations of planets will be developed and shared as an open-source teaching
resource in public code repositories. Public outreach presentations will be made
and campus-wide outreach events at Arizona State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.