* 2108310
* Small Molecule Uptake and Transport in Living and Model Bacterial Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Tessa Calhoun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2024
* USD 0.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Tessa Calhoun of the University of Tennessee Knoxville is
studying how organization in bacterial membranes can alter their interaction
with small molecules. Membranes are fundamental biological components, finely
tuned via evolution to balance the protection of the living system with an
ability to selectively move to the inside of cells molecular cargo essential for
life. Membranes are composed of a wide range of different lipid molecules and
proteins. These molecules can cluster into domains that result in multiple,
unique environments within the same membrane. Using a novel light-probing and
microscopy-based approach, Dr. Calhoun plans to make possible the observation of
small molecules as they enter membranes and move between these domains within
the membrane. Observations with membranes of living bacteria will directly
inform on new directions for model membrane formation in artificial cells. Dr.
Calhoun is also developing a first-year studies course to bring together women
majoring in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) fields early
in their career development to engage them in dialogue about the importance of
diversity, implicit bias, and imposter syndrome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A deeper
understanding of how the membrane interacts with exogenous molecules is integral
for tailoring molecules designed to target membranes, as well as in developing
model systems that facilitate controllable transport. The overall goal of the
Calhoun research program is to test hypotheses regarding the functional rules
that dictate the behavior of small molecules within the membrane environment of
living bacterial cells using second harmonic generation spectroscopy,
microscopy, and kinetic modeling. Studies will be conducted on living bacterial
cells to provide specific insight on the optimization of small molecule-membrane
interactions. This includes measuring dissociation constants for these small
molecules and relating these to structural motifs and the presence of functional
membrane micro-domain disruptors. The Calhoun group will examine small molecule
behavior with model membranes designed to mimic those of bacteria with the
intent of improving model membrane design by rational incorporation of membrane
ingredients that facilitate transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.