* 2108621
* Shape-Shifting Peptide-Based Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Vincent Conticello, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Vincent Conticello of Emory University
will investigate the design, structure, and functional properties of shape-
shifting nanomaterials derived from peptides that mimic natural tissues. They
are capable of changing their shape in a defined manner in response to changes
in their local environment. The materials will be designed to form two-
dimensional, sheet-like structures that can roll up reversibly to form tubes or
other more compact structures. The reversibility of this process is promising in
creating nanomaterials that can be tailored for societally important
applications such as the controlled encapsulation and delivery of therapeutic
agents. This project will involve skills drawn from scientific disciplines
including chemistry, materials science, and biology. Students involved in this
project will receive training in cutting-edge research methods in peptide design
and the structural analysis of nanomaterials, which will prepare them
intellectually for the challenging scientific problems encountered in the
twenty-first century workforce. Scientific material related to the proposed
research will be presented in a newly developed introductory core course, CHEM
204, and its associated laboratory experience, which focuses on macromolecular
structure and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The controlled fabrication of
functionally responsive assemblies remains a key contemporary challenge in
nanoscience. While sequence-defined polymers (e.g., peptides, proteins, and
structurally related foldamers) are promising building blocks for constructing a
myriad of assemblies with excellent nanoscale structural order, the ability to
reliably and predictably encode responsive behavior and higher-order function
lies beyond current synthetic capabilities, especially when compared to the
multicomponent macromolecular machines of living systems. This proposal
describes and develops an approach to the design of shape-shifting nanomaterials
through fabrication of two-dimensional peptide assemblies that display surface
asymmetry. The central hypothesis of the proposal will focus on the concept that
surface asymmetry in designed peptide assemblies can be employed as a mechanism
to introduce unbalanced surface stresses, which can be manifested at the meso-
scale in terms of reversible and controllable morphological transitions. Three
aims are described to investigate the structural scope of the process and
investigate the potential of shape-shifting for materials applications. It is
envisioned that the proposed structures will provide new opportunities for
creation of dynamically responsive materials that can be tailored for specific
applications that include controlled capture and release of substrates, gated
catalysis and energy transduction, through incorporation of molecular mechanisms
that can actuate this higher-order structural
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.