* 2108414
* NSF-BSF: The Frequency and Mass-Ratio Distribution of Super-Earths in KMTNet
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Yee, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2024
* USD 678,032.00

A team led by the Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory will measure
the frequency and masses of planets around distant stars in wide orbits down to
the mass of several times the Earths. The survey will use ground-based data and
the findings will help us understand the context in which the Solar System and
humanity exist in the Universe. In addition, the investigating team will search
for black holes within the dataset. This project will advance the workforce by
training a postdoc and providing undergraduate students with the opportunity to
participate in cutting edge research. It will also strengthen ties between
scientists in the United States, Israel, and the Republic of Korea. This project
is supported by both the National Science Foundation and the US-Israel
Binational Science Foundation to further collaborations between the
astrophysical communities in the two countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
of the project is to develop an algorithm to objectively search for, and detect,
planets in over 10,000 events from the Korea Microlensing Telescope Network
(KMTNet) survey. This sample of events is a factor of several larger than
previous work. A search algorithm will result in a statistically robust sample
of planets. Injection and recovery methods will be used to evaluate the efficacy
of the detection algorithm and to calculate limits on planets for the individual
light curves. Combining these limits with the detected planets will yield the
mass-ratio distribution and frequency of planets. Of particular importance are
super-Earth planets, which cannot be detected by other techniques at the orbital
separations probed by this study. This project will also develop a new technique
for measuring astrometry on the KMTNet images in order to search for
microlensing by black holes. If there are microlensing events in the KMTNet
dataset due to stellar-mass black holes 5 to 30 times the mass of the Sun, their
masses should be measurable with this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.