* 2108673
* The Petabyte Project for Fast Radio Transients
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Duncan Lorimer, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 432,848.00

We are in a golden era in the investigation of flashing, short-duration
astronomical events detected by radio telescopes. Progress in understanding
novel, highly luminous phenomena like fast radio bursts (FRBs) and highly
intermittent pulsars is being enabled by the broad availability of archives, new
observing systems on a host of telescopes worldwide, and extensive computing
systems in place to provide throughput for huge amounts of data. This field has
rapidly evolved in the past decade. Searches for such transients have been done
by constantly evolving analysis techniques, each improving on the last. However,
new techniques are typically applied to only a small set of data. A research
group at West Virginia University (WVU) will undertake “The Petabyte Project,”
which will harness many diverse archival and new data sets to perform an
unprecedented uniform search across multiple observing systems and radio
frequencies. This search for transient events has key analysis structures in
place that were not available in past searches, including a systematic check of
completeness of the constituent surveys, and a rigorously tested machine-
learning-based event classifier. To broaden the impact of their work, the
researchers will work with two strong existing outreach programs at WVU, the
Science Public Outreach Team (SPOT) to introduce area high-school students to
machine learning applications, and the Pulsar Search Collaboratory (PSC) summer
program, to enable high school students to participate in the research by
helping to classify radio sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be several
key scientific, software, and data outcomes from this search. The work will lead
to the discovery of new FRBs and pulsars, particularly at high radio frequencies
where few searches have been done. It will provide the first statements on the
completeness of FRB searches as a function of dispersion measure (distance) and
radio frequency, leading to new knowledge on the diversity and range of FRB
properties. The team will also provide the first broad, blind multi-frequency
exploration of extreme intermittency in the radio pulsar population. All code
generated by this project will be open-access and accompanied by in-depth
documentation, allowing broad use of the unified transient data read/write tool,
machine-learning suite, pipeline, and completeness assessment software. Labelled
search products will be made public on a permanent server for use in future
interference, fast-transients, or machine-learning
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.