* 2108699
* Improving the Properties of Optical Anion Sensors using Transmembrane Transporters and Extracting Agents
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Nathalie Busschaert, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Nathalie Busschaert of Tulane University is studying
a novel way to improve the selectivity and sensitivity of optical anion sensors.
Anions play an important role in life, from storing the genetic code on the
polyanion DNA, to being the active ingredient in agricultural fertilizers and
acting as a precursor to other chemicals of high value to industrial processes.
Consequently, chemists have been designing systems that can sense anionic
species through a variety of methods. However, one of the biggest challenges in
sensor development is the detection of only the anion of interest (selectivity)
in the concentration range that is relevant for the anion of interest
(sensitivity). Dr. Busschaert will use a combination of molecule-based ion
transporters or extracting agents with molecules whose color changes upon anion
exposure to generate highly selective and sensitive anion sensors. The
fundamental principles to be discovered are poised to have an impact on light-
based sensor development, as well as isolation or enrichment of anions by their
transportation through membranes. The project is anticipated to provide highly
selective anion sensors whose sensing signal changes a great deal with tiny
changes in the amount of anion present. The outcomes are anticipated to lay the
groundwork for applications that can have a broader impact on the numerous
applications of anion sensors, such as measurements in the medical diagnostics
and environmental fields. This work is expected to have a further broader impact
on the participation of women in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering,
Mathematics) fields, as Dr. Busschaert will be actively involved in a variety of
professional development activities with female undergraduate and graduate
students at Tulane University, as well as with those resulting from interactions
with national professional societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
hypothesis of the project is that transmembrane transport or liquid-liquid
extraction can provide a ‘double selectivity filter’, whereby only those
analytes that are transported/extracted and cause an optical change in a
liposome-encapsulated chromophore will be sensed by the system. This means that
neither the transporter nor the fluorophore needs to be highly selective by
themselves and are therefore structurally simple, and as a result, inexpensive.
In addition, transmembrane anion transport has the potential to enrich the
concentration of the desired anion inside the liposome, leading to an increase
in the sensitivity of the response of the encapsulated chromophore. The
hypothesis will be tested by performing a series of ultraviolet-visible and
fluorescence spectroscopy measurements to determine the selectivity and
sensitivity of a carefully selected group of transport- and extraction-based
optical sensors against a variety of anionic species. This project is jointly
funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), with partial support from the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental
and Transport Systems (CBET) Division of the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.