* 2108670
* RAFT Step-Growth Polymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Wei You of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill will explore a new polymerization method that will allow the facile
construction of polymers with embedded functionality in their backbone through a
generally applicable process. The success of this project will lead to a simple
and facile methodology of designing functional macromolecules with precisely
defined architectures, unlocking new opportunities for broad applications.
Education, collaboration, and outreach are integral aspects of this project. All
trainees involved in this project will become proficient in organic and polymer
syntheses, and a variety of characterizations. For the past fifteen years, the
You research group has successfully recruited students of underrepresented
groups into research, and has developed and supervised laboratory exercises for
middle and high-school students through various educational programs at UNC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In polymer chemistry, free radical-centered
polymerizations are almost synonymous to the chain-growth mechanism. As one of
the most important controlled free-radical polymerizations, Reversible-Addition
Fragmentation chain Transfer (RAFT) polymerization has been widely adopted due
to its simplicity and versatility of controlling the degree of polymerization
(DP) of free radical polymers, enabled by the addition of chain transfer agents
(CTAs) known as the RAFT agents. However, inherent to the chain-growth nature of
conventional RAFT, the backbone of such polymers usually consists of only inert
carbon atoms, while desired functionality is introduced through the pendent
groups. This contrasts to step-growth polymerization that typically offers
multifunctional heteroatom backbones, which can easily allow the introduction of
functionalities into the backbone. The You group recently discovered a unique
approach to achieve RAFT step-growth polymerization. Building upon significant
results, this project aims to further explore this exciting new polymerization,
with two objectives: (1) to establish the general principle and mechanism of
RAFT step-growth polymerization and expand the expand the chemistry with other
RAFT agents and monomer family; and (2) to understand the impact of reaction
conditions on the RAFT step-growth polymerization. If successful, this project
will construct important steps to achieve the long-term goal of establishing a
new polymerization methodology, RAFT step-growth polymerization, for broader use
to enable synthesis of new materials that were previously
unachievable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.