* 2108080
* Diffusion, Dissipation Enhancement, and Mixing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gautam Iyer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 230,279.00

Diffusion and mixing are key physical phenomena that arise in applications
ranging from micro-fluids to meteorology, to cosmology. Diffusion tends to
spread out clusters and tries to disperse them, while mixing weaves the clusters
and tends to intersperse layers of one cluster with another. This project seeks
to quantify their interaction and determine how it impacts the dynamics of
physical and chemical fluid systems. Improving the understanding of how they
interact has both direct and indirect consequences in scientific areas, such as
the study of chemotaxis, of phase separation of binary mixtures including
alloys, and of the earth's magnetic field. The research will be carried out with
active involvement from students and postdoctoral associates, who will be
trained across a broad range of fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
examine several issues concerning enhanced dissipation, diffusion, and mixing.
In incompressible fluids, stirring induces mixing by filamentation and
facilitates the formation of small scales. Diffusion, on the other hand,
efficiently damps small scales and the balance between these two phenomena can
lead to enhanced dissipation - the tendency of solutions to dissipate energy
faster than normal. Four goals of the project are to construct simple and
explicit family of flows that enhance dissipation by an arbitrarily large
amount; to use dissipation enhancement to address physically meaningful
questions concerning nonlinear partial differential equations; to obtain sharp
estimates for the dissipation enhancement in terms of the mixing rates; and to
investigate residual diffusivity, and the effect of dissipation enhancement on
the long-time behavior of magnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.