* 2108111
* Collaborative Research: Probing Coordination Specificity of Metalloprotein Domains with Peptide-Polymer Amphiphile Self Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Abigail Knight, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,081.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Abigail Knight (University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill) and Dr. Yaroslava Yingling (North Carolina State University) aim to
develop tools to better understand how the folding and arrangement of protein
and protein-like molecules impacts their ability to bind to metal ions. Metal
binding materials have significant potential for applications such as water
purification or metal-binding therapies but designing materials that bind only
to the requisite ions in complex environments, such as water treatment plants or
biological fluids, remains a challenge. Inspired by natural metal-binding
proteins, the team aims to generate experimental and computational tools to
systematically study how to control the 3D structure of a peptide to promote
desired metal binding properties. The research findings will provide design
principles for the advancement of next generation materials within synthetic
biology, drug delivery, and nanoelectronics. A database of this information will
be created to aggregate the information generated from these pursuits in
addition to the active recruitment of contributions from other researchers.
This, alongside the continuing efforts of both PIs to communicate this research
to the public, will maximize the impact of this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlled coordination of metal ions is critical for
engineering complex functions into next generation materials. However, rational
design of these materials is a longstanding challenge with obstacles arising
from many interrelated properties contributing to the coordination spheres. This
project focuses on the development of a supramolecular platform for
systematically evaluating the role of peptide conformation on the specificity of
metal-ion coordination and affinity for target metal ions. Metalloprotein-
mimetic self-assembled materials are of particular interest as the
supramolecular assembly provides a modular platform for tuning the surface
curvature, and thus conformation, of peptides in a metal-binding site. The goal
of this iterative experimental/computational study is to provide a fundamental
understanding of how the assembled morphology and peptide conformation
contribute to metal binding specificity, unlocking rules of metal ion
homeostasis and providing insight into the design of proteins and materials with
complex metal-binding profiles. The results will enable a deeper understanding
of the role of macromolecule conformation on metal binding selectivity and
affinity, which has the potential to help overcome significant hurdles in the de
novo design of metallo-proteins and multi-stimuli responsive materials. The
products of this proposal will be integrated into a database and to make
available to the supramolecular assembly and protein-mimetic communities with a
new source of valuable information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.