* 2108767
* CDS&amp;E: On-Line Extraction and Separation Method Development using Surrogate Optimization and Machine Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Victoria Chen, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2024
* USD 325,792.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Kevin Schug and his analytical chemistry group will collaborate
with Victoria Chen, Shouyi Wang, Chen Kan, and Jay Rosenberger with the Center
on Stochastic Modeling, Optimization, &amp; Statistics (COSMOS) at the
University of Texas at Arlington to explore advanced optimization procedures for
on-line analytical instrumentation. Trace chemical analysis often requires that
a sample be prepared beforehand to selectively extract a certain class of
compounds or to reduce interferences. Manual sample preparation is common, but
can introduce error relative to an automated approach. The Schug group focuses
on an automated on-line sample preparation and chemical analysis platform
utilizing powerful methods known as supercritical fluid extraction and
chromatography. This analytical system is very broadly applicable to the
measurement of a wide variety of chemical compounds. However, there are many
variables that need to be optimized, and their combined effect on the outcome of
the measurement is difficult to rationalize. To address this challenge, the team
is developing a machine learning-based surrogate optimization procedure to
efficiently explore optimal conditions. The results of the surrogate
optimization runs will be modeled using novel multi-task learning for “small
data,” so as to provide general knowledge for approximating optimal
instrumentation conditions. The graduate and undergraduate students involved in
this project will gain complementary experience in advanced data handling and
analytical measurements. Results of the work will be widely disseminated at
local, regional, and national conferences, and in peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Online supercritical fluid extraction (SFE)
coupled with supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC) offers automated sample
preparation and chemical analysis over a very broad application space. The team
is integrating statistics, machine learning, and operations research to enable
SFE-SFC method development. SFE-SFC, especially combined with mass spectrometry
(MS) detection, has near-universal capabilities for comprehensive analysis of
small molecules contained in solid samples. In pursuit of these aims, the team
is (1) exploring innovative representations for input features such as sample
material, analyte, and SFC column chemistry; (2) developing new experimental
design (DoE) processes over the input feature space and over the experimental
parameter space that comply with the constraints of the SFE-SFC system; (3)
implementing the DoE process within a rigorous multiple-objective surrogate
optimization that incorporates provably-optimal techniques from mixed integer
linear and quadratic programming; and (4) deriving "small data" multi-task
learning algorithms integrating nonparametric Bayesian modeling with Gaussian
processes to construct a flexible multi-response predictive model for the
optimized parameters over the input feature space. SFE-SFC has the potential to
supplant other methods that are off-line, less efficient, and less “green.” This
research aims to vastly reduce the future burden for those who implement SFE-
SFC. Further, the developed DoE, machine learning, and surrogate optimization
methodologies for "small data" will be generally applicable and available for a
wide range of societal challenges in domains such as healthcare and “green”
building, for which the sample of patients or buildings is typically
limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.