* 2108446
* Connecting Multiwavelength Variability of Protoplanetary Disks and Their Dynamic Host Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Catherine Espaillat, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 464,331.00

The team will study a wide set of observations taken at different wavelengths
with a suite of observatories of the Classical T Tauri Star (CTTS) GM Aur and
its dusty protoplanetary disk. The month-long dataset, collected in December
2019, represents the largest time-coordinated observation campaign of a CTTS. It
comprises observations in wavelengths ranging from the radio to the X-ray. It
includes ground-based observations from the CHIRON echelle spectrometer on the
SMARTS 1.5 m telescope, the Las Cumbres Observatory and ALMA, as well as space-
based observations from Swift, TESS and the Hubble Space Telescope. The
objective of the work is to understand the influence of variable high-energy
radiation fields on the protoplanetary disk. Additionally, the team will
maintain and expand LUMA, a peer mentoring program started by the PI. The team
will also conduct a career development workshop focused on astronomers from
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching question to be
answered by this work is whether (and to what degree) high-energy radiation
fields can influence the evolution of a protoplanetary disk and impact its
properties. In particular, the team is interested in determining whether there
are chemical and structural changes due to these radiation fields. The team will
measure mass accretion rates and examine accretion structures in the disk. They
will also measure the radiation field generated by the accretion process, as
well as the structure of the accretion column and the flow illuminating the
disk. The team will use CHIRON optical spectrometry, LCOGT photometry, TESS
images, and HST data. The team will also model CO emission lines in the GM Aur
disk. They will obtain CO emission data from ALMA and use disk models to derive
the disk chemistry, using co-incident UV and X-ray luminosities as constraints
on the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.