* 2108373
* RECONS Explores the Long-Term Behavior of Nearby Red Dwarfs
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Todd Henry, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 493,670.00

This project is conducting a reconnaissance of the nearest stars to the Sun, to
a distance of about 80 light years. The team is focused on the long-term
behavior of the smallest stars, known as red dwarfs. Although these are the
smallest true stars, the red dwarfs are the largest in number, accounting for
more than three-quarters of all stars. It is important to understand how the red
dwarfs compare to the Sun in temperature, size, how active they are, and whether
or not they are orbited by other stars or planets. This project will investigate
what types of companions orbit these most common stars in the Galaxy and how the
light from these stars changes over timescales of weeks to decades. This
investigation will provide insight into the environments of the planets around
such stars. The project also provides training for a diverse group of students
in the techniques of astrometric observations and in managing data dissemination
resources for the astronomical community, the media, and the wider
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cornerstone of the RECONS (REsearch Consortium
On Nearby Stars) effort is an observing program using a CCD camera at the SMARTS
0.9m telescope at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile, that has
been underway since 1999. Observations, now extending for more than twenty
years, are being made on a target sample of about five hundred of the nearest
red dwarfs to discover and characterize the orbital architectures of stellar,
brown dwarf, and Jovian planetary companions on Solar System scales.
Additionally, monitoring of the photometric variability of the same stars
permits characterization of changes over medium (rotation), and long (spot
cycle) timescales. Such variability is linked to magnetic activity in the star.
Such investigations are important as the answers provide insight into the
environments experienced by orbiting planets around the most common stars in the
Galaxy. The project also provides opportunities for young astronomers to learn
astrometric and photometric techniques, as well as hands-on observing
experience. Access to the SMARTS/0.9-meter telescope for this long term project
and for the astronomical community will be maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.