* 2108306
* Collaborative Research: Continuous-Flow Hyperpolarization of Liquids Utilizing Parahydrogen and Heterogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Clifford Bowers, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry (CHE), and partial co-funding from two other CHE programs,
Chemical Structures, Dynamics, and Mechanisms - A (CSDM-A) , and Chemical
Catalysis (CAT) and also from the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) Division, Professors Clifford R. Bowers at the
University of Florida and Wenyu Huang at Iowa State University seek to develop
new instrumentation and protocols for enhancing the sensitivity of nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, an important method for characterizing
the composition and structure of chemical structures and the foundation of
magnetic resonance imaging â€“ a major tool for medical diagnostics. The team is
developing continuous-flow methods and advanced intermetallic nanoparticle
catalysts in efforts to improve the sensitivity of NMR spectroscopy by more than
a factor of 10,000. The research will provide research experiences for high
school and undergraduate students coordinated through the Center for Pre-
collegiate Education and Training (CPET) at the University of Florida and
several NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) programs. In Ames,
Iowa, outreach activities additionally include science shows and involvement of
undergraduates and high school students in research activities and
demonstrations incorporating project concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) relies on population differences among nuclear spin
energy levels (i.e. spin polarization) in a molecule. In conventional NMR, spin
polarization is induced by placing the sample in a high static magnetic field.
However, even at the highest available magnetic fields, thermal equilibrium spin
polarizations near ambient temperature are no greater than about 0.01%, and
hence the NMR transition intensities are inherently weak. Parahydrogen-based
hyperpolarization can provide a robust and cost-effective method that is
scalable and compatible with rapid and continuous production of molecules in
fluids with polarizations approaching 100%. For production of hyperpolarized
liquids from parahydrogen, heterogeneous catalysis offers key benefits: the
solid catalysts can provide consistent activity (under appropriate conditions)
and the catalyst material can be easily separated from dissolved
hyperpolarization products. Advancement of solution-state hyperpolarization from
parahydrogen and heterogeneous catalysis requires a clear understanding of the
catalytic mechanism and parahydrogen spin dynamics after dissociation of the
molecule. The development of parahydrogen-enhanced polarization by continuous-
flow heterogeneous catalysis will facilitate fundamental studies of the
underlying mechanisms and spin dynamics of hyperpolarization from hydrogenation
reactions as well as non-hydrogenative processes such as surface-mediated
hyperpolarization from parahydrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.