* 2108288
* Expanding the Capabilities of SERS via Electronic Raman Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Sheldon, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,685.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Matthew Sheldon and his group at Texas A&amp;M University
are learning how to use a specific type of molecular sensor to obtain new
information about the changes in chemical systems when they interact with light
at a metal surface; namely, surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). This
information is important for understanding how light from the sun can be
converted into other forms of energy, such as chemical fuels. The molecular
sensors are based on metal surfaces that are precisely structured at the
nanometer scale. The reflection of light by these metal surfaces is strongly
modified when molecules are on the sensor surface in a way that provides unique,
identifying information about the molecules. The research team is examining a
background signal caused by the reflection of light from the surface. This
background signal is often ignored, but may provide new information about the
transfer of energy into or out of molecules at the surface when irradiated with
light, as well as additional information about the identity of the molecules.
The project will provide support for graduate and undergraduate research
students working in the Sheldon laboratory, and the team will work to recruit
first-generation college students from underrepresented groups starting in their
freshman year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, Matthew T. Sheldon and his
group are developing spectroscopic techniques to understand the photochemical
behavior of metal substrates that are used for molecular sensing via surface
enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). SERS spectroscopy typically measures the
vibrational spectrum of a molecule, but the electronic Raman (eR) response of
the metal SERS substrate also gives a strong “background” signal that has
traditionally been ignored. The eR signal is characteristic of the energy
distribution of electrons in the metal and can provide additional, unique
chemical insights compared with the molecular SERS signal. This research by the
Sheldon group examines how the eR signal can give detailed spectroscopic
insights into the dynamics of electron excitation and charge transfer, even when
there may be limited or ambiguous molecular signals (e.g. no Raman-active
species). The experiments will provide a foundation for SERS methodologies that
can provide quantitative insight into photochemistry and photocatalysis during
low fluence, continuous wave (CW) illumination that is similar to the conditions
that are relevant for solar energy conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.