* 2108684
* Elucidating mechanisms of biological hydrogen conversion through model metalloenzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Hannah Shafaat, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 09/30/2024
* USD 429,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Professor Hannah Shafaat of The Ohio State University will investigate
the factors that govern the activity of nickel-containing enzymes. Reductive
nickel enzymes are critical in the metabolic processes of diverse microorganisms
and perform valuable reactions such as hydrogen production, carbon dioxide
reduction, and methane oxidation. These efficient, complex enzymes operate with
high rates and full reversibility but have yet to be accurately reproduced in
synthetic systems, leaving many questions unanswered. To better understand
native nickel enzymes and learn how to harness this understanding for
anthropogenic processes, the Shafaat group will model the nickel-iron
hydrogenases using a robust, protein-based scaffold. The proposed studies on the
engineered enzymes are aimed at the elucidation of the reaction mechanisms along
with the identification of the key factors along the entire protein contributing
to catalysis. The research provides insight into how natural enzymes function
across a range of length- and timescales. Graduate, undergraduate, and high-
school students, including those from underserved communities, will be trained
in state-of-the-art research techniques spanning biological, inorganic,
physical, and analytical chemistry. This award also supports the development of
lectures and hands-on exercises to train members of the broader bioinorganic
community who attend the internationally recognized, biennial Penn State
Bioinorganic Workshop. This project will be integrated with outreach programs
spanning multiple age groups in greater Central Ohio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to address critical knowledge gaps about the naturally occurring
nickel-iron hydrogenases and related nickel-thiolate enzymes through the
development and characterization of a model hydrogenase enzyme, namely nickel-
substituted rubredoxin (NiRd). Prior work supported by the NSF in the Shafaat
group has established that NiRd is a functional mimic of hydrogenase that
exhibits high rates for hydrogen evolution. In the proposed work, spectroscopic
techniques, including electron paramagnetic resonance, nuclear magnetic
resonance, resonance Raman, and X-ray absorption, coupled with electrochemical
methods, will be employed to obtain high-resolution mechanistic information and
to reveal molecular-level contributors to hydrogen evolution activity. These
studies will provide detailed insight into the layers of control exerted by the
protein scaffold in both model and native metalloenzymes. The goals of the work
are to identify correlations between enzymatic structure and function and to
advance our understanding of biological hydrogen conversion. The research seeks
also to identify design principles for highly active artificial metalloenzymes,
with long-term implications for the development of sustainable catalysts for
small molecule activation reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.