* 2108012
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost Communication, Sensing, and Prediction for Precision Agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Vivek Mangal, WILO NETWORKS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 02/28/2023
* USD 275,694.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop low-cost, low-power, wireless
sensor networks with long lifetimes for high density deployments in the field,
primarily for precision agriculture. Existing solutions in the market consist of
sensor modules with bulky batteries and repeaters driven by solar panels which
drive up the cost. These batteries and repeaters are infeasible for large-scale
deployments. This project aims to provide sustainable solutions to increase the
accuracy and efficiency of agricultural operations, while maximizing the crop
yields and minimizing operational costs. The proposed sensor networks may also
serve as a solution for military surveillance in the field, forest-fire
prediction/mitigation, and smart highways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes the use of wake-up
receivers for radiofrequency (RF) communications, while also using the RF
communications for moisture sensing. This use of wake-up receivers and RF-based
sensing brings down the size and cost of the nodes and enables mesh networking.
The research objectives of the project include both evaluation of such a network
and the determination of the feasibility and reliability of wireless sensor
nodes deployed inside the soil across varying soil conditions and permittivity
variations. The outcome of the experiments will be a set of specifications for
integrated circuits (ICs) and networks required for a dense network deployment
in precision agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.