* 2108316
* Mechanistic Studies of Water Disinfectants on Iron Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kathryn Perrine, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 258,537.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Kathryn Perrine and her students will study fundamental chemical
interactions between chloramine, a compound used for water disinfection, with
iron, iron oxide, and iron carbonate surfaces. Disinfectants are used to treat
pathogens in distribution water lines, but also react with natural organic
matter to produce undesired byproducts that can make their way into ground
water. (Mono)chloramine is a preferred oxidizing disinfectant since it produces
fewer byproducts than other chlorine-containing disinfectants. Iron, iron oxide,
and iron carbonate surfaces are ubiquitous in the environment and present as
minerals and iron-containing distribution lines. The surface adsorption
mechanism and deactivation of chloramine on iron interfaces is not well
understood. This project will investigate the surface chemical reaction and
decomposition mechanisms of chloramine on well-defined interfaces. These studies
have the potential to advance our understanding of oxidation mechanisms in
complex mixtures in aqueous systems that impact the effect of contaminants in
water quality. Undergraduate students will experience summer research
internships and precollege outreach activities. Students in grades 6-12 will
participate in inquiry-based labs that will be developed as part of Michigan
Tech’s summer youth programs. These activities will focus on aqueous surface
chemistry and corrosion, effects of pH on metal dissolution, and surface
reactions at the liquid/solid interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key objectives
will be addressed on the kinetic adsorption and decomposition mechanism of
chloramine on iron interfaces at the gas/solid interface on well-defined single
crystal surfaces. The influence of the iron surface sites and hydroxyl sites
from water and H2 dissociation will promote or block the chloramine reaction and
decomposition pathways. The adsorption of chloramine on iron at the liquid/solid
interface will be measured using the PI’s new in situ polarized modulated
infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (PM-IRRAS) method at the
air/liquid/solid interface to connect the surface mechanism under pristine
conditions with realistic reactions in the condensed phase. Using novel surface
analysis techniques that measure reactions at the gas/solid and liquid/solid
interface, the research being conducted under this award, has the potential to
impact areas across disciplines focusing on water resources and their
purification, with societal implications associated with water sourcing,
maintenance and management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.