* 2108582
* Time Domain Structures Driven by Whistler and Kinetic Alfven Waves in a Laboratory Plasma
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Xin An, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 534,210.00

Observations of the Earth’s outer radiation belts uncovered intense electric
field spikes called “time domain structures” (TDSs). They occur in plasma
boundaries, where the energetics and dynamics are poorly understood. This
project will use laboratory experiments, simulations, and analysis of satellite
data to understand the plasma physics resulting in TDSs. This is an important
process to understand how particles gain and lose energy within the radiation
belts with applications towards space weather impacts, such as creation of
detrimental effects to satellite operations. The project supports two early
career scientists, a graduate student, and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test the hypothesis that TDSs are excited
by secondary electron beams trapped in the parallel electric fields of kinetic
Alfven waves and whistler waves. Experiments will be conducted with the UCLA
Large Plasma Device (LAPD) to generate TDSs by launching a large amplitude
whistler or kinetic Alfven wave into a plasma. The laboratory data will be used
in conjunction with data from particle-in-cell simulations. Field and particle
measurements from NASA satellites will be compared to the laboratory and
simulation results. The following science questions will be addressed: (1) What
plasma parameters determine the type of TDS that will be generated? (2) What are
the characteristics of TDSs? (3) How does the amplitude of whistler waves and
kinetic Alfven waves affect the excitation of TDSs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.