* 2108003
* DISES: Conservation incentives and the socio-spatial dynamics of water sustainability
* GEO,RISE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Dana Bauer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,596,980.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disputes over water resources are
common worldwide. In response, societies make massive investments in water
conservation and allocation to support human water security and freshwater
ecosystem services. There is a growing interest in voluntary incentives (e.g.,
payments/subsidies offered to water users) as a strategy for reducing conflicts
in and beyond water conservation. Incentive-based programs hold promise, but
uncertainties remain regarding how state and non-state environmental
organizations may implement them effectively and efficiently. Effective
implementation of incentive-based conservation requires strategic allocation of
financial incentives across space and time. This project will investigate how
interactions among social, hydrological, and biological spatial dynamics affect
the sustainability of human-freshwater systems under incentive-based
conservation. These dynamics shape the viability and effectiveness of incentive-
based water conservation programs in river basins around the world. The focus of
this project is on water systems in areas with extensive agricultural use, but
the findings will be relevant for understanding the dynamics of incentive-based
conservation programs for many types of resources (e.g., marine fisheries,
energy, waste, forestry). Thus, results have the potential to transform
understanding of the ways in which conservation incentives might enhance the
sustainability of a wide range of integrated human-natural systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the Red River, the second-largest
basin in the south-central United States. Information on conservation actors and
water users will be gathered via interviews and surveys to populate utility-
theoretic behavioral models of decision-making regarding willingness to
offer/accept conservation incentives. Game theoretic models of strategic social
interactions will extend the behavioral models by examining water usersâ€™
likelihood of cooperative or competitive behavior. Retrospective, empirically-
based modeling of relationships among groundwater, stream flows, and freshwater
ecosystems will predict ecosystem service outcomes under varying climate and
water use scenarios. Combined results from these models will be used to
parameterize and calibrate an integrative socio-environmental simulation. The
simulation will model the entire integrated system, from the design of
conservation incentives, through decisions made by water users and water
resource managers, to the linked surface and groundwater system and subsequent
ecosystem service outcomes which influence human conservation decisions. Dynamic
system scenarios based on varying conservation incentive budgets, priorities and
climatic uncertainties will be simulated over 20-year time horizons. This
integrated modeling will be used to develop the central project outputs: an
adaptable, integrated framework that can be used to navigate sustainability
dilemmas typical of water-limited river basins worldwide, leading to a set of
key insights for understanding and managing these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.