* 2108411
* Large-Scale Statistics from Line Intensity Mapping Simulations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anthony Pullen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 494,379.00

Line Intensity Mapping (LIM), which measures the aggregate line and continuum
spectrum within large conical volumes (light-cones), provides a rapid and deep
probe of the evolution of galaxies, the interstellar (ISM) and intergalactic
(IGM) media, though this information is subtle and encoded in a complex way.
Since deep LIM surveys in a diverse set of optical, radio, and millimeter wave
lines probing a wide range of physical processes are underway or will soon be,
there is a great need for tools to help connect the observables to physical
conditions. The research team will combine multiple emission lines generated by
semi-analytic models (SAMs) of galaxy formation with existing cosmological
simulations to derive a suite of "mock" intensity maps in a self-consistent
manner. By varying the SAMs the resulting simulated data sets will inform the
calibration and interpretation of LIM surveys. This research will also support
research activities by a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student, as well
as efforts by the principal investigator to develop astronomy/cosmology classes
for area majority-minority high-schools in New York
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use SAMs together with
existing cosmological simulations to produce sets of light-cones, mock LIM maps
and galaxy surveys out to z = 10 for 2-square degree survey fields in order to
compute the LIM auto- and cross-power spectrum and 1-point PDF for the 21 cm HI
line, various sub/millimeter wave CO transitions, 158 micron [C II] fine
structure line, and HÎ±. They will also simulate astrophysical parameter
estimates with these statistics for realistic representative surveys. These will
contain optical photometry which will be used for simulated cross-correlations
with galaxy surveys such as the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI).
Scientific deliverables released by the team will include halo catalogs and halo
merger trees, galaxy catalogs produced by SAMs, broad-band photometry and line
properties for N-body snapshots, source catalogs along light-cones, and multi-
wavelength LIM and synthetic cosmic infrared background maps. The full suite of
simulated survey catalogs and maps will also allow the team to determine how
well these statistical measures can constrain the physical processes driving
galaxy formation as well as search for synergies between LIM and traditional
galaxy surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.