* 2108196
* DISES: Toward resilient and adaptive community-driven management of groundwater dependent agricultural systems
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* James Butler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,611,722.00

Groundwater for irrigation is foundational to the viability of numerous US
farming communities, as well as the national and global food supplies they
support. Yet, this natural resource is being overexploited in many areas,
threatening the social and economic viability of those that depend on it.
Irrigators in western Kansas and south-central Colorado are developing
community-level rules regulating groundwater use and management in an effort to
preserve the aquifer and their livelihoods â€“ a novel experiment in self-
governance of groundwater commons. The initial success of these self-governance
regimes has prompted their rapid spread, facilitated by a transfer of experience
and rule design from one community to another, resulting in the adoption of
relatively similar rules across the communities. However, questions remain
regarding the long-term effectiveness, resilience, and adaptability of these
similar self-governance regimes under shocks, such as drought or volatile
commodity markets. This work will explore these questions and help groundwater
dependent agriculture communities create more effective, resilient, and adaptive
groundwater management strategies. The project team will strive to not only
bring timely findings to a pressing societal need but also to train
undergraduate and graduate students in interdisciplinary science so they are
positioned to help solve the vexing sustainability issues that confront society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide an empirical basis for new theory
explaining how individuals and institutions contribute to socio-environmental
system effectiveness, resilience, and adaptability. Specifically, the work will
answer important, but understudied, questions related to the processes,
dynamics, and vulnerabilities of groundwater self-governance regimes. The work
will tightly integrate research in both natural and social sciences to advance
theory on how the spread of self-governance arrangements, and their interplay
with natural and social factors, collectively influence the sustainability and
resilience of groundwater-dependent communities. Foundational to the research
plan is the convergence of social and environmental data that will underpin a
novel integrated model representing complex, dynamic interactions and feedback
between social (irrigators and institutions) and environmental (aquifer and
land) realms. The overall goal is to develop new theory of how socio-
environmental and institutional diversity (or lack thereof) determines the
effectiveness, resilience, and adaptability of groundwater self-governance
regimes under current conditions and in response to social and environmental
change. Achieving this goal will advance broader understanding and theory of
common-pool resource management and chart paths forward for groundwater
dependent agriculture communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.