* 2108346
* Instrument Development: Creating a Tunable, Broad bandwidth 2D IR Microscope for Quantitative Imaging of Chemical Dynamics Near Reactive Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amber Krummel, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 510,200.00

With the support of the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Amber Krummel of Colorado State University will study the
structures and motions of molecules near electrode surfaces. A major goal is to
produce molecular snapshots during the formation and growth of the solid
electrolyte interphase (SEI) in a model electrochemical cell. The electrolytes
and electrodes used in this project will be chosen to closely model organic
battery electrolytes and half-cells contributing to emerging energy storage
technologies. Dr. Krummel and her group will be building new capabilities into
an emerging imaging techniqueâ€” 2-dimensional infrared (2D-IR) microscopy. 2D-IR
microscopy holds the promise of visualizing the "molecular dance" taking place
near electrode surfaces, due to its ability to provide chemical information at
ultrafast time scales and its sensitivity to different types of molecular
structures. The efforts supported by this funding will produce new chemical
imaging tools crucial to many disciplines of science and technology, such as
electrochemical processes associated with clean energy technologies, materials
science, biotechnology, and geology. The results of the imaging experiments are
expected to provide insights into the fundamental characteristics of SEI, which
is key for understanding device performance issues encountered in energy storage
technologies. Further broadening impacts of the project are Dr. Krummel is
helping to train the next generation of spectroscopists and microscopists in the
areas of physical chemistry, laser physics, and materials chemistry. The primary
goal of building a tunable, broad bandwidth 2D-IR microscope will require
integration of knowledge in optical physics, imaging, and ultrafast nonlinear
optical spectroscopy tools. Finally, through hands-on mentoring, the researchers
in the Krummel group will learn the art of communicating their innovations to
broad audiences and principles of community through direct training in
diversity, equity, inclusion, and social justice issues within their
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing an imaging modality capable of
reporting chemical dynamics at ultrashort timescales and then connecting the
observed dynamics to macroscopic observables is extremely attractive. Two-
dimensional infrared (2D-IR) spectroscopy is a proven tool for capturing
information on chemical structures and dynamics at femtosecond timescales and
longer, which limits its recording chemical information about reactions that are
extremely fast and key to many crucial chemical processes. This project is
expected to significantly reduce the acquisition time of 2D IR spectra, thus
making it possible to develop new 2D-IR imaging tools to directly measure
molecular interactions across multiple length scales. The scientific inquiry
outlined in this project aims to create a new nonlinear optical microscopy tool
capable of mapping chemical interactions. The chemical interactions that will be
mapped are expected to contain quantitative details of dynamic behaviors in
electrolytes near electrode surfaces. The research team will initiate in situ
imaging of molecular structures and dynamics during solid electrolyte interphase
formation for the first time. These experimentshave to potential to increase
knowledge of fundamental driving forces present during SEI formation at
electrode surfaces, providing crucial control parameters of the SEI, as well as
demonstrating the utility of 2D-IR imaging across a range of scientific
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.