* 2108727
* Super-Resolution Two-Dimensional Infrared Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Arnaldo Serrano, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Arnaldo Serrano and his group at the University of
Notre Dame are developing a technique to image the dynamics of molecules on a
time scale that matches the fastest chemical reactions, shorter than a
picosecond (one trillionth of a second), and on a length scale that allows them
to resolve events inside of a single cell. Imaging methods that can provide
chemical information with both high time resolution and high spatial resolution
can help answer detailed questions about the chemistry of highly nonuniform
microscopic environments, such as the interior of a cell. To make such
measurements possible, the research team is investigating several approaches to
overcome the so-called “diffraction-limit” for infrared light, which is the
smallest possible length scale that can be imaged using traditional techniques.
One approach the team is pursuing involves recording images with microscopic
spheres that act as tiny magnifying glasses. Another approach involves
patterning the incoming light to take advantage of “aliasing”, the same effect
the causes moiré patterns when looking through two picket fences, in order to
extract more detailed information from a measurement in order to reconstruct
high-resolution images. These efforts hold promise for eventually enabling new
measurements of the chemical heterogeneity inside living cells. The project also
includes a plan to organize a “Midwest Ultrafast Spectroscopy and Imaging
Graduate Workshop”, where graduate students in the region can learn about
advanced optical methods and network with colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate methods for enhancing the spatial resolution of wide-
field two-dimensional infrared (2DIR) microscopy. Recent developments in
infrared imaging, including wide-field 2DIR microscopy, make it possible to
measure the ultrafast dynamics of materials on the micron-scale. While 2DIR
microscopy enables a new kind of label-free imaging, the technique is still in
its infancy and remains limited by the low spatial resolution (about 3 microns)
of infrared optics. This project takes advantage of the intrinsic nonlinearity
of 2DIR signals to make ultrafast vibrational measurements in the nanometer
regime using microsphere-enabled near-field enhancements and structured
illumination microscopy (SIM). Such enhancements of the resolution would enable
ultrafast IR imaging on a wide variety of heterogenous systems, such as infrared
plasmonic devices and the subcellular structures of biological samples. The
broader impacts of the work include advanced training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate research students, and educational outreach activities
emphasizing mathematics skills in physical science courses at the high school
and undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.