* 2108691
* Collaborative Research: Nuclear Spin Optical Rotation of Hyperpolarized Liquids and Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Igor Savukov, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2024
* USD 208,964.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Christian Hilty (Texas A&amp;M) and Dr. Igor Savukov
(New Mexico Consortium) and their groups are combining two important chemical
analysis tools - optical and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy - to
study the configuration of electrons in matter. Both optical and NMR
spectroscopy are frequently used to determine molecular structures in chemistry,
but they operate in independent domains. Optical spectroscopy probes electron
energy states, whereas NMR probes atomic nuclei. By combining both
spectroscopies, the team can garner fundamental information on materials and
molecules important for new technologies such as devices for harvesting energy
from light, or information storage and readout for quantum computing. Students
(including undergraduates) engaged in this project receive outstanding,
interdisciplinary training, preparing them for careers in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics). Professor Hilty also incorporates
elements of NMR into his courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the potential
for important advances in understanding electronic structure, nuclear spin
optical rotation (NSOR) spectroscopy up to now has not been fully exploited.
This project will use nuclear spin probes to characterize the dependence of the
NSOR effect on molecular structure. This research team will undertake the
measurement of NSOR in the solid state for the first time, opening up new
possibilities for the use of this technique. The use of hyperpolarization is
expected to lead to an increase in the NSOR signal by several orders of
magnitude. The specific aims are: (1) to demonstrate the measurement of
structure-dependent NSOR signals in a series of compounds containing
hyperpolarized nuclear spin probes; (2) to construct an apparatus and
demonstrate the detection of NSOR signals from solid state samples, utilizing
the full potential of sensitivity enhancement by DNP (dynamic nuclear
polarization); and (3) to develop computational methods for predicting liquid
and solid state NSOR. In combination, these aims will lead to a method enabling
the fundamental characterization of electron configurations of molecules in
liquids and solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.