* 2108452
* DISES: Environmental tipping points of cultural identity extinction in integrated human-ecological systems represented by small fishing nations
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Elsie Sunderland, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,450,241.00

Small-scale fisheries represent integrated socio-environmental systems that are
essential for global food security. For example, more than 6000 indigenous
populations globally rely on marine fisheries for subsistence, including many
communities in the United States. Global pollution degrades marine resources and
human health, resulting in a disconnect between the human and ecological system
and loss of cultural heritage. This project will investigate the hypothesis that
acceptable levels of pollutant releases have been overestimated by society due
to a failure to properly account for their impacts on culture. This analysis
will include field research on toxicant accumulation in food webs, human
exposure studies, and anthropological research on risk preferences and choices
when faced with the threat of potentially polluted food sources. This research
is based in the Faroe Islands, a North Atlantic fishing community which has been
a traditional whaling society for more than 500 years. It will inform global
regulatory efforts to reduce pollutant releases to the environment and provide
interdisciplinary training in public policy and human geography, natural
science, and public health for one postdoc, a graduate student, and several
undergraduate research assistants. Bidirectional community-based research
strategies will be used to engage with the Faroese through workshops at the
beginning and end of the project and with ongoing participation of many Faroese
collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small-scale fisheries are integrated socio-
environmental systems essential for the food security of many communities.
Anthropogenic pollutants degrade the health and quality of cultural keystone
species, which can decouple the human and ecological system, resulting in loss
of cultural heritage and eventually, leading to a cultural tipping point. The
overarching hypothesis of this study is that acceptable levels of pollutant
releases have been overestimated by society due to a failure to account for
their impacts on culture. The investigators will construct an integrated
systems-modeling framework, using the Faroe Islands in the North Atlantic, a
traditional whaling society, as a case study to analyze the dynamic impacts of
global pollutant release on the health and culture of fishing communities. They
will model global environmental mercury (Hg), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),
and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), conduct surveys of risk
preferences and consumption behavior among the Faroese, and assess cross-scale
governance of pollution release to answer the following: 1) What is the
relationship between pollutant releases, pilot whale tissue trends, and Faroese
exposures? 2) How have health advisories affected whaling activity, dietary
choices and risk perception? 3) How can the potential for cultural degradation
of fishing communities impacted by ocean pollution be incorporated into
international conventions? and 4) What level of global pollution releases could
prevent cultural degradation in fishing communities? Temporal trends in pilot
whale and human exposures in the Faroe Islands will provide insight into the
coupling of the human system to biological exposures, which will advance
understanding among the One Health community. New methods for characterizing the
cultural and social value of fishing activities will be developed by analyzing
risk tolerance for high levels of pollutant exposures, or consumption of seafood
beyond recommended health-based guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for
this award is being provided by Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) program one of
NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA supports projects that address convergence scientific
challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic, empower new research partnerships,
diversify the next generation of Arctic researchers, enhance efforts in formal
and informal education, and integrate the co-production of knowledge where
appropriate. This award aligns with those goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.