* 2108711
* Collaborative Research: Analysis and Control in Multi-Scale Interface Coupling between Deformable Porous Media and Lumped Hydraulic Circuits
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Lorena Bociu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This project will develop theoretical and computational techniques to advance
understanding of the circulation of blood in the cardiovascular system, from
large arteries to small vessels embedded within the tissues. This is
particularly relevant for the millions of people who suffer from glaucoma, a
progressive degenerative disease of the eye that leads to irreversible vision
loss; understanding the role of hemodynamic factors could bring new hope to the
more than 25% of glaucoma patients who continue to progress to blindness despite
medical treatment. The project will cultivate science literacy among a broad
audience and diversify the next generation of STEM students. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be mentored by the investigators on both the theoretical
and applied aspects of this project. The investigators will run Virtual Summits
on “The Eye: A Window into Our Body” to build interest in mathematics research
and mathematics-related careers among women and underrepresented minorities at
the high school level in North Carolina and Missouri.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program is focused on analysis and control in models of the perfusion
of a tissue, a local phenomenon studied in correlation with the global features
of the surrounding blood circulation. The models involve multi-scale interface
coupling between partial differential equations (quasi-linear Biot model with
incompressible constituents and permeability nonlinearly depending on dilation)
and ordinary differential equations (nonlinear system describing fluid flow
through a vascular network). The research will bridge applied and computational
mathematics and apply methods from analysis and control theory, numerical
analysis, non-convex optimization, and sensitivity analysis to study how local
factors and global features affect the solution of the system. In the
application to glaucoma, the study will elucidate the roles played by
intraocular pressure (local factor) and blood pressure (global, or systemic,
feature) in securing adequate blood flow to the eye, thereby facilitating the
development of novel therapeutic approaches coregulating intraocular pressure
and blood pressure that could potentially help many glaucoma
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.