* 2108089
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Multi-Scale Studies of Magnetic Reconnection with Interpretable Data-Driven Models
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* E Paulo Alves, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 425,165.00

This project will explore the multiscale physics of magnetic energy release in
plasmas. Most of the visible matter in the universe is in the state of plasma
and is magnetized. The magnetic energy stored in the plasma can be explosively
released by magnetic reconnection –– a fundamental process that plays a key role
in laboratory and astrophysical systems, from disruptions in fusion experiments,
to spectacular solar flare events, to, potentially, the acceleration of very
high-energy cosmic rays. The understanding of magnetic reconnection is
challenging due to the complex interplay of different processes at many scales:
from detailed physics of electron motion at very small scales, to plasma heating
and flow generation at large scales, to high energy photon and particle
acceleration that can carry away a large part of the available plasma energy.
The goal of this project is to use machine learning techniques to unravel the
connection between physics processes at small and large scales, and develop
better multi-scale models of magnetic reconnection. In doing so, it will
contribute to the goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-
Messenger Astrophysics" Big Idea. The project will provide students and
postdocs, including those from traditionally under-represented groups, with
advanced training in basic plasma physics, computational physics, and machine
learning, empowering them with a unique set of tools to address emerging
scientific opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The holistic understanding of
magnetic reconnection requires the development of new coarse-grained models that
can describe the macroscopic consequences of the essential kinetic physics of
reconnection and particle acceleration. This is often referred to as the problem
of finding good "closures"; that is, a reduced set of equations that capture the
essential processes occurring on unresolved scales as a function of resolved
quantities, and that can be solved in a computationally efficient way.
Techniques from the field of machine learning are providing unique opportunities
to harness the increasingly abundant data from experiments and high-fidelity
simulations to accelerate the development of the required reduced physics
models. The goal of this project is to develop and apply novel machine learning
tools based on sparse and symbolic regression techniques to extract
interpretable and generalizable reduced models from data of first-principles
plasma simulations. Specifically, the project aims to construct better kinetic
closures for magnetic reconnection; to derive better models of particle
injection and acceleration by this fundamental plasma process; and to use this
understanding to accelerate the development of multi-scale plasma algorithms.
While the immediate focus will be on the problem of magnetic reconnection, the
tools that will be developed are general and applicable to other areas of plasma
physics, and more broadly to many-body phenomena. The development of these
multiscale models can have a significant impact across different areas of plasma
science, from fusion to space and astrophysical
plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.