* 2108124
* NSF-BSF: Nonlinearity, Randomness, and Dynamics: Vistas into the Extreme Mechanics of Non-Euclidean Sheets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shankar Venkataramani, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

The notion of self-morphing sheets is a novel concept that has emerged in
diverse setups, such as laboratory experiments, biomechanics of living
organisms, design and architecture, soft robotics, and mathematical analysis.
Self-morphing sheets are thin objects that can drive large changes of their
shapes through internal forces, and exploit such shape changes for different
purposes, including locomotion. The interdisciplinary character of the
activities offers opportunities for training scientists and mathematicians in
technical skills, as well as in their ability to abstract, model, and design
complex systems for practical applications. The research involves investigators
in Israel and in the United States, adding to the rich and longstanding history
of scientific collaborations between the two nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-
morphing sheets are thin objects that can drive large changes of their shapes
through internal forces, and exploit such shape changes for different purposes,
including locomotion. This project, an endeavor between an experimental
physicist and an applied mathematician, will develop novel experimental and
theoretical tools in an integrated framework to model, design, build, actuate,
and control a group of such objects, known as hyperbolic thin sheets. The
results can be applied to questions ranging from how marine invertebrates swim
to the design of self-actuated soft robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.