* 2108966
* Precision Monolayer Chemistry on Amorphous Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Shelley Claridge, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2024
* USD 502,550.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Shelley Claridge at Purdue University is
studying fundamental processes that allow precise control over the surface
chemistry of technologically important amorphous materials. If better
understood, these processes could enable design and fabrication of surfaces with
well-defined chemical instructions for processes ranging from the assembly of
materials for solar energy conversion to materials that scaffold the growth of
cells to repair injuries. In this project, the progress of a class of surface
reactions will be monitored using specialized microscopes that enable imaging at
the scale of individual molecules. This information is integrated with larger-
scale experimental techniques including fluorescence microscopy, providing a
molecular-to-a macroscopic view of the reaction progress. As part of this
project, Dr. Claridge is working with graduate students in her research group
and with minority-serving undergraduate institutions to develop a series of
educational experiences and resources that help undergraduate students analyze
and communicate scientific findings, as a foundation for their future careers in
science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes striped phases of
functional alkyl diacetylenes known to assemble on graphite and other two-
dimensional materials as a basis for functionalizing the surface of amorphous
elastomeric materials such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) that exhibit
substantial nanoscale heterogeneity. In this strategy, the diacetylene monomers
are assembled on graphite, photo-polymerized by irradiation with ultraviolet
light, then covalently transferred to the PDMS surface using the hydrosilylation
reaction that is the basis for PDMS curing. The first two aims of this project
are to understand the relationship between diacetylene monomer structure and
striped phase monolayer polymerization efficiency, and to understand the
relationship between PDMS component structure (vinyl-functional base polymer and
hydrosilyl groups in crosslinker) and reactivity with the striped
polydiacetylene layer. The final stage of the process characterizes the function
of monolayers on PDMS based on their ability to control isotropic and
anisotropic particle adsorption. Understanding and control of the striped phase
polydiacetylene polymerization reaction, transfer reaction, and surface
functionality has to the potential to lead to surfaces that carry embedded
chemical instructions for applications including wearable electronics,
chromatography, and cell culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.