* 2108841
* Detecting and studying light echoes in the era of Rubin and Artificial Intelligence
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Austin Brockmeier, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 596,067.00

This award supports building an artificial intelligence (AI)-based pipeline for
the all-sky-scale automated detection and study of light echoes. Light echoes
(LEs) are caused by stellar explosions lighting up cosmic dust, and they are
faint, rare, diffuse, and hard to detect. The detection of all sky samples of
LEs can enable the discovery of previously unknown Galactic supernovae, and
permit the study of Galactic dust and the history of stellar explosions and
eruptions in the Galaxy. These new AI methods will robustly re-discover old, and
discover new, light echoes in both existing and future survey datasets. The
project will develop essential data science skills in students at the University
of Delaware and at Delaware State University, a minority- and rural population-
serving HBCU. AI model architectures for efficient and reliable detection of
low-signal-to-noise diffuse features can be used throughout astronomy, for
medical imaging, and in ecology and urban metabolism
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently, LEs are detected by visual inspection,
which is limiting and does not scale to all-sky surveys. The Vera C. Rubin
Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) will observe the southern sky
at frequent intervals, making it an ideal LE survey. Unfortunately, the LSST
alert pipeline is optimized for point sources and will entirely miss LEs. This
project will produce the first pipeline for the automated all-sky detection and
study of LEs by leveraging cutting-edge AI, and support deployment of the
pipeline on the LSST science platform. The team will also be providing hands-on
data- and computer-science training to students from groups historically
underrepresented in the STEM fields, using an immersive learning program that
includes Data Science boot camps, hackathons, and mentored research
opportunities. This project capitalizes on the two NSF Big Ideas of “Harnessing
the Data Revolution” and “Growing Convergence
Research”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.