* 2108622
* WoU-MMA: Linear and Circular Polarization as a Probe of the Relativistic Jets of Blazars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alan Marscher, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 519,184.00

This project will study blazars, the most luminous long-lived objects in the
universe. Blazars are powered by matter from stars and interstellar gas clouds
falling toward super-massive black holes at the centers of some galaxies. The
infalling matter and rotation of the black hole create jets of high-energy
particles and magnetic fields that flow outward at nearly the speed of light.
The project will help to explain (1) how the jets are formed and accelerated,
(2) whether the radiating particles are mostly "normal" matter or equal amounts
of matter and anti-matter, and (3) how much energy is contained in the jets. The
project will utilize multi-messenger observations at different wavelengths to
probe the physical conditions in the jets of nearly 40 blazars. The project will
improve our understanding of extreme conditions in the universe. It also will
contribute to public appreciation of science through presentations at libraries
and high schools. It will also advance the scientific training of students
through visits of Native-American school students to Boston University’s Perkins
Telescope, involvement of undergraduate students in the data analysis and
interpretation, availability of a free textbook on extragalactic astronomy and
cosmology written by the PI, and development of an exercise for college-level
introductory astronomy classes. This award addresses/advances the goals of the
Windows on the Universe Big Idea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Blazars are galactic
nuclei with relativistic jets of magnetized, high-energy plasma produced by
actively accreting super-massive black holes. The study will provide detailed
information needed to characterize the magnetic field pattern in blazar jets,
which is directly related to the dynamics of the jets. This will be accomplished
by measuring the polarization of blazar jets both in extremely high-resolution
images at microwave frequencies of 43 and 86 GHz, and from the entire jet at
visible and X-ray frequencies. Cross-comparison of the linear polarization of
blazars from millimeter-wave to X-ray wavelengths will trace the magnetic field
pattern from about 10 parsecs to sub-parsec scales and test hypotheses regarding
the particle acceleration processes that cause the extreme luminosities and
variability of blazars. Comparison of the 43 and 86 GHz linear and circular
polarization with computer simulations will facilitate a determination of both
the relative amount of anti-matter (positrons) and the total kinetic power of
the jets, which controls the impact that the jet can have on its galactic
environment. The amount of anti-matter determines whether the particles in the
jet are produced at the base of the jet near the black hole or injected from
outside the jet. The project will train undergraduate STEM students in
scientific data analysis and interpretation, make available a free textbook on
extragalactic astronomy and cosmology written by the PI, and develop an exercise
for college-level introductory astronomy classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.