* 2108249
* CRITICAL EARLY DKIST SCIENCE: FINE STRUCTURE IN UNI-POLAR MAGNETIC FIELDS
* MPS,AST
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Karin Muglach, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 01/31/2026
* USD 238,138.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;This Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope
(DKIST) First Science project focuses on features in the Sun’s outer atmosphere,
the corona, called coronal plumes. They are long and narrow, but bright and tend
to be seen near coronal holes (dark and cool regions in the corona). Plumes are
considered to be one of the main sources of the interplanetary magnetic field
and solar wind. This project will use the unprecedented magnetic sensitivity of
DKIST to examine these features, which are believed to have stronger magnetic
fields than previous observations indicated. This project addresses one of the
DKIST Critical Science Plan Research Areas. Because of the implications of this
work for the solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field, the broader impacts
include connection to the National Science and Technology Council’s 2019 Space
Weather Strategy and Action Plan. This project carries out the basic research in
the space environment and drivers of space weather. This project also supports a
student intern from a community college and a minority serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary studies have found that extreme-
ultraviolet images from NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) often show
small, loop-like features embedded inside active region plages and at the
footpoints of coronal hole plumes even though no minority-polarity flux is
visible in the corresponding SDO’s Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI)
magnetograms. This suggests that the HMI magnetograms may be substantially
underestimating the amount of minority flux inside plages and the strong
underlying network. The research team will use high resolution magnetic field
data from the DKIST to address this puzzling result. DKIST is particularly well
suited for these challenging observations as it is expected to deliver solar
magnetic field measurements with superior spatial resolution and the highest
possible magnetic sensitivity. The Diffraction Limited Near Infrared Spectro-
polarimeter (DL-NIRSP) will provide photospheric magnetic field information in
the near infrared and the Visible Broadband Imager (VBI) will record images from
the DKIST telescope at the highest possible spatial and temporal resolution at
wavelengths in the range from 390 nm to 860 nm This will be used to find where
the loops are embedded within the larger-scale magnetic field and flow field.
Observational evidence of the existence of this missing small-scale mixed
polarity flux will have major implications for models of coronal loops and, more
generally, solar and stellar coronal heating and solar wind
acceleration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.