* 2108400
* Optical follow-up of gravitational-wave events in the Southern hemisphere: Development of the TOROS project software pipeline
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Mario Diaz, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2024
* USD 414,434.00

The TOROS (Transient Optical Robotic Observatory of the South) project,
developed by researchers at the University of Texas, Rio Grande Valley, will
observe and characterize transient optical light associated with the mergers of
compact stellar objects such as pairs of neutron stars or a neutron star and a
black hole, while working in connection with ground-based gravitational wave
detectors. During this research project, the team will fully develop, test and
implement the software and pipelines required to successfully carry out the
project. This work makes a critical contribution to the multi-messenger research
infrastructure by enabling new capabilities in sky coverage with an improved
sensitivity in the southern hemisphere at a modest cost. The rapid localization
and accurate characterization of electromagnetic emission associated with
astrophysical mergers can make significant contributions to the understanding of
the production of heavy elements through nuclear processes. The associated
gravitational wave information has the potential to yield estimates of the
expansion rate of the Universe (the Hubble constant), which complement and are
competitive with current techniques. Through a partnership with local school
districts and a local amateur astronomical society, the research team will offer
formal and informal educational opportunities in astronomy to college and high-
school students (more than 92% of them Hispanic). Educational materials will be
developed incorporating the images obtained from TOROS and other observatories.
The students involved will acquire skills in data analysis, programming, and
robotics, skills which are transferrable beyond the discipline of observational
astronomy and will be applicable to any STEM field. Students enrolled in these
classes will actively participate in the scientific enterprise. The partnership
will also directly impact the general population of the Rio Grande Valley
through public sessions at the Resaca de la Palma State Park observatory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TOROS system will be a fully robotic facility. The
software to be developed will be critical to integrate all instances of the
scientific operation — from responding to gravitational-wave and transient
alerts, to scheduling observations, processing the raw data and carrying out the
initial analyses. The TOROS telescope and dome are already installed at Cordon
Macon in the Argentine section of the Atacama plateau. A custom optical
corrector and monolithic 10K×10K CCD camera, yielding a 1.9 square degree field
of view sampled at 0.47”/pix, will be installed early in the project. This
project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.