* 2108278
* Characterization of a Family of Enzymes Responsible for the Modular Architecture of Nematode Pheromones
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Steven Bruner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Rebecca Butcher from the University of Florida will investigate a
family of enzymes that are essential for the production of signaling molecules
in nematodes (roundworms). Parasitic nematodes cause billions of dollars in
agricultural damage and infect approximately one-third of the worldâ€™s human
population. Nematodes communicate with each other by secreting signaling
molecules or pheromones also known as ascarosides, that allow worms to
coordinate their development, as well as various behaviors, including
attraction, aggregation, and avoidance. This research project will study the
enzymatic mechanisms, substrates, and protein structures of carboxylesterase
(CEST) enzymes. These enzymes are responsible for mediating specific chemical
modifications of ascarosides that influence their biological activities.
Investigation of the CEST enzymes will be instrumental in dissecting the
biological roles of the multitude of pheromones produced by nematodes and may
ultimately lead to novel strategies for controlling parasitic nematodes. This
project will also increase the retention of undergraduates in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) majors by developing a Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) to provide freshmen with an authentic
research experience early in their undergraduate careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will characterize the biochemical
activities of key CEST enzymes by heterologously expressing them, purifying
them, and characterizing their enzymatic activities against candidate
substrates. In parallel, the project will characterize the substrate range of
the CEST enzymes in vivo by feeding worms stable isotope-labeled ascarosides.
Representative CEST enzymes will be crystallized, and their structures
determined using X-ray crystallography in order to investigate the molecular
basis for their substrate preferences. Because the modifications present in
ascaroside pheromones are critical to their activities, knowledge of how these
modifications are attached by CEST enzymes will help to determine the biological
roles of nematode pheromones. Furthermore, characterization of the enzymatic
activities of the CEST enzymes could in the future enable chemoenzymatic
synthesis of nematode pheromones and libraries of derivatives, that could in
turn be used to target parasitic nematodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.