* 2108704
* Better Characterizing the Time-Varying Microwave Environment on Cerro Toco
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Darcy Barron, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2024
* USD 393,314.00

Surveys of the cosmic microwave background seek to answer outstanding questions
in cosmology and particle physics. This includes investigating the nature of
inflation and the properties of neutrinos. Upcoming instruments will create
precise maps of the sky in temperature and polarization across a broad range of
microwave frequencies. However, these increasingly sensitive instruments are
vulnerable to interference from nearby sources of microwave emission. Developing
better tools to monitor the microwave environment now will help in planning for
the next generation of such surveys. This will help in maximizing the scientific
output of these surveys. The principal investigator will also incorporate
aspects of this work into course-based undergraduate research. These research
experiences will reach a broad audience at the University of New
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will develop small-scale instrumentation
and analysis tools for better monitoring of the time-varying microwave
environment on and above Cerro Toco, at the site of the current POLARBEAR/Simons
Array CMB experiment. These tools and datasets will help better understand and
possibly increase the achievable sensitivity and survey area for upcoming ultra-
wide survey cosmic microwave background polarization measurements that will be
made from the same site by Simons Observatory and CMB-S4. This work includes
using low-level data from the current POLARBEAR/Simons Array instruments to
characterize the atmosphere in detail, including the occurrence of tropospheric
ice clouds that were observed by POLARBEAR-1 to create polarized microwave
radiation. This unique dataset would be enhanced and used to understand
indicators of conditions going forwards by the development of small-scale
instrumentation for monitoring, measuring, and predicting the microclimate and
microwave environment on Cerro Toco.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the ATI program of the Division of Astronomical Sciences and
by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.