* 2108264
* Nonlocal Transport Equations in Fluids, Swarming, and Traffic Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Changhui Tan, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 183,008.00

Nonlocal models are relevant to many real-world phenomena and have been an area
of active and growing research in recent decades. The development of a
mathematical theory of nonlocal interactions plays a significant role in the
understanding of complex structures, with rich applications in physics, biology,
and social sciences. One example of the effects of nonlocal behavior found in
nature is the collective dynamics in animal swarms, where small-scale
interactions emerge into intriguing global phenomena. This project develops
novel and robust analytical techniques for models that share similar
nonlocality. These tools help to advance the understanding of the hidden
structures of the models, and ultimately have an impact in applications, such as
in traffic flow, where they can be used to study how to integrate nonlocal
communications into a smart traffic network to improve efficiency and avoid
traffic congestions. The training and professional development of graduate
students is an integral part of the project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
studies three families of nonlocal transport equations. The first family
includes the Euler-alignment system describing the flocking phenomenon for
animal swarms. The goal is to establish a global well-posedness theory for the
system in multi-dimensions, starting from imposing radial symmetry, and to apply
the methodology to other models, such as the Euler-Poisson equations and more.
The second includes a nonlocal transport equation which describes the evolution
of the distribution of polynomial roots under repeated differentiation, the aim
is to find a rigorous connection between this equation and the differentiation
process. The last is a family of nonlocal traffic flow models, which have
received extensive attention in the last decade, and are analyzed to understand
the impact of the nonlocal interactions and how the nonlocal phenomenon can help
to prevent traffic congestions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.