* 2109503
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Uncovering the molecular mechanisms that govern cnidarian-algal symbiosis using forward genetic screens
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Casandra Newkirk, Newkirk, Casandra
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
will be studying the impacts of climate change on the cnidarian-algal symbiotic
relationship (cnidarians include corals, jellyfish, and sea anemones). This
symbiotic relationship is crucial to the stability of marine ecosystems.
However, due to increased sea temperatures, many symbiotic cnidarians are dying
rapidly. The proposed work will seek to understand how to preserve this
relationship under the changing climate by studying the mechanisms behind this
relationship at a cellular level. The knowledge gained through this fellowship
will provide data that will assist in the conservation efforts of these animals,
and help us to better understand this ecosystem. This award will not only allow
for the training of a fellow from an underrepresented background, it will also
allow the fellow to increase participation of students from underrepresented
backgrounds by providing them with mentorship and training in a laboratory
setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed by the fellow seeks to
understand the cellular mechanisms underlying the cnidarian-algal symbiosis. The
fellow will use a forward genetic strategy to probe the essential genes for
establishing the coral-algal symbiosis. Symbiodiniaceae Breviolum minutum strain
SSB01 is known to be able to form symbiosis with many cnidarians including
corals, sea anemones and jellyfish. One such cnidarian that is used as a model
system for researching questions related to this symbiosis is the jellyfish
Cassiopea xamachana. For this research project a library of algal mutants of
SSB01 will be generated and then evaluated for their ability to populate
Cassiopea xamachana. C. xamachana polyps are easy to rear and grow in large
numbers in a laboratory setting which will allow for high throughput analysis of
the stability of the symbiosis with the algal mutants. Because working with
corals can be problematic, the development of this model system on a cellular
level may allow us to develop engineering strategies to counter devastating
coral bleaching. Possible strategies might include targeted genetic modification
or in-laboratory evolution of algae that are resistant to
bleaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.