* 2109174
* Interfacial Control through Adsorbate Design Offers Fundamental Insights and Practical Utility
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* T. Randall Lee, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 10/31/2024
* USD 479,959.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor T. Randall Lee from the University of
Houston will undertake fundamental materials discovery studies based on novel
synthetic strategies and materials characterization while evaluating the utility
and performance of the resulting materials for use in a variety of technologies
that require robust surfaces. These include approaches to anti-fouling coatings
for biomedical implants, oil pipelines and marine-based structures, and
nanoscale coatings for patterning and protecting electrodes and superconducting
tapes, and advanced coatings for controlling wettability and preventing
corrosion at the macroscale. Research activities will be closely integrated with
educational and outreach efforts. Graduate students, undergraduate students, and
high school students will work collaboratively on the projects to gain the
training and expertise in areas relevant to emerging technological challenges
facing the nation. Recruitment geared toward broadening the participation of
women and underserved minorities will include hosting hands-on laboratory
activities for students from local high schools having significant underserved
minority populations through the University of Houston's teachHouston program.
High school students with an interest in research from across the state will
have the opportunity to engage in a summer research experience through the Welch
Foundation Summer Scholars program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
will focus on four central thrusts: (1) the study of multi-dentate adsorbates
possessing phase-incompatible or structurally dissimilar chemical compositions
for generating stable films having homogeneously mixed "conflicted" compositions
as potential nanoscale anti-fouling coatings; (2) the examination of
multidentate thiol-based adsorbates that resist desorption as cyclic disulfides
for functionalizing the planar faces of 2D transition metal dichalcogenides such
as MoS2 to facilitate exfoliation and enable layer-by-layer fabrication of
unique hybrid nanostructures for optical and electronic devices; (3) the
development of selectively fluorinated adsorbates for generating nanoscale
coatings having well-controlled compositions and conformations that permit
studies of surfaces dipoles and their historically controversial impacts on
interfacial properties; and (4) the custom design and study of adsorbates for
generating thin-film interfaces that mimic polymer interfaces, but cannot
undergo traditional surface reconstruction. All of this research may be regarded
as use-inspired fundamental research on the molecular-level design, development
and study of functional surface coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.