* 2109639
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Contributions of linkage, dominance and plasticity to variation in fitness in a wild pedigreed bird population
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Felix Beaudry, Beaudry, Felix EG
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Evolution has two requirements: (1)
differences in survival and reproduction between individuals (Darwin’s concept
of “fitness”) and (2) genes underlying those differences. Although genes for
fitness are a central tenet of evolution, scientists have not found many genes
that contribute to fitness differences between individuals. Recent theory
suggests some fitness differences may be caused by interactions between genes
with their environment instead of by the action of genes themselves. By tracking
the fitness and genomes of 4000+ birds in a wild natural reserve, the fellow is
testing whether gene interactions can explain differences in fitness between
individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use cutting-edge
statistical methods, highly accurate estimates of fitness, the latest genome
assembly techniques, detailed resource availability data, and whole genome
resequencing of hundreds of Florida Scrub-Jays. First, the fellow will consider
the impact of interaction between pairs of genetic variants on the heritability
of fitness using genotypes from hundreds of individual Florida Scrub-Jays. Next,
the fellow will compare the heritable variation in fitness explained across
different chromosomes, which will require developing new methods to assemble the
sex chromosomes of the Florida Scrub-Jay. Finally, using decades of data on
acorn availability, the fellow will compare heritability and selection estimates
across low and high resource years in the Florida Scrub-Jay population. The
methods and results have important implications for prediction of evolutionary
change. This work will also allow the fellow to develop a module aimed at
broadening participation in STEM, in that this module will add a consideration
of works from the field of gender studies into undergraduate
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.