* 2109625
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Investigating the Genetic Basis of Local Adaptation in Yellow Starthistle (Centaurea solstitialis)
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Bryan Reatini, Reatini, Bryan
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Bryan Reatini is "Investigating the genetic basis of local adaptation in
yellow starthistle (Centaurea solstitialis)". The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of Arizona and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Katrina Dlugosch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yellow starthistle is a major
agricultural pest and is among the most ecologically and economically damaging
invasive plant species in the western United States. Consequently, there is
considerable interest in understanding what allows yellow starthistle – and
other agricultural pests like it – to spread so aggressively. Previous research
has shown that yellow starthistle has evolved to become better suited to the
local environmental conditions of California, which likely contributed to its
rapid spread. Yet the specific genes that have played a role in this process,
and the source of the genetic variation involved, remain unknown. This project
will determine the source and type of genetic variation that has contributed to
the evolution of yellow starthistle to become better suited to the local
environmental conditions of California. In doing so, this research will inform
how evolution can contribute to the aggressive spread of agricultural pests such
as yellow starthistle, and provide information that may be used to mitigate the
future spread of agricultural pests. Another objective of this project is to
train university students with the tools and skillset required to generate maps
that can be used to predict areas at risk of invasion by species like yellow
starthistle. Throughout this training process, a collection of maps will be
created and provided to the United States Department of Agriculture to help
inform management decisions regarding the spread of invasive
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how local adaptation is maintained
despite gene flow remains an ongoing area of research in evolutionary biology.
Range expansions offer exceptional opportunities to study local adaptation with
gene flow in real time, but theoretical predictions have quickly outpaced
empirical tests of those predictions. Yellow starthistle (Centaurea
solstitialis) offers unique opportunities to close that knowledge gap, because
adaptive trait evolution to local environmental conditions has occurred rapidly
despite gene flow between nearby populations in its invaded range. To determine
how connections between genotype, phenotype and environment have been achieved
under gene flow in this system, this project will determine: 1) the genetic
basis of an important adaptive trait in this invasion – increased plant size –
using associations between genetic variation and phenotypic variation; 2)
associations between genetic variation and environmental variation for
environmental conditions that appear to be driving the evolution of this
adaptive trait; and 3) the source of genetic variation contributing to adaptive
evolution, using computational methods in order to evaluate the potential
contribution of admixture to adaptation. All data generated by this research
will be made publicly available via the searchable public databases of the
National Center for Biotechnology Information and Dryad. Ultimately, this
project will contribute to fundamental understanding of how the genetic
architecture of local adaptation has contributed to range expansion, for one of
the most problematic invasive species in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.