* 2109210
* CAS: Elucidating Mechanisms of Perfluoroalkyl Substances Degradation in the Environment: A Coupled Computational Experimental Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shubham Vyas, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 455,655.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program in the
Division of Chemistry at NSF, Shabham Vyas and his students at the Colorado
School of Mines will study the reactivity of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS) in the environment. The project focuses on chemical reactions of PFAS
with various reactive species, such as carbonate radicals, and the role metal
ions play in this process. PFAS are among the most persistent anthropogenic
chemicals that quietly proliferated throughout the world. The unique properties
of PFAS, especially their chemical stability, lent them to diverse applications.
However, research in the last two decades points to potential adverse effects of
PFAS on the environment and in biological systems. This project will be carried
out using cutting edge computer modeling and targeted experimentation with the
overall objective of establishing methods to achieve complete breakdown of such
environmental contaminants. This project will provide graduate and undergraduate
students opportunities to participate in interdisciplinary research. Dr. Vyas
also will participate in K-12 outreach programs to encourage students to pursue
careers in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kinetic and thermodynamic parameters for various chemical
transformations, including electron transfer reactions, will be obtained using
density functional theory and post-Hartree-Fock-based chemical computations.
Concurrently, targeted experiments will be performed using techniques such as
laser flash photolysis, time-dependent photolysis, electron paramagnetic
resonance and mass spectrometry. The first objective of this work is to
quantitatively measure the reactivity of PFAS with radical species and probe
mechanisms of associated electron transfer reactions. The second objective will
be to investigate the role of environmentally relevant transition metal ions in
radical-mediated degradation of PFAS. The third objective of this project is to
delineate the degradation mechanisms of PFAS and the impact of radicals and
metal ions. Collectively, this research work will quantitatively establish the
reactivity of PFAS and their degradation with the available reactive species in
the environment. The ultimate goal would be to establish fundamental science
that might one day lead to complete mineralization of
PFAS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.