* 2109422
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Identifying the functional roles of SNAI2,SOX9, and SOX10 in cranial neural crest cell specification and adhesion
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Brigette Monroy, Monroy, Brigette Yau
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 0.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
proposes to understand how cells move throughout the developing embryo body to
reach the right destination at the right time. This research will use model
organisms to understand how these cells function, as this process is conserved
across species. The specific cells that will be examined are those that form the
head and facial features, as any minor disruptions in this process can lead to a
variety of birth defects, including cleft lip. By understanding how these cells
move and function in a model organism, the research can potentially contribute
to the understanding and development of novel therapies for these birth defects
humans. In addition, this project will broaden the participation of under-
represented groups in biology by providing the opportunity for them to receive
scientific, professional, and personal support through a novel on-campus student
and postdoc organization.

Neural crest (NC) cell development is a highly dynamic process that is
controlled by a tightly regulated gene regulatory network (GRN) which drives the
expression of several transcription factors that drive cell fate, migration, and
differentiation. SOX9 and SNAI2 function in the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, followed by SOX10 which mediates NC cell migration. The genes that
code for these NC transcription factors are expressed during NC development, but
little is known about the conserved roles of SNAI2, SOX9, and SOX10 in
regulating the expression of each other nor how they specifically control
expression of relevant cadherin proteins in the NC cell population. Therefore,
this research proposes to determine how three of the most highly expressed NC
cell specifiers (SNAI2, SOX9, and SOX10) drive NC specification and regulate NC
adhesion in two complementary amniote models, Gallus gallus (chicken) and
Coturnix japonica (quail). Aim 1 will define the spatiotemporal localization of
SNAI2, SOX9, and SOX10 proteins during NC development and identify the effects
of SOX9, SOX10, and SNAI2 functional perturbations and their consequences on
cadherin proteins in vivo. Aim 2 will determine the binding partners of SOX9,
SOX10 and SNAI2 in chick and quail and characterize SNAI2, SOX9, and SOX10
protein domain functions. This project will contribute to training of the fellow
in the following areas: scientific writing, technical skills, mentoring, and
teaching.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.