* 2109550
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Parallel evolution of lizards in urban heat islands: locomotor performance, muscle physiology, and gene regulation
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Andrea Rummel, Rummel, Andrea
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Temperature has a pervasive effect on animal
performance and are of concern for both wildlife and humans. Because urban areas
tend to be hotter than rural areas, a phenomenon known as the urban heat island
effect, cities provide an opportunity to study how animals acclimate and adapt
to high temperatures. This research explores adaptation to high temperatures in
crested anole lizards living in cities relative to lizards living in forests in
Puerto Rico through the lens of the locomotor system. The Fellow will compare
the relationship to temperature of running speeds and muscle performance in city
and forest lizards, and then examine genetic changes which underlie differences
in responses to temperature. This research will deepen our understanding of how
animals respond and adapt to the increasing temperatures predicted during
climate change. The Fellow will also develop educational materials for K-12
students and incarcerated students as well as mentoring undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project associates morphological, locomotor, and
physiological phenotypes with features of the crested anole transcriptome to
test the hypothesis that adaptive modification of fine-scale muscle physiology
underlies divergence in the thermal tolerance of locomotor performance. The
study system consists of multiple, independently derived urban and forest
populations of crested anole lizards in Puerto Rico. Locomotor performance will
be assessed by measuring sprint speeds across a range of temperatures, as well
as morphological variables that are known to influence sprint speed in lizards.
To disentangle the contributions of morphological and physiological subordinate
traits to whole animal performance, the Fellow will then measure the intrinsic
contractile properties of the locomotor muscles powering sprinting across
temperatures to assess the impact of muscle thermal sensitivity on locomotor
performance. Finally, muscle transcriptomes will be compared between
urbanâ€“forest pairs and across localities to identify differentially expressed
genes and signatures of selection which are associated with differences in
temperature-dependent performance. This work will significantly expand our
current knowledge of how urban environments modify complex phenotypes on rapid
timescales. Under the guidance of Dr. Campbell-Staton, the Fellow will receive
training in thermal physiology and transcriptomics, and enhance mentorship and
communication skills by working with undergraduates and other
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.