* 2109789
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Leveraging Frequent Monoicy-dioicy Transitions in Hornworts to Understand the Rules of Sex Determination
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Peter Schafran, Schafran, Peter W
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Peter Schafran is "Leveraging frequent monoicy-dioicy transitions in hornworts
to understand the rules of sex determination" The host institution for the
fellowship is the Boyce Thompson Institute and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Fay-Wei Li.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In animals sex determination is fairly
consistent across diverse groups, such as the XY chromosomes that originated
once in the common ancestor of all placental mammals including dogs, cows,
humans, elephants, whales, etc., over 166 million years ago. In contrast, the
evolution of separate sexes in plants has occurred many times and over much
shorter time periods. One plant group that shows this is hornworts, in which
about half of all species have separate sexes that evolved from hermaphroditic
ancestors at least 14 separate times. To understand why sexual system evolution
is so flexible in plants, this project will examine how genes and chromosome
structure change each time a species evolves to have separate male/female
individuals. New genomes will be generated from hermaphroditic and male/female
hornwort species representing over 300 million years of evolution in order to
determine common genes that may be prerequisites for formation of separate
sexes. This project will also examine patterns of change in genome architecture
over time, as sex-determining genes eventually cause the formation of sex
chromosomes, which then may be more likely to degrade. Identifying these
processes in hornworts will uncover mechanisms that may provide a model for
evolution of separate sexes across all plants and a contrast for the starkly
different pattern in animals. A better understanding of how chromosomes and
genes function will enhance efforts to improve crop plants. This project will
provide varied opportunities for training high school and undergraduate students
in tissue culture, genome assembly, comparative genomics, and plant
transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage multiple
monoicy-dioicy transitions across the hornworts in order to test whether common
rules govern the evolution of sex-linked genes and sex chromosomes. Evidence
will be drawn from a broad range of phylogenetic diversity, evolutionary time,
genomic scales, and gene-phenotype associations. Three specific objectives are:
1) characterize the structure and composition of hornwort sex chromosomes; 2)
identify candidate sex-determining genes by examining genes associated with sex
chromosomes and under selection in multiple lineages; 3) functionally
characterize candidate sex-determining genes by transgenically over-expressing
them in the monoicous model hornwort Anthoceros agrestis. Multiple genome
assembly techniques will be used to create 19 new hornwort genomes representing
monoicous and dioicous species assembled to pseudochromosome level. Genetic
analyses will examine gene orthologs from pairs of monoicous and dioicous
species to identify those with evidence of selection across multiple independent
transitions between monoicy and dioicy. For genes found to recurrently appear to
be selected for on sex chromosomes, their over-expression in A. agrestis is
expected to affect the successful development gametes/gametangia and their
ability to form viable sporophytes. The expected results will contribute
functional knowledge about specific genes, and about the associated chromosome
structural and compositional variations that lead to formation of sex
chromosomes. All data will be publicly available through GenBank as well as
HornwortBase, a new platform for hornwort genomic analysis
(www.hornwortbase.org). Results will be communicated through public lectures and
open access publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.