* 2109563
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Modeling the singular and additive effects of various anthropogenic disturbances using genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Kevin Aviles-Rodriguez, Aviles-Rodriguez, Kevin J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Species are
often affected by multiple human-created stressors simultaneously. However,
disentangling the singular and additive effects of these human made stressors
remains challenging. The fellow will use a technique called landscape genomics,
which allows you to identify relationships between the environment and genetics
of organisms, to build a model to understand the effect of human induced
environmental change (urbanization, climate change) on a freshwater turtle, the
Puerto Rican Slider, in Puerto Rico. This species is impacted by both habitat
loss to urbanization and the spread of an invasive species, the red eared
slider. Additionally, the fellow will facilitate community engagement at various
levels. Firstly, the fellow will work with Puerto Rican science educators to
facilitate the use of iNaturalist, which is an app used to discover, identify
and report local biodiversity. Secondly, the fellow will facilitate training in
molecular laboratory techniques for underrepresented high school students near
the sponsoring institution in New York. Thirdly, the fellow will help connect
students to graduate programs, fellowships, and professional opportunities
through a Facebook group called Jicoteando created for this fellowship and also
via various oral presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will require
the application of population genomics, spatial analyses, and ecological
studies. Thus, the fellow will be provided training in many new skills and in
interdisciplinary work. The landscape genomics models will test the singular and
additive contributions of biotic and abiotic factors in relation to the species’
functional genetic connectivity. To accomplish this, the fellow will first
sequence genomic DNA and then sample relevant landscape and ecological
covariates across the study area. Covariates will then be transformed into
resistance surfaces characterizing their permeability or resistance to the
movement of genetic variation. This transformation will be used to contrast
singular and additive resistances arising from the measured covariates. The
fellow will build important collaborations with conservation agencies with the
goal of writing a management plan for the species informed by the impacts of
landscape features and hybridization. The fellow will also gain outreach
experience working with students at various career
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.