* 2109040
* Collaborative Research: Controlling Process Variability in Bottom-up Nanoelectronic Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Eric Vogel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Realizing the new products, systems, and applications promised by the
nanotechnology revolution requires the stringency of high-quality manufacturing
applied to nanoscale structures. Importantly, no mass-manufactured component,
whether a car part, transistor, or commodity chemical, is perfect. Variations in
structure (e.g., geometry, composition, etc.), and thus function, are
unavoidable. However, by quantitatively understanding these variations and their
distribution, a process or product designer can compensate for them. The
objective of this project is to secure such knowledge for the case of bottom-up
(i.e., additive) nanoelectronic device fabrication. Success of this project
promises to enable new electronic technologies that benefit the consumer,
industrial, and defense sectors, ranging from desktop-printable integrated
circuits to retinal implants for sight restoration. The investigators will carry
out multiple educational and outreach activities, ranging from demonstrations at
a summer camp for girls to the launch of a new conversational podcast that
addresses big challenges in manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide fundamental statistical insight into the connection between bottom-
up nanoelectronic device processing and device electronic properties using two
newly developed high-throughput, non-contact methods. Si nanowire p-n diodes
will serve as model electronic components; they are widely used in
rectification, sensing, and power-harvesting applications. The vapor-liquid-
solid nanowire growth method will allow for systematic control of diode doping
profile, nanowire diameter, and surface characteristics and passivation.
Solution-based electro-translation and electro-orientation measurements will
provide access to the junction and surface properties of individual diodes in an
ensemble as a function of key process parameters. The high-throughput, non-
contact nature of the electro-translation and electro-orientation techniques
will permit the most statistically meaningful characterization to date, and aid
in the design of processes that yield nanoelectronic devices with performance
superior to, and far better controlled than, the state-of-the-
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.