* 2109747
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The neurocircuitry of spider web-building
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Gregory Artiushin, Artiushin, Gregory
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Understanding complex behaviors occurring over
long time scales is a substantial challenge in neuroscience. Orb-web weaving
spiders present a unique example of animal construction that is an innate
behavior (encoded in the genome) performed by an animal with a relatively small
and easy to study nervous system. A web is a record of a spider’s movements (as
it trails silk) and follows simple geometric rules with few sensory inputs.
Despite this simplicity, the neuroscience of spider web-building has received
limited attention. This project uses the hackled orb-weaver, Uloborus diversus,
as a model organism for creating a map of the spider’s brain that identifies the
neurocircuitry that controls web-building. Orb-web building is a readily
understandable behavior, and the non-venomous U. diversus (and its webs) can be
easily transported for public introductions to spider behavioral neuroscience;
the Fellow will pursue teaching and outreach opportunities in science museums
and in the Baltimore school district using this unique feature of the study
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project are to reveal the
circuitry governing orb web-building in U. diversus by 1) establishing a brain
atlas of the major neurotransmitter/neuromodulator systems through
immunohistochemistry, 2) imaging expression of a putative immediate-early gene
homolog by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to mark active neuronal
populations at different stages of web-building, and 3) investigating the
expression and behavioral influence of ecdysone, a candidate signaling molecule
in this system. The Fellow will gain training in spider neurobiology, and the
application of modern molecular techniques such as small molecule FISH to whole-
mount brain preparations in this novel model. Furthermore, this project will
provide experience with computational methods, including the use of alignment
and registration algorithms in creating a spider brain atlas, and familiarity
with machine vision and deep learning, which is relied upon for analysis of
spider behavior and web construction. Pursuit of these aims will provide
opportunities for mentorship, including with undergraduates who will be
annotating an anatomical data set to be incorporated into the atlas. The
completed atlas will be made publicly available and serve as a foundational tool
and entry-point for other researchers interested in spider
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.