* 2109599
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Testing rules of life for developmental trade-offs in sensory and cognitive systems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Sarah McKay Strobel, Strobel, Sarah McKay
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Development involves growth of the body and
differentiation into specialized tissues. In response to early-life stress,
organisms - from plants to insects to mammals - face trade-offs between
developmental speed and specialization. Maturing at a faster rate may help
organisms escape environmental stress but creates trade-offs with other traits
that are important for survival such as body size, limb formation, and immune-
system function. This research explores how accelerated growth impacts neural
and cognitive development, which is critical for animals to accurately respond
to beneficial cues and threats in their environments. Since developmental
pathways and decision-making brain regions are shared across vertebrates, the
Fellow’s research will be a major step forward for identifying mechanisms that
mediate trade-offs between growth and differentiation. The Fellow will develop
new, web-based activities to distribute material to a diverse audience and work
with Native American students to incorporate frog-centric narratives that lend
cultural and historical relevance to lesson plans.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Fellow will build networks across two research labs at Utah State University
(USU) and the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign to examine if sensory and
cognitive phenotypes in anurans are stable or flexible in response to
accelerated development. The Fellow will manipulate developmental timing in
three distantly-related species of anurans to assess trade-offs in morphology,
locomotion, sensory perception, and cognition, and then link trade-offs to
underlying neuromolecular mechanisms and gene-expression patterns. This research
will reveal how developmental plasticity manifests across levels of biological
organization, how these patterns evolve or are maintained across diverse taxa,
and how these phenomena influence the resiliency of species and communities to
ecosystem changes. An additional component of the project is expansion to
northern Utah K-12 schools by the Froggers School Program which brings hands-on,
question-based learning experiences to local classrooms. The Fellow will also
partner with established programs that specialize in student retention,
completion, and inclusion at USU by mentoring students in undergraduate-led
research and outreach projects that match students’ career
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.