* 2109400
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Diet and defense: characterizing the relationship between poison frogs and their tropical ant prey
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Katherine Fiocca, Fiocca, Katherine
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The research
project will focus on the relationship between tropical poison frogs and their
toxic ant prey through both field-based and lab-based experiments. Poison frogs
feed on toxic insects to obtain their chemical defense, consuming only a small
subset of ants when compared to all those available, but little is known about
how and why these specific choices are made. As tropical habitats disappear due
to human modification and the changing environment, insects will continue to
decline. The project will test poison frogs prey choice to determine the
specificity of their diet, and the severity of the extinction threat they may
face if their ant prey disappears due to the current global insect loss. The
Fellow will also focus on broadening the participation of historically
underrepresented groups in Biology by collaborating with local schools to
provide tools to conduct frog research, as well as mentoring, collaborating
with, and supporting undergraduate students and postdoctoral researchers at the
host institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the specificity of poison
frog prey selection and possible behavioral drivers, the Fellow will combine
field sampling in South America and laboratory experiments at the host
institution and will ask if prey toxicity or morphology drives frog prey
selection. Chemical profiles from wild-caught poison frogs and ant prey will be
characterized using gas chromatography and mass spectrometry, and frog stomach
contents will be dissected and identified using DNA barcoding. Community ants
will be collected to compare diet selection to overall ant availability, and
morphology of ants will be quantified using size and coloration measurements.
Frog colonies at the host institution will be employed to test behavioral
drivers of prey selection, including size and toxicity, and measuring foraging
response. The Fellow will participate in broadening the representation of
historically underrepresented students in Biology by 1) partnering with local
students to bring independent frog research into the K-12 classroom, 2)
mentoring and providing academic resources to undergraduate students with
intersectional identities, and 3) recruiting and collaborating with postdoctoral
scholars at the host institution. The Fellow will also pursue training in
current pedagogical techniques with a focus on inclusive teaching methods and
developing course materials at the host institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.