* 2109666
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Maximizing power to uncover the molecular mechanisms between genotype and phenotype
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Avery Bell, Bell, Avery Davis
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Proteins are industrious molecules that are
essential to all life processes. DNA provides instructions for building these
proteins: genes in the DNA are converted into RNA template molecules that are
translated into protein molecules. However, the number of RNA molecules that are
produced from a stretch of DNA (a gene) does not necessarily predict the number
of protein molecules produced from that RNA. This imperfect relationship may
itself be genetically encoded in DNA, which could provide information about how
the genetic encoding of other life processes has evolved. To better understand
how RNA and protein levels are genetically encoded in DNA and how this encoding
may have come to be, the Fellow will compare RNA and protein produced from two
different versions of genes within the same organism using Caenorhabditis
elegans nematodes (tiny worms). This study will improve the genetic resources
available to the large scientific community that uses C. elegans to study
diverse biological processes. This work will also broaden participation in
science via engagement and long-term mentorship of a high schooler from a group
historically underrepresented in science and via communication of the Fellowâ€™s
research and disability-accessible career journey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Fellow will investigate the molecular steps and evolutionary genomic patterns
along the genotype-to-phenotype path by first characterizing the genetic control
of RNA expression variation in C. elegans by analyzing allele-specific RNA
sequencing data from crosses among five wild-type strains. The project will
interrogate the evolutionary patterns underlying RNA expression variation by
evaluating population genomic contexts. To test the hypothesis that genetic
variants in close proximity buffer expression in the translation of RNA into
protein, the Fellow will investigate allele-specific protein levels of a set of
candidate genes within individual animals by engineering epitope tags for highly
sensitive quantification. The Fellow will be trained for a flexible career in
science via expertise expansion, coding and experimental design workshop
development and implementation, and long-term mentoring of a high school and
potentially undergraduate student; this mentorship will broaden the impact of
the research by engaging members of historically underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.