* 2109742
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Neutral buoyancy in deep-sea squid: mechanisms of ammonia rich, low density fluid formation and impacts of ocean acidification
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Andrea Durant, Durant, Andrea
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The research
will examine how deep-sea squid produce a unique fluid for buoyancy. Deep-sea
squid produce and store a fluid internally that is the same density as the
external seawater, an important strategy for buoyancy that limits the energetic
demands of locomotion. The Fellow will examine the cellular processes that lead
to this fluid formation in specialized buoyancy organs of deep-sea squid.
Furthermore, carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from human activities are absorbed
by oceans and consequently, the deep-sea is projected to experience the most
significant decreases in pH (i.e., ocean acidification) within the next century.
Therefore, this research will also examine the impacts of ocean acidification on
deep-sea squid buoyancy. The proposed research will provide a novel framework of
buoyancy processes in deep-sea squid, which play critical roles in the food web
of marine ecosystems both as predator and prey. The Fellow, who is African
American, will promote greater inclusion of underrepresented undergraduate
students at the University of Miami through meaningful mentorship involving the
proposed research activities. The Fellow will also coordinate an annual World
Ocean’s Day program to engage Miami-Dade elementary school children in ocean
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many species of deep-sea squid use some form of
ammonium (NH4+) retention to achieve neutral buoyancy, a very poorly understood
physiological adaptation allowing for a low-energy lifestyle. This research will
examine physiological mechanisms underlying NH4+-rich fluid formation in deep-
sea squid and determine the effect of ocean acidification on buoyancy, as NH4+
regulation is generally linked with acid-base homeostasis in animals. Field
collections of live specimens combined with powerful molecular approaches,
including next-generation sequencing, will be used to (1) characterize the ion-
transport mechanisms allowing for NH4+ retention in the buoyancy organs of squid
and (2) examine alterations in the NH4+ retention mechanisms in response to
acidified seawater. Main findings will describe the first ion transport model in
ammoniacal squid and identify changes in physiological endpoints (i.e.,
buoyancy) in the context of ocean acidification. The Fellow will receive
training in the fields of bioinformatics and cell culturing systems as well as
implementing an annual World Ocean’s Day event aimed at broadening participation
through the involvement of elementary school students from the Miami-Dade
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.