* 2109466
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Deciphering the epigenetic signatures associated with invasive capacity in mixed seagrass communities
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Kelcie Chiquillo, Chiquillo, Kelcie Lorena
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The proposed
research addresses the great debate of whether nature (genetics) or nurture
(environment) drive biological invasions, i.e., the process where introduced
species become harmful, threatening biodiversity and natural ecosystems outside
their normal range. It is known that nature and nurture work in conjunction to
produce biological traits. Traits are controlled by genes, and the expression of
these genes (or how much these genes are turned on) will change depending on the
environment that they are in. Not all introduced species become invasive, and
this research will help understand how environmental changes are linked to
invasions for conservation biology. The outcomes of this research will be to
determine which factors and habitat characteristics modify gene expression and
promote invasion success. This is particularly important as invasive species can
be global threats to local ecosystems, like seagrass meadows, which support a
wide variety of life (e.g. fish, sea turtles, manatees and birds); thus, it can
have implications on society by altering ecosystem services that people depend
on. This project will provide high quality research opportunities to
traditionally excluded groups, and indirectly help management in recovery of
seagrass communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will use both field work
and epigenetic technologies to understand the function and modifications of
anthropogenic stressors in seagrass meadows and determine what role epigenetic
mechanisms play in biological invasions. The fellow will test the hypotheses of
whether species interactions, epigenetics, and microbial communities induce the
epigenetic signatures of the seagrass invasion and determine the physiological
mechanisms that promote an invasive phenotype. For that purpose, this work will
characterize epigenetic modifications, microbial populations, and their
interaction with energetic networks (e.g. nutrient acquisition) to promote
induced competitive phenotypes linked to acclimatization. In doing so, the
fellow will broaden participation by developing a culture-based support program
called ‘SALTI: Science Acceleration and Learning Techniques Inclusivity’ week,
where NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates students and their families
learn hands-on approaches to conducting marine science in South Florida. The
proposed program will produce engaging science-communication films. By
facilitating family support, the diversity of people who are engaged in science
will strengthen, and they and others can gain a deeper understanding of its
ecological importance and feel empowered to protect the marine
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.