* 2109850
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Fluid homeostasis in the evolution of frog breeding phenology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Bryan Juarez, Juarez, Bryan H
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The goal of
this research is to understand the role of aquaporin proteins in allowing frogs
to overcome harsh environments, and how this may be related to climate and
breeding behaviors. Aquaporins allow water to move across cell membranes and
therefore allow frogs to maintain water balance in many different environments.
Frogs might encounter harsh weather conditions during their reproductive period
and must overcome them in order to reproduce and survive. The Fellow will obtain
data on the genetic diversity of aquaporins and other relevant traits from
various species of frogs living in different habitats. Laboratory experiments
will be used to determine how different species may adapt to hot, cold, or dry
conditions and eventually inform amphibian conservation efforts. If differences
across species are observed, it is implied that aquaporins are important in
allowing frogs to survive changing climates and are related to breeding
behaviors in frogs. Additionally, the Fellow will design and implement free
public workshops for graduate students providing practical guides for reporting
statistical results and enhancing scientific reproducibility, with the goal of
promoting the participation of historically underrepresented groups at the
postdoctoral level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test three
hypotheses to determine the evolutionary relationship between behavior, climate,
and genetic and functional diversity in aquaporin proteins: H1) breeding period
duration across anurans is related to climate, H2) diversity in aquaporin
sequences is influenced by climate, and H3) aquaporin gene expression is related
to temperature/water availability. H1 and H2 will be analyzed using phylogenetic
generalized least squares (PGLS) regression while accounting for relevant traits
such as body size or habitat preference. For H2, pairwise genetic distances will
be obtained via generalized time-reversible models and then projected into a
Euclidean space (required for PGLS regression) using multidimensional scaling.
H3 will be analyzed using a phylogenetic multivariate analysis of variance
model. It is expected that temperature will be one of the major factors
influencing sequence diversity, gene expression, and breeding period duration.
This research is important for understanding past biogeography and future
conservation prospects in anurans. Training objectives for the Fellow include
developing mentorship skills and learning to obtain and analyze data on climate,
molecular sequences, and gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.