* 2109605
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Does genomic recombination stabilize populations and enhance ecosystems?
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Christopher Nadeau, Nadeau, Christopher Paul
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/28/2025
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Ecosystems provide invaluable services to
humans such as maintaining water quality and reducing coastal flooding effects.
A key rule of life is that ecosystems with more species often provide better and
more consistent services. The same rule might also apply within species, where
populations with a higher diversity of individuals – that is higher genetic
diversity – are more stable and provide better ecosystem services. If this is
true, managing communities of species to maintain high genetic diversity could
provide significant benefits to humans. However, within a single species, sexual
reproduction alters genetic diversity over time by producing offspring with new
combinations of genes (a result of recombination). This project asks whether
this circumstance breaks down the aforementioned rule of life by disrupting
optimal states of genetic diversity. By answering this question, new insights
will be made about how to appropriately manage genetic diversity across
geographic regions that encompass multiple levels of biological organization.
The Fellow will provide outreach activities associated with this work by
involving members of underrepresented groups in research and training
activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will address how recombination at
the intraspecific level alters predictions from interspecific theory, and
therefore contributes to a cross-scale synthesis in biology. Specifically,
interspecific theory predicts that communities with a mix of highly diverged
species will have higher stability and function. Recombination at the
intraspecific level could change this prediction because it can produce
offspring with low fitness and thereby reduce stability and function
(outbreeding-depression hypothesis). Conversely, recombination between highly
diverged genotypes could increase genotypic diversity among offspring and thus
increase stability and function (increased-diversity hypothesis). The Fellow
will use genomics, lab-based breeding experiments, and field-based mesocosm
experiments in a model system - Daphnia magna - to test how divergence and
recombination interact to alter population stability and function. The Fellow
will learn, apply, and advance genomic techniques for measuring the various
forms of genetic divergence within species. The Fellow will also produce a Guide
to Genetic Management for Conservation Practitioners, provide training and
research exposure to two technicians from underrepresented communities in
biology, and continue outreach to K-12 educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.