* 2109127
* A New Probe of the Magnetic  Interstellar Medium
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Anthony C. Readhead, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2024
* USD 625,319.00

Astronomical research reveals that our universe began with a Big Bang, about
13.7 billion years ago. With modern telescopes we can trace the history of the
universe from a few minutes after the Big Bang. But can we explain the Big Bang
itself and what gave rise to it? The “Inflationary Theory” attempts to do just
that. If Inflationary Theory is correct, then all the structure in the universe,
from clusters of galaxies to stars and planets, started as tiny fluctuations in
spacetime that were created during the Big Bang. The theory also provides a
fascinating link between relativity, which explains the large-scale properties
of the universe, and quantum mechanics, which explains the small-scale
properties of atoms. Tests of the Inflationary Theory are therefore of
fundamental importance to science. According to the Inflationary Theory, there
should be a tiny signal in polarized radiation, visible in every direction. The
investigators are part of a large international effort to find this faint signal
in the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB). To test the model, the team must
accurately measure the polarization from dust clouds in our Milky Way galaxy,
which produces a similar kind of faint polarized light. This team has designed
and built two revolutionary instruments to measure the polarization of the light
from millions of stars. These measurements would enable the team to discriminate
polarization due to dust in the Milky Way from that left over from the Big Bang.
The investigator will contribute existing education and outreach activities at
Cal Tech, including an effort to work with students in the Navajo region,
introducing them to radio astronomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has
developed the Wide-Area Linear Optical Polarimeters (WALOPs), which are based on
a novel application of Wollaston prisms. The linear polarization of a star can
be measured with a single exposure. This is very important because one needs to
measure polarization with accuracy better than 0.1%, and small changes in the
atmosphere between successive exposures can cause systematic errors at this
level. The team will deploy one of the WALOPs in Crete and the other in South
Africa. They will survey the two parts of the celestial sphere that are least
contaminated by dust in the Milky Way, around the northern and southern galactic
polar caps. This will increase the number of stellar polarization measurements
that exist from about 35,000 to over 4 million. They will use the stellar
polarization measurements in conjunction with stellar distance measurements to
trace the Milky Way magnetic field. The investigators will make major
contributions to understanding the structure of the Milky Way’s magnetic fields
and determine the effects of Milky Way dust on the polarization signal in the
CMB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.