* 2109906
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021:  Neural basis of coordinated, multi-limbed movement in an emerging model tardigrade species
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Ana Lyons, Lyons, Ana M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
develops tools in a novel microscopic animal system, to directly observe the
whole-brain, and the whole-body nervous system—during the performance of complex
behaviors. In particular, advanced genetic and microscopic methods will enable
visualization of live brains and nervous systems, while animals are walking and
responding to shifts in environmental stimuli. This will allow for a better
understanding of a wide range of complex behaviors and disorders, and how common
principles of nervous system organization are shared among various forms of
life. To broaden participation in science, the Fellow will establish a new
postdoctoral interest group at the host institution on the topic of anti-ableism
in academia. The Fellow will also organize a week-long training program for
undergraduate researchers at a Hispanic-serving institution, illuminating the
path to becoming a future academic researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in
genome editing and cutting-edge microscopy have allowed for single-cell
resolution imaging of neuronal activity in small, transparent model organisms in
vivo—making the exploration of foundational questions in neuroscience
increasingly accessible. Here, this project develops the microscopic animal
known as the tardigrade as a new model system for convergent, systems-level
neuroscience. Compared to C. elegans, tardigrades have more complex nervous
systems capable of coordinated multi-limbed locomotion, yet they retain many
lab-friendly qualities. This work establishes methods for transgenics in
Hypsibius exemplaris and generates a strain of genetically-encoded calcium
indicator GCaMP tardigrades. Subsequently, the whole-brain, whole-body neural
dynamics of live tardigrades will be characterized, while animals undergo
distinct sets of behaviors: constrained in a custom-built microfluidic device,
freely-moving, and during -taxis. Behavioral assays utilize light-sheet
microscopy and high-resolution video recordings in vivo. This highly
interdisciplinary research will make significant contributions towards
understanding how global neural dynamics underlie more complex behavior, such as
locomotion, in live multi-limbed organisms. As a broader impact, the Fellow will
form a new postdoctoral interest group at UCSF on the topic of “Understanding
and challenging ableism in academia.” This group will have regularly scheduled
journal clubs, a group website, outreach at academic conferences, and K12
outreach. Additionally, a week-long tardigrade-focused “Lab Fundamentals
Bootcamp” will be organized, for first-time undergraduate researchers at
California State University Channel Islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.