* 2109816
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Extremes in the interplay: the development and effects of gut microorganisms within Earth’s largest terrestrial species
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jenna Parker, Parker, Jenna Marie
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The Fellow will study microorganisms
(bacteria, fungi, viruses, etc.) living in the gut of African elephant orphans
brought to an orphanage in Kenya. Using dung samples, the Fellow will identify
which microorganisms are present within the orphans in order to determine if
microorganisms change as the orphans move from the wild to human care and
eventually back into the wild. The Fellow will also investigate whether the
elephants’ health and behavior change according to which microorganisms are
present. This research will therefore consider how living organisms are unified
with other living things that live inside them. The Fellow is likely to discover
new microbial species, and conservationists may use this new understanding of
microbiome-host dynamics to increase the survival of captive-raised individuals
of endangered species when they are released into the wild. Dissemination of
this information will reach a diverse public audience, including through an
international collaboration with Kenyans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be
collected from three areas within Samburu, Kenya: the Reteti Elephant Sanctuary
(Reteti), Sera Rhino Sanctuary (Sera), and Samburu and Buffalo Springs National
Reserves (the reserves) where a long-term monitoring project of elephants takes
place. Dung samples will be collected every two weeks from the orphans beginning
at Reteti and after their release into Sera. Wild elephants in Sera, who have
the same environment as the released orphans, and wild elephants of the same age
as the orphans at the reserves will also be sampled during the study. These wild
elephant dung samples will be used to assess whether orphans can develop
microbial communities similar to wild individuals. The Fellow will measure the
environment, physiology and behavior of orphans with data including but not
limited to body condition scores, diet records, weight records, intestinal worm
loads, glucocorticoid levels, focal behavioral follows, and GPS collar fixes.
The Fellow will be trained in laboratory techniques to identify microorganisms
and arrange to employ and share these skills at a newly built laboratory in
Kenya. The Fellow will lead data collection in collaboration with the sponsoring
institution and several Kenyan wildlife organizations, exchanging knowledge and
writing papers with Kenyan researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.