* 2109712
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Adaptation along a thermal gradient in the holopelagic ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Remi Ketchum, Ketchum, Remi N
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Temperature affects all biological processes,
yet the current understanding of how thermal environment impacts populations,
organisms, and genetic responses is largely dominated by land and freshwater
species. While studies in marine systems are growing in number, there are few
studies investigating how marine systems adapt to temperatures in what are
called holopelagic animals (animals that live their entire life in the water
column). Studying organisms with biological traits distinct from classically
studied organisms has great potential to broaden our understanding not only of
these organisms, but of fundamental and broad evolutionary processes in general.
This knowledge gap will be addressed by studying populations of the holopelagic
ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi from distinct thermal environments along its
native range of the Atlantic coast of the United States. Investigating the
mechanisms species employ to respond to contemporary thermal gradients will
provide insights into their capacity to survive the rising temperatures
associated with climate change. This project will increase participation in the
sciences through mentoring and outreach to groups under-represented in science.

This research will use an integrative approach to expand our understanding of
how thermal environment drives differentiation in M. leidyi. First, whole-genome
sequencing of M. leidyi populations along the Atlantic coast will be performed
in order to characterize how thermal environment affects population dynamics in
holopelagic animals. Second, experimental thermal assays from populations along
this large latitudinal gradient will provide insights into geographic patterns
of resilience to thermal stress and shed light on the interaction between
temperature, development, and holopelagic dispersal. Finally, outlier analysis
on the whole-genome sequencing data will elucidate how genotypic differentiation
arises in the face of ongoing gene flow and how species with life history traits
that necessitate exposure to a wide range of temperatures adapt. Importantly,
the fellow will receive training in bioinformatics, embryo culturing techniques,
developing inclusive research programs, and becoming a more effective science
communicator.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.