* 2109786
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Spatially Resolving the Cellular Landscape of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Symbiosis with M. truncatula and D. epigaea
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Trevor Tivey, Tivey                   Trevor         R
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 01/31/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Trevor Tivey is "Using Spatial RNA-Seq and endocycle analyses to spatially
resolve the cellular landscape of arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis with Medicago
truncatula and Diversispora epigaea". The host institution for the fellowship is
the Boyce Thompson Institute and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Maria
Harrison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad diversity of plants and a limited group
of soil fungi interact together in a type of association known as arbuscular
mycorrhizal symbiosis. This underground relationship between plants and fungi
takes place within plant root cells, and helps both plants and fungi acquire
critical nutrients. Key plant genes governing this symbiosis have been
identified, however the timing and regulation of plant and fungal gene
expression during colonization is complex and requires further understanding. To
characterize this interaction, this project will measure plant and fungal
transcripts during symbiosis at a fine spatial resolution and identify gene
expression differences between cells along a gradient of fungal colonization.
Results from this project will help to develop resources for the study of root-
microbe interactions and enable the application of these methods to address
similar questions in major crops. In the process, this project will promote
research participation of undergraduates who are underrepresented in biology and
support students from the local community through outreach and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use spatial mRNA-Seq to map the
plant and fungal transcriptomes and compare gene expression in all plant cell
types along a spatiotemporal gradient of colonization, enable the creation of
plant-fungal gene co-expression networks, and correlate transcriptomic and
microscopical evidence of endoploidy to identify candidate gene pathways. To
address the controls on endoploidy, plant mutants, cell cycle markers, and image
analysis will be used to disrupt symbiosis signaling and to examine the effects
on endoreduplication. An increased understanding of the significance of
endoploidy in AM symbiosis has the potential to inform mechanisms of symbiotic
and parasitic biotroph colonization in plants. Spatial transcriptome datasets
will be made publicly available in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. M.
truncatula cell cycle marker lines and endocycle regulation mutants will be
shared for future experimental studies of the plant cell cycle and biotrophic
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: host-microbe, mycorrhiza, spatial
transcriptomics, endoreduplication, colonization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.