* 2109179
* Circumstellar Disk Evolution and Implications for Planet Formation in the Binary Environment
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Lisa Prato, Lowell Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 486,836.00

While recent surveys suggest that planet formation is universal, circumstellar
disks, which provide the raw material for planet formation, are detected less
often in young binary star systems, particularly in close binaries. Given that
1/3 to 1/2 of all stars occur in binary systems, the question naturally arises
as to how the variable irradiation and gravitational fields in these systems
influence the properties (and survivability) of circumstellar disks and the
planets that form therein. This research program will use data covering a wide
wavelength range to advance our understanding of the structure and evolution of
circum-stellar disks for a sample of both close and widely separated binaries.
This program will support a post-doctoral researcher as well as several broad
efforts to stimulate interest in the physical sciences among historically
underrepresented communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator proposes a study of young binary stars over a wide range of
separations (from a few to several hundred A.U.) to characterize (1) the impact
membership in a multiple system has on circumstellar disk formation, structure,
and evolution, and (2) why circumstellar disk evolution appears uneven in some
wide binary systems despite what one might have expected to be inconsequential
dynamical effects of the companion star. Wider pairs will provide the basis of a
more nuanced study of circumstellar disk behavior in general, while disk
characteristics in closer pairs will offer insight into not only disk but also
binary formation models. To carry out these goals, the PI will employ high-
resolution infrared spectroscopy, high-angular resolution optical/infrared
imaging, time series photometry - both ground-based and with NASAâ€™s K2 - to
determine rotation periods, as well as direct imaging of circumstellar disks
through their sub-millimeter dust emission with ALMA. The analysis of these data
will lead to a comprehensive picture of both the formation and evolution of
circumstellar disks in close and wide binaries viewed as a function of their
stellar and binary properties. Additionally, by combining individual rotation
periods and values for the projected rotation it may ultimately be possible to
measure the stellar inclination in binaries. Misaligned stellar rotation axes
may provide clues to dynamical processes behind disk
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.