* 2109692
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: : Investigating the roles of  epigenetic and genomic variation through time in the invasion success of Japanese  white-eye
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Madhvi Venkatraman, Venkatraman, Madhvi
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The introduction of non-native species in an
environment can have significant problematic effects on many native species in
that environment. Therefore, a main goal of invasion biology is to understand
what makes a species a successful invader. Understanding the genetics of
invasive species is considered extremely important to understanding what makes a
species a successful invader. This project will focus on epigenetic mechanisms
for invasive species. Epigenetic mechanisms can regulate gene expression, and
therefore an individualâ€™s phenotype, without any change in DNA sequence. As it
becomes increasingly clear that epigenetic mechanisms play an important role in
species responses to changing environments, it is essential to assess how
epigenetic mechanisms themselves evolve. The nascent field of historical
epigenetics, or the epigenetics of museum specimens, provides an exciting
opportunity to study the evolution of epigenetic mechanisms. Understanding the
genetic and epigenetic characteristics of species can help predict its capacity
for invasion, and therefore provide information that can aid in mitigating the
negative effects of species introductions.

The primary objective of this research is to investigate the relative roles
epigenetic and genomic variation in invasion success, focusing on the Japanese
white-eye (Zosterops japonicus), also known as the warbling white-eye. Z.
japonicus, a bird native to East Asia, was introduced to Hawaii in the early
1900s and has since become the most abundant bird on the islands. This study
will use whole genome sequencing and modern and historical epigenetics to 1)
characterize current levels of genomic and epigenetic divergence in native and
invasive populations of Z. japonicus, 2) assess how genomic and epigenetic
divergence changed over time in these populations, and 3) characterize
epigenetic variation in genes involved in immune response to avian malaria, a
disease that has decimated native Hawaiian bird populations but Z. japonicus
shows resistance to. This research tests the central hypothesis that epigenetic
variation plays a large role in early colonization by an invasive species but
that over time the pathways become robust, and populations show increased
genomic divergence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.