* 2109989
* Collaborative Research: Reproductive heterogeneity in the structured coalescent framework
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Peter Beerli, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2024
* USD 410,357.00

Curbing the effects of pathogens and securing the survival of endangered or
commercially exploited species is a matter of national interest. While
collecting genetic data on these pathogens and endangered species has become
standard over the last decade, the data requires translation and analysis to be
useful for policy decisions. These data are commonly used in models that
describe both the recent and ancient history of the species. These models are
founded on theoretical population genetics and are often not very flexible. This
research addresses the assumption that the populations that are being studied
have a relatively constant number of offspring per generation. Scientific
observation has shown that this assumption is incorrect. For example, some SARS-
CoV-2 strains are more successful in infecting people than others, suggesting
that the ancestor with a new mutation has many more 'offspring' than others.
This research generalizes the common assumption and constructs a framework that
allows for the improvement of these population models by offering an increase in
accuracy and a decrease in bias. This research will result in the creation of a
software tool that will benefit the research community and train the next
generation researchers. Accurate estimates of population size and genetic
diversity will lead to better control of pathogen outbreaks, regulation of catch
quota for commercial fishing, and maintenance of endangered species.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the effect of heterogeneity of offspring
production on the genealogy of a population using (1) a theoretical framework
that can handle heterogeneity and the development of software to infer this
heterogeneity from genomic data. This framework is based on the fractional
coalescent expanded to multiple, structured populations. The research extends a
single-population derivation of the fractional coalescent that incorporates
offspring variability as a random variable. These new methods will be
incorporated into the widely-used open-source computer software MIGRATE. The new
approach will then be compared with multi-merger coalescent methods using
artificial data. These data are generated using (2) a simulator taking into
account environmental quality changes within and among populations affecting the
number of offspring an individual can have. (3) Analyses of the effect of
heterogeneity for many biological datasets over a broad range of species with
different life histories: from viruses to humpback whales and from small
geographic scale to large scales. These biological datasets will be analyzed in
collaboration with practical scientists. Software and tutorials will be reported
on http://popgen.sc.fsu.edu and
https://peterbeerli.com.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.