* 2109697
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Role of Transposable Elements and DNA Methylation on Immunity Gene Regulation and Diversification in Maize and Model Setaria viridis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Read, Read, Andrew C
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Andrew Read is “The role of transposable elements and DNA methylation on
immunity gene regulation and diversification in maize and the model monocot
Setaria viridis.” The host institution for the fellowship is the University of
Minnesota and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Nathan
Springer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although plants are able to fend off many
disease-causing organisms, when a pathogen successfully infects a plant the
results can be devastating. Aggressive pathogens can result in loss of tree
species in forests and crop loss in agricultural systems. This project will
improve our understanding of how individual plants sense and respond to
pathogens. Additionally, the research will examine the genetic features that
allow plant populations to rapidly evolve diverse sets of immunity genes. Unlike
much prior work in this field, this project will focus on plant immunity in the
grasses, a group of plants that includes many of our most important staple crops
such as rice, corn, and wheat. Altogether, this research will empower the
breeding and development of improved disease resistance in these important
crops. Each of the three research objectives generates a resource for the
broader plant science community. Over the course of the project, the Fellow will
receive technical and leadership skills from a group of interdisciplinary
scientists and will in turn mentor several undergraduates during meaningful
research experiences. Further, the Fellow will engage in community outreach via
Market Science, a program led by post-docs and graduate students to provide
family-friendly science education. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Plants lack an
adaptive immune system and, instead, encode a diverse suite of rapidly evolving
immunity genes. It is becoming increasingly clear that transposable elements
(TEs) and DNA methylation influence the evolution and expression of these
immunity genes. Research on the model dicot Arabidopsis thaliana has been
foundational in our understanding of TEs, DNA methylation, and immunity gene
biology, however many of our most important crop plants are monocot grasses, a
group that diverged from dicots over 125 million years ago. This project will
combine a descriptive study of TE, DNA methylation, and immunity gene
associations in a diverse maize population with mechanistic testing of these
associations using CRISPR/Cas gene knockouts and transgenic stress-reporter
lines of the model monocot Setaria viridis. These data and tools will enable a
better understanding of monocot responses to biotic stress and inform the
development and deployment of disease resistant cultivars. Results of research
will be shared on pre-print servers when submitted to open-access scientific
journals. Plasmids generated over the course of the project will be deposited
with Addgene and transgenic and edited plants will be made
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: plant immunity, epigenetics,
transposable elements, Setaria viridis, disease
resistance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.