* 2109841
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The morphological drivers and effects of long-distance bird migration
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Oscar Johnson, Johnson, Oscar
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Long-distance
migration is one of the most spectacular behaviors in the natural world, but is
costly for the animals that undertake it. The reasons why animals migrate are
well known, but the changes in morphology (form and function) required to
undertake that migration are less well known. This research aims to understand
how long-distance migration affects the morphology of migratory species, and
will further the understanding of the origins of migration. The Fellow will
integrate large sets of genetic, morphological, and distributional data in a
diverse group of birds to answer these questions both within and across species.
To increase broader participation at the host institution the Fellow will mentor
undergraduate students, organize community events for postdoctoral researchers,
and organize outreach events at local K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
factors that predispose species or populations to migratory behavior remain
poorly understood. Previous research on avian migration has revealed the
importance of extrinsic factors like seasonality and habitat as drivers of
migration, but intrinsic attributes of birds such as their morphologies are also
likely critical for predisposition to migratory lifestyles and remain largely
unexplored. This project will compile morphological data from 1,300 species of
suboscine passerine birds and combine these with phylogenetic and distribution
data to test for associations between key morphological features and the gain
and loss of seasonal migration. The Fellow will then investigate range-wide
variation in morphology and migratory behavior in four species of birds that
contain both migratory and resident populations to test whether geographical
variation in morphological traits corresponds with differences in migratory
behavior at the population level. This study will advance our understanding of
the effects and drivers of migration, a behavior ubiquitous across the tree of
life. This project will involve extensive training of undergraduate researchers
at a predominantly Hispanic-serving institution in both field methods and
cutting-edge molecular techniques, as well as mentoring undergraduate student
research projects. The fellow will conduct outreach at K-12 schools using
lessons and activities about bird migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.