* 2109962
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Weak and Protective Measurements in the Time Domain
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Maximilian Schlosshauer, University of Portland
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 71,029.00

This project will realize new ways of measuring a quantum system. In physics,
the concept of a measurement is extremely important. We can only learn about the
world around us by performing measurements, e.g., when you look at something you
are “measuring" it with your eye. In classical physics, measurements can be
performed without disturbance—one gains information about an object without
changing its state. (The trajectory of a baseball is unchanged as you look at
it). In quantum mechanics, however, it was long believed that a measurement
would nearly always change the state of the system, the wave function would
“collapse," and there was no way around that fact. Recently that belief has been
challenged, as physicists have come to realize that it is possible to perform
so-called weak or protective measurements in which one gains information about
the object while only minimally disturbing its state. Such types of measurements
have been transforming the landscape of quantum measurements. They also offer
technologically important applications in quantum information processing. In
this project, the group will implement new experimental techniques for
performing weak and protective measurements. These techniques promise to provide
significant improvements in measurement performance and flexibility over
existing experiments. In parallel, the group will advance our understanding of
weak and protective measurements through theoretical investigations, whose
predictions will in turn be tested by the experiments. Much of the work will be
performed by a diverse group of undergraduate students, providing an excellent
opportunity for them to develop research skills and further their scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will experimentally realize weak and
protective measurements with single photons and complement these experiments
with theoretical studies. The experimental approach is characterized by using
the temporal differential group delay (DGD) between polarization components as a
measuring “pointer." The group will construct a source of narrow-band, pure-
state, single photons in the telecommunications C-band (~1550 nm) and use it to
first implement a weak measurement of polarization by directly measuring photon
arrival times after the DGD. This basic setup will then serve as the central
building block of a novel experimental realization of a protective measurement
in the time domain by utilizing DGD in a loop configuration to measure
expectation values of photon polarization. The optical loop will enable the team
to pass the photons repeatedly through the same measurement and state-protection
stage, thus implementing the protective measurement. In the theoretical portion
of the project, the group will study several important properties of protective
measurements and their performance, including: the effect of diminished state
purity on the measurement, photon survival probabilities, and the uncertainty in
the final measurement. These theoretical activities will generate models and
predictions that can be tested by experiment and that will enhance our
understanding of protective measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.