* 2109023
* Collaborative Research: Multi-phase Sulfur and Nitrogen Chemistry in Air and Snow during Alaskan Layered Pollution and Chemical Analysis (ALPACA)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Jack Dibb, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2024
* USD 194,683.00

This collaborative effort will contribute to the interagency-supported Alaskan
Layered Pollution and Chemical Analysis (ALPACA) program, that includes the NSF-
funded Sustainably Navigating Arctic Pollution Through Engaging Communities
(SNAP-TEC) project. This project focuses on chemical mechanisms for the
conversion of sulfur dioxide to particulate sulfate under the cold, low-light
conditions in Fairbanks Alaska. This research also will investigate the ability
of snow chemistry to affect air quality. The results of this study will
contribute to a better understanding of the chemical mechanisms for forming air
pollution in northerly regions, such as in Fairbanks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
following two hypotheses will be examined through a combination of field,
laboratory, and modeling studies: (1) Brown carbon drives the oxidation of S(IV)
to particle sulfate through reactions involving BrC-derived triplet excited
states (3C*) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2); and (2) The persistent winter
snowpack has a significant influence on the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere
(e.g., through release of HONO), as well as on the processing of sulfur and
nitrogen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the broader impacts of this research
includes the development of science modules for local middle school students.
The modules will be made freely available to teachers, homeschooling parents,
and self-guided students. For the homeschooling audience, the PIs plan to
supplement the activities with projects that utilize data from air monitoring
networks that leverage active-learning principles. The homeschooling sub-focus
is particularly important for Alaska Native and American Indian populations, who
rely on homeschooling much more than other groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.