* 2109082
* DISES-RCN: Resilience in agricultural socio-environmental systems
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Tala Awada, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 09/30/2025
* USD 403,020.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Research Coordination
Network will utilize four existing agriculture research networks to create a
‘network of networks’ that will use existing data and resources to begin to
address some of these large-scale, big-picture knowledge gaps in agricultural
sciences. It will build a robust transdisciplinary and collaborative community
that will act as a hub for conducting long-term, multi-scale research focused on
resilient agricultural systems; drive theoretical and data science advances; and
develop practical applications to understand, reduce, and mitigate the
vulnerability of agricultural systems to collapse within and across multiple
scales. These advances will contribute directly to food security and sustainable
natural resources. This project will be of interest to decision makers,
researchers, farmers and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
details the creation of a Research Coordination Network (RCN) that brings
together 4 networks to enable sharing and integration of data, expertise, and
knowledge; develop a collaborative community; strengthen existing and foster new
synergies; and incorporate a diversity of perspectives and knowledge less likely
to be realized in one institution or isolated network. The proposed network is
uniquely positioned to advance knowledge about the resilience of integrated
agricultural systems beyond the plant/plot/field/farm scale and will address the
coupled human and environmental components. It is novel in its creation of a
network of networks that will leverage the diverse domains of expertise, and
scales of inference, of each network. The project will also take advantage of
existing data collection programs by multiple U.S. agencies (e.g., NEON,
ClimateHub), and provide the opportunity for the novel application of those data
sets to research questions that will be significantly broader than the
institutional mandate of each individual network. The proposed network will
provide an empirical basis for goals of food security in an increasingly
uncertain and non-stationary time for human societies. The project will directly
impact researchers, students, scientists, technicians, farmers, stakeholders and
partners across the extensive and diverse membership of the 4 networks and the
Advisory Board. The proposed network will mentor, train, and challenge students
in diverse and innovative research and connect them with scientists and
communities across the network to promote professional and personal growth.
Findings and results will be broadly disseminated through the four networks and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.