* 2109097
* CAS-MNP: Molecular Probing Surface Reactivity Dynamics of Native versus Photo-Oxidized Microplastics and Nanoplastics in Environmental Aqueous Media
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ludmilla Aristilde, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 458,122.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Environmental Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical,
Biological, Environmental, and Transport Systems is supporting Dr. Ludmilla
Aristilde at Northwestern University for research on microplastics and
nanoplastics, which are important end-products in the environmental fate of
plastics in oceans, lakes, and rivers. These remnant plastic materials are
reported to trap various organic contaminants in different environmental aqueous
media. Through photo-oxidation due to exposure to sunlight in the presence of
reactive particles, the fragmented plastic surfaces can develop different
chemical characteristics. This project focuses on unraveling these different
chemical characteristics and their role in facilitating contaminant adsorption
on the polyethylene, polypropylene, and polystyrene plastic types. The outreach
and educational broader impacts aim to implement undergraduate students into the
research activities, foster the engagement of high school students, and increase
public literacy regarding the environmental fates of plastic
wastes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies several spectroscopic
investigations coupled with molecular simulations to unravel the surface
chemistry and chemical dynamics at native versus photo-oxidized structures of
microplastics and nanoplastics in relation to their selective interactions with
specific contaminant classes. The adsorbent role of plastics relies on favorable
nanoscale to molecular-scale interactions at the water-plastic interfaces.
However, a mechanistic understanding of these interactions, especially within
the context of the different surface chemistries of native versus photo-oxidized
plastics, remains a critical knowledge gap. Atomistic-scale experimental probing
at the water-plastic interfacial environments is performed to elucidate changes
in molecular reactivity in different media composition representing freshwater
versus seawater of varying chemistries. These experimental results are coupled
with molecular modeling simulations of solvated systems to determine the
structural factors that control favorable versus unfavorable contaminant
affinity to native versus photo-aged nanoplastic surfaces. The research is
expected to provide new mechanistic insights on how structural and chemical
changes at the microplastic and nanoplastic surfaces influence the trapping
dynamics of organic contaminants of different classes at the water-plastic
interface. These findings will be important in the quest to develop predictive
models for the role of microplastics and nanoplastics in the fate of organic
contaminants in freshwater and marine waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.