* 2109331
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC--Coupled Tropospheric Reactive Halogen Chemistry in the Subtropical Marine Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jochen Stutz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2024
* USD 473,163.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the influence of reactive halogens on the oxidation capacity (the
reactivity) of the atmosphere. A measurement campaign will be conducted at the
BIOS Tudor Hill Marine Atmospheric Observatory in Bermuda to measure reactive
gaseous halogens (bromine, chlorine, and iodine species) and their aerosol-phase
counterparts. The results of this research will improve the process level
representation of reactive halogen chemistry in atmospheric chemical transport
models, increasing the ability to accurately predict the concentrations of
pollutants such as ozone in the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
observations supported by this effort will include what are expected to be the
most abundant reactive gaseous bromine, chlorine, and iodine species (HCl, BrO,
ClNO2, IO, among several others) and their aerosol-phase counterparts (Br-, Cl-,
I-) from which the gas-phase species are derived. For gas-phase species, three
different observational techniques (CIMS, LP-DOAS, TILDAS) will be employed,
allowing for comparison of the measurements of some key reactive halogens while
also expanding the suite of measured halogen species. A chemically detailed
representation of the halogen chemistry will be included into the GEOS-Chem
model as part of this project. This project will support three U.S. graduate
students and one U.K. graduate student, providing these students with experience
in field work, global modeling, and international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.