* 2109890
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Bacterial spatial organization as a microscale mechanism of ecosystem resilience
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Jen Nguyen, Nguyen, Jen
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Ecosystems — from plant roots to animal guts
to oceans — are sustained by their microbial communities: collections of
microorganisms that can protect or promote disease, depending on the
environmental conditions. These communities routinely experience and endure
environmental change. Some environmental changes destabilize communities,
leading to pronounced changes in the microbial species composing a community.
How these changes persist, even long after normal environmental conditions
return, is not yet understood. This project seeks to learn how the spatial
organization of single bacterial cells can determine how the bacterial community
within the mammalian gut responds to environmental perturbation. By combining
sequence-based observation with biophysical insights, the Fellow seeks to
provide the first causal mechanism to explain and visualize how some gut
ecosystems recover from disturbance while others suffer lasting change. Students
recruited from underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines will engage in these
activities with the Fellow.

This project will investigate how organization of intestinal communities
maintains the homeostasis of their host’s gut ecosystem by changing the
bacterial species residing in microscopic folds of the gut epithelium (crypts).
Both crypt- and whole-gut species composition can be altered after diarrhea, a
perturbation that increases the abundance of some bacterial species and causes
the extinction of others. Diarrhea also alters mucus and fluid flow in the gut
that might enable changes in bacterial spatial organization that favor or
destabilize the presence of specific species in the gut. To test this, the
Fellow will develop a microfluidic system to track bacterial movement in a
structural mimic of the mucus and fluid flow in the gut. The Fellow will
generate a spatio-temporal map of bacteria in pre- and post-diarrhea guts to
link in situ spatial organization with whole community composition. These
multiscale data will unveil bacterial behaviors currently masked by prevailing
sequencing techniques. This dataset, and all tools developed to generate it,
will be made available through public repositories to promote multiscale
research across diverse ecosystems. The training objectives include developing
new skills in bioinformatics and histology, enabling the Fellow to complement
findings from these methods with existing expertise in microfluidics and
bacterial growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.