* 2109832
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Defining the Genetic Basis of Tomato Reproductive Heat Tolerance through Phenotyping, Genome-wide Association, &amp; Predictive Mode
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Cedar Warman, Warman, Cedar Dale
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Cedar Warman is " Defining the Genetic Basis of Reproductive Heat Tolerance in
Tomato through High-throughput Pollen Tube Phenotyping, Genome-wide association,
and Predictive Modeling." The host institution for the fellowship is the
University of Arizona and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Ravishankar
Palanivelu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant reproduction is highly sensitive to heat
stress. Failures in plant reproduction can lead to crop yield losses and the
economic and social impacts of these losses are likely to increase as
temperatures rise in a changing climate. Some plant varieties are more resistant
to heat stress than others: in this project, 200 tomato varieties that show a
wide range of responses to heat stress will be measured during reproduction.
These measurements will then be used to find variable regions of the tomato
genome that are associated with resistance and susceptibility to heat stress.
The identification of these regions will enable predictions to be made for the
heat tolerance of ~1000 tomato cultivars. This project will answer fundamental
questions about the mechanisms plants use to resist heat stress; it will also
contribute new methods for measuring plant responses to the environment and new
strategies for making predictions from these measurements. Over the course of
this project, the Fellow will be trained in genetics and computational biology
by an interdisciplinary group of mentoring scientists. This project will be used
as a case study to create an interactive curriculum to be presented at local
high schools with enrollments that include a majority of students who have been
traditionally underrepresented in U.S. science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key steps
of plant reproduction, including the development and function of pollen, are
disrupted after even short periods of excess heat, leading to incomplete
fertilization and a reduction in seed and fruit yield. This project will survey
pollen tube growth phenotypes under heat stress from a diverse panel of 200
tomato cultivars and wild relatives using a novel high-throughput imaging
system. Genetic loci associated with variation in these phenotypes will be
identified using genome-wide association studies (GWAS). These data will form
the basis of a genomic prediction model that will be used to predict phenotypes
under heat stress for ~1000 sequenced tomato cultivars, with a subset of these
predictions functionally validated to assess model accuracy. The phenotyping,
loci identification, and genomic prediction pipelines developed over the course
of this project will be readily adaptable to other crops. All data generated in
this project will be released to the public, including deep-learning models and
training datasets used for high-throughput phenotyping. A broader understanding
of heat stress during pollen tube growth will guide future breeding efforts to
create novel heat tolerant varieties both in tomato and in other agriculturally
important species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Keywords: tomato,
environmental stress, heat stress, thermotolerance, genetics, phenotyping,
computer vision, deep learning, genome-wide association, genomic
prediction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.