* 2109458
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Comparative viromics in vertebrates from the Sonoran Desert of the Baja California peninsula, Mexico and Arizona
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Karla Vargas, Vargas, Karla Leonor
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Viruses play
essential roles supporting life on Earth. They are present in all environments
and can affect all types of organisms. Viruses are genetically and structurally
diverse and their evolution is linked to their hosts. The fellow will
characterize viral communities in wildlife and investigate host-virus dynamics
in the Sonoran Desert. The natural variation of this region makes it the ideal
setting to explore viral diversity associated with wildlife and the interactions
between the host and the virus. This research is relevant to understanding
factors that contribute to genetic variation within species, and also to
understand how new species of viruses can emerge. Furthermore, investigating
undiscovered viral communities in wildlife may be instrumental to gain knowledge
on emergence of new viruses and prevent potential spread to humans. This
fellowship will support the research, training, and career advancement of a
fellow from an underrepresented group in STEM. The fellow will develop
initiatives for underrepresented groups at the postdoctoral level, provide
mentorship and develop educational tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration
with the NSF funded BajaGeoGenomics consortium, the fellow will sample across
the Baja California peninsula, Mexico (BCP), and the Sonoran Desert, Arizona
(SDA) and follow a viral metagenomics approach to a) characterize RNA and DNA
viruses associated with host populations of rodents, lizards, and carnivores, b)
compare viral diversity within BCP and SDA host populations and evaluate
potential geo-climatic and demographic predictors of viral diversity, and c)
assess host-virus dynamics across BCP by investigating whether viral genomic
differences are consistent with intraspecific genetic divergence between
northern and southern populations. The project will integrate genomic and
biogeographic data to fill fundamental gaps in viral diversity and explore the
role of environmental stressors and host demographics in host-virus systems. The
fellow will investigate the lineal history of host and viruses in context of the
geo-climatic history of the region, predictors of viral richness, and patterns
of divergence in viruses and hosts. As part of this appointment, the fellow will
work along an international cross-disciplinary team, receive training in viral
metagenomics methods, organize an international postdoctoral seminar series,
initiate a virtual network for Latinx postdocs, contribute to the development of
bilingual educational videos, and promote science education and mentorship for
K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.