* 2109860
* IMPACTS OF RAPID LANDSCAPE CHANGE AND BIODIVERSITY ON VIRUS HOST SPECIFICITY
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Christine Johnson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,379,565.00

Rapid changes to landscapes and the biodiversity of plants and animals are
altering relationships between microbes and their natural hosts with direct
implications for human health. This study investigates the impacts of
deforestation, landscape change, and biodiversity on virus characteristics that
determine zoonotic potential, including virus “host plasticity”, which is the
diversity of host species a virus can infect in nature. Previous work has
indicated that higher virus host plasticity is linked to increased likelihood of
human-to-human transmission and wider geographic spread. This project seeks to
understand whether landscape and biodiversity change drive microbes towards
greater host plasticity and therefore heightened pandemic risk. Findings from
this research will contribute to ecological theory on the impact of
environmental changes on microbial adaptation, with practical implications for
management of ecosystems at high risk for pathogen spillover. This research is
especially relevant to public authorities seeking evidence on the relationship
between environmental change, biodiversity, disease outbreaks, and pandemics.
Training opportunities provided through this project will help foster a network
of cross-trained scientists interested in disease dynamics, public health and
animal health who will strengthen One Health research into the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viruses have more opportunities to adapt to new hosts at
the edge of ecosystem boundaries, which could influence virus host plasticity
and increase spillover risk as new ecosystem edges are formed through habitat
fragmentation. To test this hypothesis, this research investigates the host
range of bat-borne coronaviruses and mosquito-borne arboviruses (flaviviruses,
alphaviruses and bunyaviruses) across replicated gradients of landscape change
and community composition in the biodiverse tropical forests of Southeast Asia.
Theoretical and computational modeling, underpinned by field investigations and
in vitro experiments, will evaluate (1) how virus host and vector plasticity
changes at the edge of ecosystems, such as at the boundary between forest and
urban habitats, 2) how virus host plasticity is related to virus epidemiology
across landscapes, and 3) how intra-host genetic diversity of viruses is
influenced by host and vector plasticity. Data and model driven insights will
inform on the role that mosquito vectors play in constraining or expanding virus
host plasticity and genetic diversity. Characterization of bat-borne
coronaviruses and host affinities in an ecosystem with SARS-CoV-related viruses
will further inform on coronavirus evolution and emergence of zoonotic
potential. This study explores an important paradigm of functional relationships
between biodiversity and public health to advance a mechanistic understanding of
zoonotic virus emergence with potential to be generalized to other
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.