* 2109420
* RUI: Weaving Space with Quantum Entanglement, and Black Holes in Stochastic Matrix Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Vatche Sahakian, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 135,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Vatche Sahakian at Harvey
Mudd College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most significant tensions in
modern physics lies at the junction between our understanding of the
gravitational force through Einstein's theory of General Relativity, and the
state-of-the-art description of the microscopic world through Quantum Mechanics.
As part of his research, Professor Sahakian will investigate this tension by
exploring new ideas that suggest that the perception of space, time, and gravity
can be viewed as emergent from more fundamental principles in Quantum Mechanics.
As a result, this research advances the national interest by promoting the
progress of science at a foundational level: exploration of our understanding of
the physical laws through inconsistencies between two pillars of modern physics.
This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts.
Undergraduate students will be involved in the research, and thus the project
provides critical training for junior physicists beginning research in
theoretical physics. Professor Sahakian will also give public lectures on this
research and he will continue to develop new course curricula supporting
research in theoretical physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically,
Professor Sahakian will explore several key ideas in string theory and quantum
gravity: the possibility that resolution of the clash between quantum mechanics
and general relativity might lie in a rethinking of the nature of spacetime as
an emergent phenomenon arising from quantum entanglement, and the development of
new computational techniques in quantum gravity to explore the character of the
black hole horizon. The research goals of this project are to achieve a better
understanding of the mechanics through which the fabric of spacetime can arise
through entanglement entropy, as an emergent collective phenomenon of underlying
microscopic dynamics in string theory; to develop new computational numerical
techniques that allow for exploration of quantum gravity in new regimes; and to
better understand the nature of the black hole horizon using newly developed
non-perturbative techniques. This project addresses fundamental questions in two
general areas: emergent spacetime through quantum information theory, and
stochastic quantization in quantum gravity. Professor Sahakian will also develop
an undergraduate course on modern topics in theoretical physics, providing
students with solid foundations for graduate school, and prepare an
undergraduate textbook on classical field theory. He will also engage in course
development on high performance numerical computation in physics including
exposure to machine learning and deep neural networks. Finally, a public lecture
series will be implemented, bringing accessible presentations of modern physics
topics to the wider community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.