* 2109974
* Workshop: An Evidence-based Industry Perspective on STEM Education for the Future
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Haluk Demirkan, International Society of Service Innovation Profes
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 03/31/2022
* USD 85,800.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by further informing higher
education leaders about industry perspectives concerning skills needed for STEM
jobs of the future. The project will focus at a 10-year and beyond horizon. It
will also take account of the disruptive changes driven by advanced digital
technologies, work behaviors, and business models. These changes are profoundly
affecting the nature of work, skills needed for work, and the composition of the
workforce. In many industries, the most in-demand occupations, specialties, and
skills did not exist five or ten years ago. The pace of change is likely to
accelerate going forward and to have tremendous impacts on how the workforce of
the future acquires and applies new skills. This project will examine the new
research questions that emerged from an earlier project on the industry
perspective on STEM education for the future. These research questions include:
1) How has industry perspective on needed skills changed because of the COVID-19
crisis? 2) How are industry recruiters and hiring managers screening STEM
graduates for both specialized and foundational skills? 3) From industry
perspective, which colleges/universities and curricula/pedagogies better align
with current and future industry demand? 4) Can a set of desirable
curriculum/pedagogy attributes be developed? and 5) How are industry recruiters
using badges and certifications to assess job-readiness of college graduates?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine these research questions, this project will
organize and host four virtual workshops in fall and winter 2021. The
International Society of Service Innovation Professionals (ISSIP), in
collaboration with the University of Washington, will execute the project. With
more than 1400 members representing multiple industry sectors, academia, and
government, ISSIP is uniquely positioned to conduct this research. By presenting
an evidence-based industry perspective, this project aims to further explore how
to close the gap between undergraduate education and employment, to ensure the
Nation continues to have a thriving STEM workforce in the future. Workshop 1
will focus on the industry hiring process: How are industry recruiters and
hiring managers screening STEM graduates for technical skills/foundational
skills? And how does that map to the undergraduate curricula and/or pedagogies
of the universities with which they have had the most and least success hiring
new graduates? Workshop 2 will examine industry perspectives on badging and
evolution of credentialing. Workshop 3 will explore industry perspectives on
university curricula and pedagogies that are best aligned with the needs of
industry. Workshop 4 will examine the industry perspective on the impact of
COVID-19 on the future of work and of learning. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.