* 2109616
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The benefits of yeasts to bees and bees to yeasts
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Megan Moore, Moore, Megan Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. When two species engage in an interaction that
benefits both partners, it is called a mutualism. Mutualisms are widespread in
the natural world, and are vital in how ecosystems function. A well-studied
example of mutualisms is pollination. Insect pollinators, such as bees, have
recently been discovered to have additional mutualistic interactions with
microbes that live in flower nectar. This project will investigate the costs,
benefits and mechanisms of mutualistic interactions for bee pollinators and
nectar yeast species that are native to the southeastern United States. The
Fellow will investigate these questions across several biological scales: from
the genetic and cellular level up to organism responses and ecological
interactions. This research will broaden the scientific understanding of
pollination ecology, and help to preserve interactions among flowering plants,
insects and microbes that are vital to both natural and agricultural systems.
The Fellow will recruit and train undergraduate students from groups that are
underrepresented in science; the results of this research will also be shared
with the public at local science outreach events.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Fellow will use a series of experiments to assess the costs and benefits of
yeast-insect interactions, scaling from genomes to organismal response. The
first experiment will investigate the genetic pathways that lead to volatile
production in yeast, and determine which volatile compounds/mixtures serve as
attractors to bee pollinators. Using these volatiles, the Fellow will assess
whether the presence of attractive volatiles increases bee pollinator fitness
indirectly via increased foraging efficiency, and/or directly by increased
nutrition from ingesting yeast cells. To test whether yeast benefit from
dispersal via pollinator vectors, the Fellow will test the efficacy of yeast to
adhere to bee exoskeletons or survive passage through bee digestive systems, and
establish growth in new nectar sources after transport. This experiment will
also test the hypothesis that yeast undergo outcrossing and sexual reproduction
in bee digestive tracts. During this project, the Fellow will receive training
in chemical and genomic analyses, and develop technical skills in microbial
biology and behavioral ecology. The Fellow will train undergraduate students in
experimental design, data collection and statistical analyses during the course
of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.