* 2109149
* Nonlocality in Continuum Mechanics, Population Dynamics, and Neural Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Mikil Foss, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 406,757.00

Nonlocal systems have been used to predict cracks and damage in dynamic
fracture, to denoise images, and to provide more accurate models in binary
fluids and in phase separation. This project concerns theories employed to model
discontinuous, singular, or irregular behavior encountered in such applications.
Currently, they are applied to study damage-resistant cover glass such as the
one produced for cellphones, composite-based aircrafts, blades for wind
turbines, oil and gas extraction, and in the nuclear energy industry, as in
fracturing of concrete in extreme situations and storage of spent nuclear fuel.
The project also aims to develop mathematical tools to advance the understanding
of nonlocal models, with the goal of answering questions such as how much damage
a specified force will induce in a material, what is the make-up of a population
under given growth, decay, and diffusion rules, and how can efficiency and
efficacy of neural networks performance be improved. The project provides
opportunities for research training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct a mathematical
and computational investigation of nonlocal models that arise in dynamic
fracture in plates, image processing, and phase transitions. They will create
neural networks models with continuous depth, which involve nonlocality, by
considering a cumulative effect of layers in the hidden states. To provide a
theoretical and methodological foundation for the study of nonlocal models
within the realm of applied mathematics, the researchers will adapt existing
techniques from the local theory to the nonlocal framework, as well as develop
new methods. Applied mathematicians from academia and research laboratories will
provide expertise in modeling and computational
aspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the DMS Applied
Mathematics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.