* 2109259
* DISES: RUI: Understanding the Use of Discretion and its Socio-Environmental Consequences for Reservoir Systems
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Stephen Bollens, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,600,000.00

As one of the most heavily impounded large rivers in the world, the Columbia
River system provides an outstanding model in which to investigate integrated
biophysical and socioeconomic dynamics of river impoundment. This project
focuses on the dynamic, reciprocal relationship between environmental and social
systems by examining dam operations, the decision-making process governing those
operations, and feedbacks between this decision-making process and the
environment. As a well-characterized system with quantifiable outcomes (e.g.
water levels, volumes, flows, fates) and a well-established but diverse and
evolving regulatory environment, dam and reservoir management offers an
opportunity to test fundamental hypotheses about tradeoffs between rules-based
and discretion-based management approaches to gain deeper understanding of
adaptive management of reservoirs specifically, and of the nature of socio-
environmental integration generally. In pursuing this goal, the investigators
will generate fundamental knowledge about how environmental conditions affect
resource management and vice versa. The project will also involve training for
undergraduate and graduate students; education of K-12 teachers; and engagement
of reservoir managers, stakeholders, and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
the Columbia River system as a model, this project will advance understanding
of: 1) how, and to what extent, the degree of discretion in management affects
biophysical outcomes; 2) how, and to what extent, management-dependent natural
system outcomes affect rule setting, exercise of discretion, and decision
outcomes, and 3) how social and environmental factors shape the dynamic
reciprocal relationship between the biophysical outcomes from management
decisions and the structure of rules governing them. The research will integrate
fundamental understanding of river biogeochemistry and ecology, how to match the
appropriate level of flexibility to environmental management challenges, and how
costs and benefits of discretion in environmental management influences
economics while providing actionable insight. It employs economic contract and
mechanism design theory to an adaptive management paradigm for dam and reservoir
operations, a setting that is both specific and ubiquitous enough to allow for
novel empirical testing of fundamental hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.