* 2109851
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Phage life history and evolution as a driver of microbial ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Emily Ebel, Ebel, Emily R
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. In virtually every environment on earth, many
kinds of bacteria and viruses co-exist within microbial communities. Different
kinds of communities perform different functions important for humans, such as
nutrient absorption in the gut, chemical cycling in the soil, and fermentation
of food and drink. These functions depend on the stable coexistence of different
community members, each of which is constantly evolving and responding to
environmental changes. This research will explore how phage, a group of viruses
that infect bacteria, impact the stability of microbial communities over time.
Phage can quickly evolve to infect different types of bacteria and transfer
important genes between them. Depending on the environment, they may either kill
bacteria outright or remain dormant for generations. Understanding the behavior
and evolution of phage in diverse settings will give scientists more tools to
control microbial communities, especially in the face of environmental change.
This research will also support teaching, mentoring, and outreach by the Fellow
to improve scientific communication and participation of underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although diverse bacteriophage are expected to be
key drivers of bacterial population dynamics, common sequencing approaches are
unable to resolve phage life history strategies or host ranges within complex
microbial communities. Consequently, many fundamentals of phage-bacteria
interactions remain unknown, including how quickly host range evolves; how phage
life history is shaped by environmental stress; or the overall extent to which
phage drive bacterial abundance and community stability. This research will
combine emerging single-cell sequencing approaches with culture-based phenotype
assays and environmental stress experiments to characterize how phage behavior
and evolution impact microbial community stability. To understand the
interactions between ecological factors and phage proprieties, the Fellow will
perform natural community sampling from diverse environments as well as
manipulative experiments with synthetic communities in a model laboratory
organism. Through this project, the Fellow will develop laboratory and analysis
skills in complex microbial systems, collaborate with diverse microbiome
scientists, and produce scientific publications with the aim of improving
functional control of microbial communities. The Fellow will also gain
experience teaching and mentoring undergraduates and work to improve
transparency and inclusion in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.