* 2109502
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Comparative methods and model clades for evolutionary developmental biology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Samuel Church, Church, Samuel H
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The funded research will use large datasets to
investigate how evolution leads to biodiversity. Methods for collecting large
amounts of data with thousands of measured biological traits are becoming
increasingly common and inexpensive to generate. Examples of such data include
developmental assays of gene expression. As this data becomes more common, so do
comparisons of these data across species. However, evolutionary biologists have
warned for years that comparisons across species must be performed using
mathematical models that account for how related species are, or they risk
misidentifying patterns across species. This fellowship will focus on developing
new methods for comparing data across species. This research is important given
that, in this era of rapid global change, robust models of evolution are needed
to accurately predict how biodiversity is likely to change in the future.
Furthermore, this research will broaden participation in science by recruiting
and mentoring undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in
computational biological analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will result in a new comparative framework for analyzing high-dimensional data
on gene expression across species. Gene expression data are common in assays of
developmental biology, yet current comparisons of these data across taxa often
fail to consider the evolutionary non-independence of observations. There exists
a rich literature of comparative methods designed to statistically compare
traits across taxa, but their implementation for high-dimensional continuous
traits faces technical limitations. To overcome these limitations, first the
fellow will identify and extend evolutionary models to describe the distribution
of expression data across taxa. This analysis will require the fellow to achieve
specific training objectives, including seeking out advanced knowledge in
mathematical modeling, to overcome common challenges in analyzing datasets that
have many thousands of parameters. Second, the fellow will apply these methods
to real-world data on gene expression across tissues and species, testing
hypotheses about the degree to which phylogeny, gene pathway, and gene product
type explain variation. The results of this study will be a comparative
framework that can be immediately applied to datasets of gene expression across
species, which will be released as free, publicly accessible, open-source
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.