* 2109928
* SBIR Phase I:  Categorical Representation Learning in Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Artan Sheshmani, QGNAI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,531.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is substantial improvement in artificial intelligence. Despite advances
in AI, the current state-of-the-art platforms are still weak in learning and
require large amounts of training data. The proposed system creates a better AI
system by exploring more relationships within complex data sets. The initial
application is cancer detection in genomic data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel
relation-oriented machine learning platform. Current platforms are object-
oriented, where objects (e.g., words, sequence data, etc.) are represented as
feature vectors. The feature vector representation is powerful in performing
tasks such as pattern recognition, classification, and regression but
ineffective in learning the interrelationships of objects in great detail. An
in-depth understanding of objects is paramount in learning. Also, the meaning of
objects is defined and can only be defined through their interrelationship with
other objects. Based on category theory in mathematics and quantum physics, the
proposed platform is relation-oriented. It maps and preserves the
interrelationship between objects in all dimensions. Based on the observed
concurrences of objects and their relations, the platform fuses them to create
more complex objects progressively and learns their interrelations iteratively
to form a hierarchical structure associated with the dataset. This platform
automatically learns the meaning of objects and the governing rules between
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.