* 2109356
* Improving Access to Biology Education Research by Decreasing Barriers to Participation in the Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Research’s 2021 National Conference
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Jennifer Knight, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 02/28/2023
* USD 49,996.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing access to the
2021 Society for Advancement of Biology Education Research (SABER) national
conference. Each year, SABER hosts a national conference for biology education
researchers and practitioners. On average, about 400 participants have attended
these in-person conferences. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2020
SABER national conference was held virtually, with no registration fees. These
changes led to a tremendous increase in participation, with over 1400
registrations for the meeting and over 500 active participants at conference
sessions. To sustain broad attendance at the 2021 conference and to increase the
diversity of attendees, this proposal intends to expand conference activities
through a regular series of special lectures, to design the 2021 annual meeting
to include the option for virtual attendance, and to provide registration and
travel fellowships to broaden participation in biology education research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Special interest groups within the SABER community will
select 12 speakers for a series of live webinars that will be offered throughout
the year. The webinars will be freely available to any interested participant.
In addition, they will be recorded and archived on the SABER website. In
addition, the project will build virtual attendance options into all sessions of
the 2021 SABER conference, which is expected to be an in-person conference
scheduled for July 22-25, 2021. Virtual participants will pay registration fees
that are half as much as those required for in-person participation. The virtual
participation option is expected to enable participation by biology education
researchers and practitioners who would be otherwise unable to attend the
conference due to financial or logistical challenges. Finally, the project will
support travel fellowships to support in-person participation by individuals
from diverse backgrounds. The availability of travel fellowships will be
advertised to minority-serving institutions including Hispanic-serving
institutions and Historically Black Colleges and Universities, as well as
through partner organizations such as the Society for Advancement of Chicanos
and Native Americans in Science. Recipients of travel fellowships will be
selected by SABER’s Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion committee. These efforts
are intended to broaden participation in and access to SABER activities. The NSF
IUSE: EHR program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.