* 2109572
* I-Corps: Additive manufacturing of nickel titanium aerospace actuators
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Mohammad Elahinia, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of shape memory alloy actuators through 3D printing that may compete
with the force capabilities of traditional hydraulic actuators. An actuator is a
component of a machine that is responsible for controlling a system. A typical
commercial aircraft has several independent hydraulic systems and one or two
pumps to pressurize the systems. These systems are used to control the flight
surfaces that control the movement of the aircraft in the air. These systems add
a great deal of weight to the aircraft. In the development of vehicles for the
aerospace industry, space and weight are always of great concern. This
technology has the potential to reduce the weight and footprint of actuators
used in aircraft by eliminating the need for hydraulic systems. This project has
a potential added benefit of also reducing the fire risk for aircraft
experiencing an emergency in the air or during landing. Finally, this technology
has the potential to aid satellite and rocket manufacturing industries with
similar motivations for adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of additive manufacturing strategies for shape memory
alloys. Shape memory alloys are a class of materials that allow the materials to
be formed into a desired shape, which is called the parent shape. This parent
shape can then be deformed and upon the application of heat above a certain
threshold, the material will revert to its parent shape exhibiting a “shape
memory.” Nickle and titanium are readily alloyed to produce shape memory alloy
actuators. However, traditional machining of nickel titanium alloys are
challenging due to their high hardness and the fact that the heat generated
during machining has the potential to change the properties of the material. The
use of additive manufacturing using a high-powered laser to melt powdered metals
is used to address the difficulties associated with traditional machining. The
use of specific printing strategies has been developed to modify the threshold
temperature of the actuator during printing and thus, enable the material
properties to be tailored. This tailoring allows the development of actuators
customized to the customers’ specific needa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.