* 2109675
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Elucidating genomic, transcriptomic, and phenotypic consequences of genetic rescue in wild populations
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Cinnamon Mittan, Mittan, Cinnamon S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project leverages genetic information to
improve the conservation of endangered species. A common strategy to support
endangered species is moving individuals from large populations to small, inbred
populations, known as “human-assisted migration”. This exchange reduces
inbreeding, and often improves the health of recipient populations. However, the
exact causes of improvement are poorly understood. Mitchell’s Satyr Butterfly
(MSB) is a critically endangered butterfly, and one of many species for which
human-assisted migration is being considered. Mitchell’s Satyr once had a large
range in the US, but is now restricted to a few small populations Michigan and
larger, but disconnected populations in Mississippi. This project will identify
the underlying genetic processes that improve offspring health in recipient
populations (Michigan) to inform decisions about the choice of populations for
assisted-migration. This novel approach will be broadly applicable to conserving
other endangered species with disconnected populations that might otherwise face
extinction. The fellow will also lead a two-day workshop for undergraduates to
increase involvement and inclusion of groups historically underrepresented in
field biology. The workshop includes finding and applying to research
opportunities, hands-on training in field techniques, and professional network
building to increase the students’ confidence in pursuing
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in model systems suggests that inbred
individuals are more sensitive to stress, and that genes with reduced genetic
variation due to inbreeding are more likely to be expressed mal-adaptively in
stressful environments, leading to decreased fitness. This project investigates
the mechanism and extent by which assisted migration (gene flow) mitigates this
inbreeding-stress relationship in wild populations by (1) Quantifying genomic
variation and inbreeding across the range of MSB through whole-genome sequencing
of all extant populations; (2) Assessing critical-thermal maxima in Michigan,
Mississippi, and outcrossed individuals, thus linking heat-tolerance phenotype
to genomic variation (1), and transcriptional response; and (3) Quantifying gene
expression during heat stress in Michigan, Mississippi and outcrossed
individuals to identify the genes and molecular pathways most impacted by the
inbreeding-stress relationship, and those potentially rescued by outcrossing.
The fellow will receive training in whole-genome bioinformatics, receive
mentorship in manuscript preparation, and will build collaborative relationships
with conservation managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.