* 2109207
* Resonant Contact Binaries in the Trans-Neptunian Belt
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Scott Sheppard, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 352,538.00

This project carried out by Lowell Observatory is to examine Trans-Neptunian
Objects (TNOs), which are dwarf planets that orbit the Sun at average distances
greater than Neptune. The most famous and the first TNO to be discovered, is
Pluto. TNOs are the leftovers of Solar System formation. By studying them, key
information about the early Solar System and, by extension, the history of
exoplanet systems can be constrained. With exoplanet science growing fast with
the discovery and characterization of thousands of exoplanets, and trans-
Neptunian-like belts around them, the need to better understand local small body
populations for context is growing. This project is a comprehensive study of
contact binary TNOs, which are bodies consisting of two connected lobes. The aim
of the project is to understand their formation, history, and population. The
data to be collected promises to be the largest comprehensive sample of contact
binary properties yet obtained. The results will help us better interpret the
properties of the contact binary Arrokoth, visited by NASA’s New Horizons
mission. The Broader Impacts of this project include participation in “Meet an
Astronomer” Nights and other public talks hosted by Lowell Observatory. An
undergraduate student will also be recruited to participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observations in this project will be used to
examine the resonant TNOs through lightcurve and color studies. By studying
resonant TNOs, rotational and physical properties of these objects will be
ascertained while also probing the contact binary population. This will allow
the shape, period, and color distributions to be constrained for each tested
resonance. Together, these efforts will contribute to an improved understanding
of the trans-Neptunian belt and contact binaries, as well as their formation
which is critical to understand Arrokoth. A comparison of the results from this
study with the results from the second flyby of the New Horizons spacecraft will
allow an in-depth understanding of the contact binaries, planet formation, and
by extension, exo-planetary systems and disks. The project has wide-ranging
significance for various areas of astronomy including small body research and
Solar System formation and evolution. Understanding how contact binaries form
and how efficient the process of formation is will provide insights into the
very early solar system and the formation of planetesimals, which are the
building blocks of the planets. An improved understanding of our Solar System
will also facilitate more meaningful comparisons to extra-solar planetary
systems and protoplanetary disks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.