* 2109902
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Integrating megafauna community reassembly with ecosystem carbon cycling
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Elizabeth Forbes, Forbes, Elizabeth S
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Climate change (mediated by accelerated carbon
emissions) and wildlife community reassembly (mediated by unprecedented rates of
species introduction and loss) are environmental calling cards of our modern
era. However, the connection between changes to wildlife communities and changes
in the carbon cycle is rarely drawn, despite growing recognition that wildlife
may control carbon exchange between ecosystems and the atmosphere. This project
will demonstrate how management of wildlife can mediate uptake and storage of
carbon in a boreal forest ecosystem, potentially offering a nature-based climate
solution, and more accurately account for sources and fates of carbon in the
system’s carbon budget. The Fellow will train the next generation of scientists
(high school, undergraduate and graduate) from diverse backgrounds by
integrating wildlife conservation with ecosystem science using field and
laboratory methods, data science, and carbon modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project quantifies impacts of moose populations on
carbon cycling in the boreal forest of Newfoundland, Canada. Boreal forests are
a sink for atmospheric carbon, but Newfoundland’s forest’s capacity as a carbon
sink may be threatened by rising populations of introduced moose and their
foraging impacts on forest biomass and soil biogeochemistry. The study will
systematically examine how variation in moose population abundances links to
changes to forest carbon storage and emissions across a landscape-scale moose
density gradient. The Fellow will quantify carbon stored aboveground in tree
biomass, carbon stored in soil, and the soil carbon emissions in relation to
local moose abundance and local biophysical features of the landscape. These
three aspects of carbon cycling will be measured with drone imagery, soil
sampling and carbon analyses in the laboratory, and custom carbon-emissions
detecting sensors, respectively. The data will holistically describe moose
impacts on carbon storage and emissions. These insights will be used to develop
a model relating moose density and landscape features to carbon cycling across
Newfoundland to provide a spatial decision-support tool for landscape management
to enhance ecosystem carbon uptake and storage. The Fellow will receive training
in soil and climate science, landscape ecology, and data science as well as
providing outreach to students on these topics through multiple online and in-
person venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.