* 2109452
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: : Investigating how neopolyploidy affects the core microbiome and how the extended phenotype can facilitate ecological establishment
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Thomas Anneberg, Anneberg, Thomas
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Polyploidy, or whole-genome duplication, has
frequently acted as a mechanism of generating new species. However, first-
generation polyploids, or neopolyploids, are expected to suffer from a high risk
of local extinction shortly after they arise due to competition with their
diploid parents for limited space and resources. Despite the expectation that
neopolyploids should go locally extinct shortly after they arise, we see a
disproportionately high number of established polyploids in nature. This
research will address this apparent gap in knowledge by investigating what
factors can drive the establishment of neopolyploid populations. The project
will specifically characterize how environmental resource supply and microbial
interactions affect the ability of neopolyploids to persist in the presence of
their diploid parents and become established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research is to understand the ecological drivers of neopolyploid
establishment by testing two hypotheses: that neopolyploid establishment is 1)
dependent on the external environment, and 2) is facilitated by the extended
phenotype: neopolyploid genotypes and their microbiomes. The approach to testing
these hypotheses is to first characterize how neopolyploidy affects the
microbiome community and shapes host phenotypes. Second, to predict the outcome
of competition between diploids and their neopolyploid descendants and whether
it differs given the extended phenotype, multigenerational competition
experiments will be combined with modern coexistence theory. The expected
outcomes of this research are to understand 1) how neotetraploidy affects the
microbiome composition and diversity and 2) how the microbiome affects the
competitive ability of neotetraploids against their diploid ancestors, and 3)
whether these patterns vary with the genotype of a lineage or across
environmental resource gradients. The fellow will use diploid and synthetic
neotetraploid duckweeds, which is a uniquely well-suited system for this
research since they have rapid generation times and are compact enough to allow
high replication across various environmental conditions. Additionally, this
research will incorporate the mentorship of high school and undergraduate
students from under-represented groups to carry out independent research
projects, as well as facilitating outreach activities with local intercity
classrooms on ecological
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.