* 2109481
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: From genomes to phenomes: the rules of life that govern bacterial-fungal-plant symbioses
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Louis Berrios, Berrios, Louis
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. For instance, bacteria and a certain kind of
fungi (called ectomycorrhizal fungi) associate with plants and help drive the
processes that link agriculture, ecosystem health, and climate patterns.
However, knowledge of bacterial-fungal interactions currently lacks detailed
descriptions of which bacterial-fungal relationships persist in the environment
and which bacterial-fungal relationships work together (symbiotically) to
contribute to plant growth and development. This research will investigate the
fundamentals of these complex relationships to the end of establishing models
that determine how plants develop in complex environments. Moreover, this
project will provide the fellow with the interdisciplinary training needed to
implement large scale, microbial-based ecosystem sustainability goals and will
facilitate partnerships with graphic designers and local organizations to put
forth a series of virtual animations that link underrepresented groups to the
arts and sciences.

This research will directly test the Baas Becking Hypothesis—which states that
the environment (e.g., plants) selects from a homogenous pool of organismal
partners—by determining the composition of plant-associated bacterial-fungal
partners across the coastal plain of California. To better understand the
mechanistic details (genotypes-to-phenotypes) that drive bacterial-fungal-plant
relationships, top-down (i.e., metagenomic sequencing) and bottom-up (i.e.,
plant bioassays) approaches will be combined to 1) establish prevalent plant-
associated bacterial-fungal interactions, 2) uncover the degree of genetic
overlap and dissimilarity between bacterial-fungal plant-associated communities
across microscale (proximal and distal to plant root systems) and landscape
(California coastline) scales, and 3) determine the importance of select
bacterial-fungal interactions and functions for mediating microbial community
assemblages and fostering plant development. Resultantly, two models/rules of
life will be tested: 1) symbioses depend as much on biotic context as on abiotic
context; and 2) because dominant mutualisms change over space, this leads to
predicable changes in enzymatic activity and community assemblages that impact
Earth system functions (e.g., shifts in oligotrophic bacteria that are more
chitinolytic than cellulolytic). Further, the fellow will gain critical training
in microbial ecology (i.e., micro- and macroscales) to the end of generating
predictive models that undergird ecosystem functioning with plant-microbe
interactions. Finally, this project will generate virtual exhibits that will
anthropomorphize plant-microbe communities to demonstrate how diverse
relationships in life strengthen the social fabric of our communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.