* 2109465
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Biophotonics, Species, and Relationships
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Dakota McCoy, McCoy, Dakota E
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Coral reefs, essential elements of the global
ecosystem, depend on solar-powered symbioses: algae live inside marine reef
animals, such as coral and giant clams, and photosynthesize to provide ready
energy. However, increasingly environmental changes jeopardize the balance that
maintains these animal-algal symbioses. To protect critically-threatened reefs
worldwide, we face a powerful imperative to (i) explore how reef animals harness
solar power so efficiently and (ii) understand threats to their intricate solar.
In this project, the fellow will research optical adaptations and evolution in
reef-dwelling symbiotic animals. The results will help us understand why corals
bleach so severely while other symbiotic marine animals do not. Along the way,
the innate creativity of nature may inspire sustainable technologies for solar
power.

Through three projects, the fellow will explore the following rule of life: how
do animal hosts and their symbionts partner together to harness solar energy? In
Project 1, the fellow will research whether photosymbiotic acoels and anemones
have adaptations to channel light toward their symbionts, and if so whether
these adaptations resemble light-harnessing structures seen in other organisms
(such as plants). As a result, this work will set the stage for comparative
evolutionary analyses as well as, potentially, inspiring new solar panel
research. In Project 2, the fellow will test hypotheses about what selective
forces drive diversity in biophotonic structures (from Project 1) and colors
across acoels and anemones. For example, are environmental influences—such as
depth—less important than symbiotic pressures—such as species of symbiont? In
Project 3, the fellow will analyze why some animals are so susceptible to
bleaching while others are resistant. Specifically, I will assess whether
certain biophotonic adaptations that concentrate light for photosynthetic could
actually exacerbate bleaching – potentially by causing organisms to heat up, or
experience light shock, amidst warming waters. The fellow will learn and apply
cutting-edge microscopy, applied physics, and materials science methods to
marine biology (including hyperspectral imaging, transmission electron
microscopy, and finite-difference time-domain simulations).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.