* 2109866
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Mosquito-borne disease networks and variation in transmission traits across a gradient of anthropogenic impact
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Aimee Massey, Massey, Aimee
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The spread of zoonotic disease directly ties
human and wildlife communities together. Not only are there direct consequences
of contracting infection at the individual level, but there are local and global
costs of mitigating the effects of disease outbreak. From an ecosystem services
perspective, the increase in human-wildlife interactions and subsequent disease
emergence caused by deforestation should inform the costs of losing tropical
forests. However, there are gaps in knowledge about the impacts of land-use
change on vector-borne disease because of the difficulty in collecting such
data. This research will use a novel approach of integrating genomic sequencing
with vector feeding behavior to quantify patterns of zoonotic disease
transmission across a gradient of human activity along the Juru치 River in the
Amazon rainforest. The research will address the consequences of ongoing
landscape transformation on biodiversity and human health; students of diverse
backgrounds will be engaged in field-training and research activities throughout
the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using novel techniques for sequencing and
identifying DNA and RNA present in mosquito vector samples, the Fellow will
focus on quantifying (1) the abundance and distribution of host, vector, and
pathogen species communities and (2) the transmission traits (biting rate and
host choice) of mosquito vectors. To accomplish these objectives, the Fellow
will work in collaboration with Brazilian researchers at the Instituto Juru치 to
collect mosquitoes from forested sites along the Juru치 River that span a
gradient of anthropogenic activity. The DNA and RNA from these vectors will be
sequenced using a molecular method of massive parallel sequencing
(metabarcoding). This protocol will allow the Fellow to directly measure the
interactions of individual vectors with their hosts (both wildlife and human
hosts) as well as quantify disease prevalence across different levels of land-
use change. The interdisciplinary nature of the research along with an emphasis
on combining field and wet-lab methods present opportunities for mentoring of
young scientists and students. The Fellow will use cutting-edge molecular
methods which can be generalized to other systems. The study will also promote
international collaboration and produce meaningful disease risk data for an
initiative to manage wildlife and habitat along the Juru치
River.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.