* 2109451
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: What is the predictability of hybrid genome evolution across ecological contexts?
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Alexandra Fraik, Fraik, Alexandra Kaye
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Hybridization has been of long-standing
interest to evolutionary biologists to understand how species interactions at
the genetic level affect variation. Studying hybridization can provide valuable
data on the genetic basis of traits of interest, and how new species evolve.
Hybridization can occur naturally or as a consequence of human activities. This
project will investigate how hybridization among natural and human-induced
hybridizing Oncorhynchus trout species affects these species phenotypes.
Throughout the Pacific Northwest, O. c. clarkii (coastal cutthroat trout) and O.
mykiss (Steelhead) are ecologically and culturally significant trout species
that hybridize, making them ideal species for this research. This work will be
crucial to furthering scientific understanding of how the environment influences
hybrid genome evolution and how predictable it is.

The proposed NSF PRFB project builds on previous work to address a major gap in
evolutionary biology research: how do hybrid genomes evolve? This research will
evaluate the Rules of Life that govern how hybridization affects speciesâ€™
adaptation and evolution, specifically how ecological context impacts genome
evolution. Genomic and phenotypic data from experimental, lab-produced crosses
of two trout species will be used to (1) investigate how hybridization impacts
the chromosomal and genomic landscape of hybrids. Paired life-history data from
hybrid crosses will (2) elucidate the fitness and phenotypic effects of
hybridization. Finally, genomic data produced from natural populations will (3)
demonstrate if parallel signals of genomic introgression are detected across
natural and anthropogenically hybridizing populations. The computational methods
developed for diagnosing the ancestry of tracts of genomic introgression,
quantifying gene flow, and estimating timing of hybridization events in trout
species can be applied across taxa. Research on the fitness and phenotypic
consequences of hybridization will provide candidates for the genetic basis of
hybrid fitness and phenotypes (e.g., genomic incompatibilities) currently
lacking in hybridization literature. The PI will also mentor high school
students from underrepresented communities in computational genomic projects,
analyzing other hybrid genomic data sets. The PI and students will then co-
present the findings from this research to conservation practitioners from
tribal, non-profit and governmental institutions working on these hybridizing
taxa in a workshop. This work will expand the computational genomic research
skills of this PI, furthering her professional development for a career as an
evolutionary geneticist for a top research institute.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.