* 2109919
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Translating transcriptome to phenome: defining intercellular signaling landscapes of the liver
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Tara McCray, McCray, Tara
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. One of the most fundamental rules of life is
the “central dogma” and states that DNA is the genetic code for proteins. As the
activity of thousands of proteins have been identified, the next rule of life
needs to define how these overlapping protein signals resolve to control cells
and build tissues. This research aims to understand how cells use multiple
redundant pathways to talk to one another and achieve a particular outcome. In
short, this research will expand upon the established central dogma and enhance
scientific understanding of how cell signaling networks are integrated. While
doing so, this research will advance scientific technology in spatial
transcriptomics and organoid engineering with far reaching applications in
disease models and drug toxicity testing. This research will also broaden the
participation in STEM through mentorship and outreach opportunities for
underrepresented minorities in the University of Washington surrounding
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next rule of life should establish how
numerous cell signaling cascades achieve a predictive phenotype. Using the
regenerating liver as a model phenotype, this research will determine the
biological signals and their originating intercellular sources that drive that
phenome. Human liver tissue and bioengineering human liver grafts will be
studied using single cell RNA sequencing and spatial transcriptomics to create a
‘blueprint’ of liver cell signaling networks. These networks will be
reconstructed in vitro through an engineered novel human liver organoid
coculture model. To mimic the cell:cell interactions in native tissue, human
primary liver epithelial organoids will be cultured alongside their in vivo
neighbors, endothelial and fibroblast cells. Finally, cell signaling networks
will be examined within the cocultured organoids in vitro and in in vivo grafts
to prove their involvement in liver regeneration. Components of individual
signaling networks will be probed to determine their contribution to the liver
regeneration phenotype and develop a predictive rule of life. These research
findings will be communicated through training opportunities such as teaching,
conference presentations and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.