* 2109626
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Resolving the evolution of stress axis signaling in vertebrates
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Ciaran Shaughnessy, Shaughnessy, Ciaran A
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 10/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. In response to environmental stress,
vertebrate animals exhibit a classically described ‘fight or flight’
physiological response, a highly conserved and essential survival instinct.
During stress, a signaling pathway between the brain and other organs
upregulates production of steroid hormones that prime the stressed body for
‘fight’ or ‘flight’ action. How this complex and essential endocrine system
evolved in the earliest forms of vertebrate life has remained a mystery. The
overarching scientific goal of this research is to combine the use of newly
available genomic resources for basal vertebrates (i.e., hagfish and lamprey)
with classical and cutting-edge in vivo and in vitro experimentation to
mechanistically explain the evolution of this complex endocrine network.
Research during this fellowship would establish new collaborations between
categorically different institutions in the USA and abroad. The Fellow will
spearhead efforts to promote senior-level near-peer mentorship to students in
STEM and engage with established programs at the University of Denver that aim
to increase the participation, enrollment, and success of under-represented
students in STEM.

This research will be combine in vivo studies on the stress response in basal
vertebrates with in vitro studies on the molecular relationships between
hormones and their receptors. In vivo studies in hagfish and lamprey will
identify the neuroendocrine hormones (i.e., melanocortins) that are released
from the brain and the corticosteroid hormones that are produced in the body
during stress. In vitro studies will test how neuroendocrine hormones interact
with their receptors. Using newly available genomic resources and phylogenetic
modeling techniques, this research will reconstruct and resurrect ancestral
melanocortin receptors for functional experimentation in a model cell line. This
research will resolve how specific genetic mutations from the ancestral
melanocortin receptors have led to a highly specific receptor hormone
relationship that now has a critical role in the ‘fight’ or ‘flight’ stress
response in later-evolved vertebrate animals. This work will serve as an example
of how to empirically investigate step-wise evolution of complex physiological
networks. The Fellow will to gain technical training in an emergent theme of
interdisciplinary scientific inquiry and meaningful experience with research,
mentoring, and teaching.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.