* 2109887
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Characterizing gustatory receptors in bumble bees
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Kaleigh Fisher, Fisher, Kaleigh
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 0.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. All animals use taste to discriminate between
beneficial and harmful components in their food, which ultimately impacts their
survival and reproduction. It is mediated by receptors which are encoded by
gustatory receptor genes. Receptors are located on external surfaces that come
in direct contact with food. Each receptor plays an unique role in the detection
of specific compounds in the environment. Thus, understanding how variable the
genes that encode these receptors are between species, as well as different
populations within a species, sheds light on how animals interact with their
environments. This research will provide a foundation for understanding how
taste mediates floral resource visitation by bumble bees, a keystone pollinator
that plays a critical role in ecosystem functioning through the delivery of
pollination services. The Fellow will actively work with undergraduate students
from disenfranchised groups, interested in plant-pollinator mutualisms, in an
effort to increase representation in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. A key
barrier to understanding the role of taste in species-environment interactions
is that in many species, the compounds that receptors are tuned to, have not
been identified. This makes it difficult to draw direct connections between
genotypes and phenotypes. Bumble bees have undergone three unique taste receptor
gene expansions. The significance of these expansions has not been explored. The
Fellow will study the significance of these receptor expansions in bumble bees,
and test whether genetic differences in receptor genes across populations leads
to phenotypic differences in what compounds in food individuals can detect.
Specifically, the Fellow will 1) identify the compounds a set of receptors in
the expansions can detect in bumble bees, 2) identify whether there are genetic
differences in receptor genes across populations of a widespread bumble bee
species Bombus vosnesenskii, and then 3) compare whether genetic differences
lead to differences in what compounds can be detected in food resources. The
Fellow will be trained in genomic and electrophysiological techniques to perform
this research as well as working with conservation groups to reduce the gap
between basic, molecular research and applied conservation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.