* 2109909
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020: Quantifying nutrient sharing across mutualisms and identifying involved genetic factors
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Inga Conti-Jerpe, Conti-Jerpe, Inga Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 10/31/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Inga Conti-Jerpe is "Quantifying nutrient sharing across mutualisms and
identifying involved genetic factors". The host institution for the fellowship
is the University of California, Berkeley and the sponsoring scientists are Dr.
Rebecca Tarvin and Dr. Todd Dawson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbiotic relationships
in which two species exchange nutrients afford both partners access to auxiliary
nutritional resources, allowing them to survive under nutrient limited
conditions. Many plants, for example, live in symbiosis with soil fungi that
provide nutrients the plant cannot assimilate on its own. In exchange, the
fungus receives sugars produced by the plant through photosynthesis. These types
of relationships exist in other lifeforms including marine invertebrates
(corals, jellyfish, clams, sea slugs, and flat worms) that associate with
single-celled algae, and lichens, which are comprised of algae and fungi living
together. By coupling their nutrition, these partners thrive in nutritional
deserts and provide the foundation for critical ecosystems such as forests and
coral reefs. This research will investigate patters in the evolution of
symbioses by measuring nutrient sharing in plants, marine invertebrates, and
lichens, and identifying traits associated with tightly and loosely coupled
partners. This will create a predictive framework where traits can be used to
assess the nature of nutritional exchange within a symbiotic relationship.
Additionally, this research will manipulate a model symbiosis between trees and
fungi to identify genes that underpin nutrient sharing between partners. The
broad scope of this project lends itself to the mentorship of undergraduates who
will conduct independent research on one of the many symbiotic partnerships
investigated. Additional broader impacts are a regular, bimonthly workshop
focused on supporting and transferring skills to women in science, as well as
the development and deployment of a high school lesson plan on data
visualization and interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The same set of disparate
traits have evolved in symbioses across multiple taxa: 1) obligate vs
facultative relationships, 2) intracellular vs extracellular associations, and
3) vertical vs horizontal transmission of symbionts. These traits are thought to
influence coevolution between symbiotic partners, however there is little
understanding of how they affect nutrient sharing within the holobiont. Further,
the genes that regulate these symbiotic adaptations are unknown. This project
uses stable isotope analysis to quantify nutrient sharing across symbioses
exhibiting disparate traits to test the hypothesis that nutrient sharing is
greater between obligate, intracellular partners that maintain vertical
transmission compared to facultative, extracellular partners that rely on
horizontal transmission. Further, this work will use transcriptomics to compare
gene expression in Alnus incana (grey alder) when associated with arbuscular
mycorrhizae or ectomycorrhizae and test whether genes involved in nutrient
transfer are upregulated in symbiosis with intracellularly associated partners
compared to extracellularly associated partners. Stable isotope data will be
available on the Dryad Digital Repository (https://datadryad.org/stash) and/or
IsoBank (http://isobank.tacc.utexas.edu/en/). Raw sequence reads will be
digitally archived with the NCBI Sequence Read Archive
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) and comparative transcriptomics data will
also be archived on Dryad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.