* 2109222
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Laser Based Ion Sources with High Data Rate Techniques
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Christopher Orban, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 477,683.00

As laser technology continues to improve, it is important to investigate how
laser interactions with matter can be better controlled and optimized to develop
new applications. This research project will investigate two methods to enhance
intense laser interactions in order to accelerate protons and ions. One method
involves using a machine learning algorithm, which is a form of artificial
intelligence, to control the laser system. The other method involves splitting
the laser pulse into two beams and using the constructive interference to as
much as double the intensity on target without requiring additional laser
energy. The goal of both methods is to maximize the numbers and the energies of
the protons and ions ejected from intense laser interactions. The intellectual
products of this research may have a profound impact on efforts to use intense
laser systems to perform proton radiography for a variety of biomedical,
industrial, and defense purposes. The project will support several graduate and
undergraduate students, and its members will be actively involved in several
efforts to increase cultural, socioeconomic, and gender diversity in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is great potential for intense laser systems to
become a useful source of energetic ions for a variety of scientific and
engineering applications, but the properties of laser accelerated protons and
ions are typically far from ideal and the peak ion energy scales weakly with
laser intensity. This project will address these problems by investigating two
complementary techniques to enhance and control laser interactions with solid
density targets. Specifically, machine learning methods will be used to control
multiple experimental parameters on intense laser systems to examine how much
optimization and control over the resulting proton spectrum can be achieved. The
other technique involves using the constructive interference of two laser pulses
to significantly increase the effective intensity and absorption of laser light.
Both techniques leverage high repetition rate laser systems such as the kHz
repetition rate Extreme Light intense laser system at Wright Patterson Air Force
Base, which will be involved in this project. Particle-in-Cell simulations will
be performed to better understand optimal conditions for ion acceleration and to
understand the physics of why the double pulse technique is so
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.