* 2109818
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Ecological drivers of chemosensory gene family evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Kevin Quinteros, Quinteros, Kevin
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. A principal
difficulty in biology is understanding how complex traits in an organism
diversify, since complex traits can serve numerous functions and are controlled
by multiple genes. Plants and insects are the two most diverse groups on earth
and are important to multiple ecosystems. The ability to detect floral scents by
insects affects many plant-insect interactions. This project will investigate
the genetic evolution of insect smell (olfaction). This research will combine
gene-level data with the knowledge of a Panamanian insect communities and plant-
insect associations. Integrating these biological scales can help our
understanding of how and why environmental and ecological variation generates
and maintains variation in complex traits. The Fellow will develop a science
communication workshop to foster a collaborative mentoring environment between
college students and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insect chemosensory gene
families on the antennae participate in the olfactory recognition of floral
scents. This project will unravel ecological factors contributing to the genomic
evolution of floral scent detection in the highly co-evolved symbiosis between
figs (genus Ficus) and fig wasps (superfamily Chalcidoidea). By addressing three
questions: (1) Does pollinating and non-pollinating fig wasp attraction to the
same fig host result in convergent evolutionary patterns at the genomic level?
(2) Is greater host breath and attraction to a larger diversity of floral scents
associated with greater chemosensory gene family variation? (3) Is a larger
effective population size also associated with greater chemosensory gene family
variation? To answer the aforementioned questions, the Fellow will use next-
generation sequencing to construct de novo genomic references. Furthermore, the
fellow will incorporate comparative genomics with fig wasp community
composition, estimates of effective population size, and plant-host association.
This project will provide opportunities for the Fellow to gain new skills in
genomics, de novo genome assembly, and wet lab techniques. The broader impacts
of this project include the development of a grant writing and science
communication workshops with the goals to (1) disseminate tips and information
on grant writing, (2) foster a mentoring environment in which participants can
share their research, and (3) help establish professional connections and
mentoring relationships among participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.