* 2109649
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Using a protoendothermic mammal to understand how body temperature influences nutrient absorption.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Justin Conner, Conner, Justin L
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The ability to
generate a high internal body temperature independent of environmental
temperature, has independently evolved twice in vertebrate animals, in mammals
and in birds. However, there is a high cost (in terms of energy) to maintaining
a high body temperature. This project focuses on understanding why there is
increased body temperatures in modern mammals. To answer this question, the PI
will use the tenrec as a model system. Tenrecs are mammals from Madagascar with
a body temperature more variable than any other known mammal, and are an
excellent model for understanding the advantages of having a warmer body
temperature. More specifically this project will focus on how body temperature
influences digestion, which is connected to energy generation. To broaden
participation, the fellow will set up two independent outreach events at the
University of Nevada Las Vegas aimed at increasing minority engagement within
the Department of Life Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tenrecs have the
remarkable ability to partially disconnect body temperature and metabolism. For
instance, when maintained at 12°C, the body temperature of active tenrecs can
range from ~13 to 32°C but resting metabolism of active tenrecs at 12°C may vary
by 25-fold and is only partially dependent on body temperature. The fellow will
exploit a unique mammalian system in order to understand how body temperature
influences the nutrient extraction from food. This model will directly test the
hypothesis that warmer body temperatures allow for greater nutrient extraction
from foods. To test this nutrient extraction model for the evolution of
endothermy (increased body temperature), an integrative approach will be used.
Utilizing whole animal, ex vivo, and in vitro 3D cell culture approaches to
develop a multi-level approach the exploits whole animal, organ, and even
cellular level investigation. Fewer than 2% of all post-docs in STEM fields are
Black/African American, which is an over 6-fold underrepresentation of the
population as a whole. Diversity within biological sciences will not increase
unless underrepresented individuals are elevated thus, becoming an example of
opportunities within this field. To broaden participation, the fellow will
establish outreach events at the University of Nevada Las Vegas, leveraging the
LSAMP program there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.