* 2109293
* Identifying local-to-global "win-win" solutions for human health and sustainability through infectious disease control
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Jason Rohr, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 2,500,000.00

The unprecedented rate of infectious disease emergence, the need to feed 11
billion people by 2100, widespread poverty, and rapid degradation of the
environment represent some of the most formidable ecological and public health
problems of the 21st century. Because health often drives policies across the
globe and is regularly linked to ecology, it can be a vital lever for securing a
sustainable future for the developing world, where disease, poverty, and human
population growth are most rampant, and resources to address these issues are
most limited. The research team investigates how disease control strategies at
local-to-global scales benefit human and environmental health. This study builds
on the facts that part of every calorie that the more than 1.5 billion worm-
infected humans on the planet consume is wasted on feeding or combating these
worms, that mass drug administration (MDA) to treat worm infections is cheap and
cost-effective, and that fertilizers that wash off an agricultural field fuel
waterborne worm infections and reduce water quality. Reducing food wasted on
parasitic worms would provide more food for humans and reduce the conversion of
natural areas to agriculture, simultaneously mitigating disease, hunger,
poverty, climate change, and ecosystem service deficits. Specifically, the
research team tests the efficacy of controlling the disease schistosomiasis by
removing aquatic vegetation that harbors the snails that are the source of the
worms that infect humans. The fieldwork is carried out in Senegal and serves as
a prototype for how the management of infectious diseases can promote
sustainability across the planet. This project is transformative because it
innovatively integrates principles of ecology, disease biology, and socio-
economics to develop mitigation strategies and policy recommendations to address
global ecological and public health problems. The project provides research
opportunities for a postdoctoral researcher and undergraduate and graduate
students, including individuals from underserved groups, and it promotes
international collaboration with scientists in Senegal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim of this project is to conduct a global
bioeconomic analysis to holistically quantify the substantial economic benefits
of MDA to treat human helminths, which, in turn, should more widely promote the
use of MDA to reduce not only disease but also undernutrition, poverty, and
environmental harm. The second aim of this project is to use randomized control
clinical trials to evaluate whether harvesting aquatic vegetation and using it
as compost, livestock feed, or fuel for gas-producing biodigesters will decrease
human waterborne diseases and poverty, reduce water pollution by recycling
nitrogen and phosphorous captured in the plants, and increase profits, open
water access, and food and energy production. The third aim of this project is
to begin to integrate, translate, and scale these innovations using remote
sensing technology to map the abundance of aquatic vegetation and village
remoteness. The bioeconomic experimental and mathematical approaches used in
this project are general in their construction, offering broad generalizability
of the theoretical aspects of this project beyond the specific parasites and
locations of empirical work. This allows the project to serve as a blueprint for
how to i) disrupt poverty-disease traps, ii) design and test incentives for
community-led maintenance of public health benefits, iii) predict the effects of
environmental change on the transmission of other parasites, and importantly,
iv) synergistically integrate socio-economic and environmental systems to
develop innovations that simultaneously improve human health and sustainability.
The results from this study will be disseminated through peer-reviewed
publications, a public seminar series in the U.S. and Senegal, and workshops at
Senegalese research centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.