* 2109487
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Evolution of bacterial strategies for evading predation by amoebae
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Margaret Steele, Steele, Margaret I
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The amoeba (called Dictyostelium discoideum)
is a single-celled protist that lives in the soil, eats bacteria, and sometimes
serves as a host to some bacteria. Though D. discoideum has served as a
laboratory model for decades, relatively little is known about how its
interactions with bacteria in the wild affect bacterial evolution. To date, few
of the genes and molecular interactions that allow bacteria to escape predators
or infect and exploit their would-be predator have been identified. The
objective of this study is to explore the mechanisms bacteria use to interact
with D. discoideum and test the hypothesis that distantly related bacteria have
developed similar strategies. This will provide insight into the role of
predation in driving the evolution of complex bacterial traits, such as the
ability to evade predation, or manipulate host behavior. In addition to
experimental work, this project will increase public participation in science by
engaging undergraduate students in research and will inspire games and
activities aimed at communicating the process of scientific discovery to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates interactions
between D. discoideum and 20 different bacteria. Effects of amoeba-bacteria
interactions on the fitness of both participants will be quantified to
categorize bacteria as beneficial prey, harmful pathogens, or predation-
resistant but non-harmful symbionts. Transcriptomics will be used to evaluate
the response of D. discoideum to each bacterium to determine whether distantly
related bacteria in the same category achieve similar outcomes by targeting the
same host pathways. Additionally, the rate at which D. discoideum ingests
different bacteria and the duration of bacterial survival after ingestion will
be measured through microscopy. Gene expression will be measured and manipulated
to determine whether bacteria overcome host defenses by stimulating D.
discoideum to overproduce the protein discoidin, which binds to cell membranes
and increases bacterial survival after phagocytosis. Finally, comparative
genomics will be used to look for bacterial genes that contribute to escape from
predation. Findings from this study will help to bridge the gap between the
present understanding of D. discoideum as a laboratory model and its role in
natural microbial ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.