* 2109219
* Collaborative Research: Mass transport in Jupiter's magnetosphere -- driven by internal or external processes?
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Morgenthaler, Planetary Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2024
* USD 279,536.00

The sun emits a stream of particles called the solar wind. The solar system
presents a wide variety of obstacles to the solar wind in the form of planetary
magnetospheres. Magnetospheres arise from the internal magnetic field of a
planet and serve to deflect the solar wind from the surface of the planet. Mass
from the solar wind hits the magnetosphere and is diffused toward the poles and
then carried out behind the planet in a structure called the magnetotail. Io is
a moon of Jupiter that also provides particles to its magnetosphere from within,
and so it can be used to trace the flow of particles from within the
magnetosphere. This project will use observations of sulfur and sodium ions to
trace out the diffusion of particles from within Jupiter's magnetosphere to
better understand the process of diffusion in magnetospheres. The project will
use a dedicated telescope for their observations. The project will also create a
children’s book, “The Misfit Telescope” with a companion website and social
media stream that use the benefits of diversity in scientific instrumentation as
a parable to illustrate the benefits of racial and cultural
inclusivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will study the Io Plasma
Torus (IPT) around Jupiter in order to gain insight into the Jovian magnetic
field. The project will use the Io Input/Output observatory to make time domain
observations of S II and Na lines in the IPT to determine the nature of
diffusion of material. IoIO is a small-aperture robotic coronagraph that
operates nightly, contemporaneously recording narrow-band images of the IPT ins
S II. Combined with a model of the IPT, the observations will show whether
diffusion is driven by mass loading from Io or by activity in the middle Jovian
magnetic field. The project's children's book will show the value of both being
in the minority and havingg a different point of view and of being in the
majority and accepting and respecting the minority point of view. The book will
be produced by the Planetary Science Institute's award winning public outreach
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.