* 2109765
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Phenotypic flexibility may allow long-lived species to buffer from environmental change
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Angelina Dichiera, Dichiera, Angelina M
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The ability to change functional traits is
thought to benefit animals that live in rapidly changing environments. However,
little research has focused on how slow-growing, long-lived species may use
physiological changes to withstand environmental stress that occurs over long
timespans. White sturgeon, one of the largest freshwater fish in North America,
can live upwards of 100 years. Sturgeon populations in the Fraser River, British
Columbia, are considered threatened or endangered due to overfishing. As efforts
increase to restock sturgeon in the Fraser River, it is important to understand
how these fish may tolerate environmental stress, and what genetic components
may produce climate change “winners”. The Fellow will investigate if flexibility
in functional traits can help buffer a long-lived species from future
environmental change. The Fellow will gain critical research experience during
the study, ranging from transcriptomics to whole-animal performance, as well as
involving students from diverse backgrounds in research activities. This project
uses a paired design, wherein individual sturgeon will be assessed for
characteristics of tolerance and performance across biological levels of
organization. Individuals will undergo a series of environmental stress tests to
determine thermal and low oxygen (hypoxia) tolerance and understand if tolerance
is consistent across stressors. In addition, individual aerobic performance will
be measured to determine whether tolerance is functionally beneficial for this
species. Furthermore, genetic, biochemical, and tissue-level metrics will be
assessed to determine what anchors whole-animal tolerance and performance.
Comparative physiologists have long been captivated by the mechanistic
underpinnings of thermal and hypoxia tolerance. The sheer diversity of fish
species has limited unifying explanations that could explain the linkage between
thermal and oxygen limitations. Therefore, it is imperative to characterize and
understand thermal and hypoxia tolerance of a long-lived species previously
unstudied in this context to further understanding of these processes.
Furthermore, understanding which genes produce favorable phenotypes can help
conservation initiatives to identify stress-tolerant white sturgeon. The Fellow
plans to partner with local conservation and education initiatives to
disseminate the findings of this research beyond academia.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.