* 2109233
* Redox-Responsive H-Bonding Systems for Supramolecular Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Diane Smith, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,234.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Diane Smith of San Diego State
University will be exploring new methods to selectively control the strength of
interactions between molecules using electron transfer combined with proton
transfer. The molecules involved can be thought of as synthetic relatives of the
natural base pairs that link together the two strands of the DNA double helix.
These natural base pairs link together in a highly specific fashion, a feature
necessary for the reliable transfer of genetic information. In the synthetic
versions under investigation, the linkages also are highly specific, but, unlike
their natural cousins, the strength of the linkage should be switchable,
reversibly going from weak to strong by using electron transfer to induce proton
transfer between base pairs. The resulting highly selective ON/OFF binding may
find application in a variety of smart materials and sensing systems, as well as
molecular devices and machines. In addition, the research itself, which involves
a variety of skill sets, will provide an excellent, well-rounded education to
the diverse group of students involved, including graduate, undergraduate and
high school students, many of whom are from groups underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the primary goal of this
project is to explore the generality and test the limits of using electron
transfer to greatly alter binding strength in hydrogen bond (H-bond)
heterodimers (base pairs) by inducing proton transfer across a H-bond. This
changes the nature of the secondary H-bonds, which are well-known to strongly
affect overall binding strength. In Aim 1 of this project, Professor Smith and
her students aim to significantly expand upon a previous result in which a
10^5-fold increase in binding strength in a 3 H-bond dimer is observed by using
the same reduction-based redox couple to create 4 and 6 H-bond heterodimers and
by exploring the use of 2 different oxidation-based couples to create new highly
redox-responsive 3 H-bond dimers. Furthermore, fundamental issues governing the
strength of the effect will be explored with simple 2 H-bond systems in a sub-
project specifically designed for undergraduates, and, in Aim 2, aided by high
school interns, the team will determine the ease with which the solution
chemistry can be translated to surfaces by attaching the electro-active
component to electrode surfaces. Aim 3 will investigate whether H-bond dimers
with very large changes in binding strength between oxidation states can be used
to advantage for the construction of highly redox-responsive supramolecular
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.