* 2109398
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Deciphering how adipokine control of the epigenome impacts an organism's starvation response
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Kevin Kelly, Kelly, Kevin Parsons
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 10/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. An accurate assessment of nutritional status
is essential for survival. Fat cells signal a nutrient surplus state by
secreting hormones called adipokines. Adipokines regulate decisions on several
physiological processes including hunger, immunity, and reproduction. In surplus
states, adipokines release a signal indicating energy resources can be devoted
to costly activities like immunity and reproduction. During starvation, their
secretion is reduced, signaling an energy deficit driving energy conservation.
Recent evidence suggests that nuclear sequestration of the fly adipokine Upd2 is
controlled by Atg8, a protein known for its role in autophagy. Furthermore, Upd2
can be forced to remain nuclear by disrupting the protein-protein interactions
of Upd2 and Atg8, resulting in increased starvation resistance and promoting
post-starvation hunger responses in flies. These data suggest that Upd2 and Atg8
may affect gene expression. This study seeks to determine the role of this
unstudied form of adipokine-driven gene expression. The project will devote this
research to teaching and mentoring high school students of underrepresented
minorities through an established summer internship program to teach students
basic fly research concepts and cultivate scientific
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to delineate how Upd2 and Atg8
modify the nuclear landscape to regulate organismal fitness during and after
nutrient stress. Neither protein can bind DNA, so DNA/Chromatin binding proteins
associated with Upd2 and Atg8 will be determined via immunoprecipitation. The
project will determine where Upd2 binds to the genome using the CUT&amp;Tag
method of epigenomic profiling. In conjuction, a differential expression profile
of genes associated with changes in nutrient state will be generated using
RNAseq. Data from both analyses will be combined using current computational
approaches to identify candidate genes regulated by Upd2 in a nutrient-dependent
manner. Candidate genes will be mutated in the fly model for feeding behavior
analysis during fed and starvation conditions to prove their involvement in the
nutrient sensing response. This behavioral screening will provide a fun and
simple way to introduce undergraduates to basic concepts of fly research and the
Fellow will receive new experience and training in this study system as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.