* 2109800
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Using DNA-barcode lineage tracking to study ecological and evolutionary dynamics in the cucumber pathogen Erwinia tracheiphila
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Milo Johnson, Johnson, Milo
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research aims to use new genetic tools to
understand the “evolutionary natural history” of an economically important
cucumber and squash pathogen, Erwinia tracheiphila. E. tracheiphila infects
plants through wounds on leaves or flowers, divides in the xylem of the plant,
and is transmitted between plants by striped cucumber beetles. It is an ideal
system for studying how plant pathogens adapt to different plant host and insect
vector environments. Through a series of infection experiments, the Fellow will
observe the process of E. tracheiphila evolution and measure the effects of
mutations in squash, cucumber, and beetle environments. This research will
further our understanding of this agriculturally important pathogen’s biology
and will serve as a first step towards building a new model system for
understanding the evolution of pathogens more generally. The Fellow will also
participate in the Promoting Inclusivity in Computing (PINC) program at San
Francisco State University during this work as part of an effort to broaden
participation in computational biology research. This experience will also
provide valuable training in education and scientific
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research will use existing
E. tracheiphila strain collections and DNA-barcode tracking technologies to
study how E. tracheiphila evolves in high resolution. The Fellow will conduct
lineage-tracking evolution experiments and barcode-based fitness assays to
measure the fitness effects of both naturally occurring and engineered (using
transposon mutagenesis) mutations in in-vivo plant and insect environments with
and without competitors (other E. tracheiphila strains) and predators (phage).
This work will provide a comprehensive dataset on how the fitness effects of
mutations depend on the intersection of the environment, the genetic background,
and ecological interactions. To maximize the broader impacts of this project,
the barcoded E. tracheiphila strain libraries will be made available to other
scientists, along with an open-source interactive browser that researchers can
use to explore the data and test their own hypotheses. Working with scientists
at UC Berkeley and Lawrence Berkeley National Labs, the Fellow will gain
training - in functional bacterial genetics, plant-microbial interactions,
experimental design, and mentorship - that will be essential for a successful
career as a scientist or research professor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.