* 2109873
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Linking biomechanics to neurobiology: how coordinated bird flight emerges from visual motion processing
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Anthony Lapsansky, Lapsansky, Anthony B
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. How the brain interprets visual information to
guide safe movement through the environment is one of the great outstanding
questions in biology. Understanding this process will help direct the design of
safer self-driving cars. Using bird flight as a model system, this research will
uncover fundamental principles for the control of movement around obstacles and
in coordination with other individuals. Birds are among the most maneuverable
animals and rely on visual information to guide their movement; as do humans and
self-driving cars. This research will determine how bird flight emerges through
processing in the brain using real-world visual stimuli. Data describing bird
flight and coordination will be collected in collaboration with students from
the Lummi Nation. Thus, this project will provide Native American students – the
least represented group in STEM – with hands-on, geographically relevant,
exposure to science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Typically, visual processing is
studied by exposing animal subjects to simple patterns in laboratory settings.
Though these methods allow for tight regulation of experimental designs, simple
patterns lack many features of visual stimuli provided by natural conditions.
This dramatically limits our insight into how animal behaviors emerge through
the processing of visual information. With training in visual neuroscience from
two renowned experts in the field, the Fellow will build upon their experience
in biomechanics to connect animal behavior to visual neurobiology. Research will
determine how the natural statistics of visual stimuli experienced by free-
flying pigeons differ across flight contexts using a paired, head-mounted camera
system. Animals will also be equipped with GPS-trackers and accelerometers, such
that context-specific visual stimuli can be linked to instantaneous kinematics
and trajectories of pigeons. Finally, exposing pigeons to visual stimuli while
using electrophysiology to study brain activity will uncover how features of
natural visual stimuli are encoded in the activity patterns of visual-motion
neurons. This research will thereby bridge the gaps between the information
provided to the sensory system, processing, individual motor responses, and
coordinated group movement, while providing the Fellow with advanced training in
neuroscience. Data for this project will be collected in collaboration with
Native American students to facilitate and encourage them to pursue advanced
degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.