* 2109355
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Understanding the genetic and  physiologic adaptations to thermally challenging environments in Chinook Salmon.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bradford Dimos, Dimos, Bradford
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The fellowâ€™s research will investigate the
capacity of Chinook salmon to adapt to warming stream temperatures as a
consequence of climate change. Like many aquatic organisms Chinook salmon are
struggling to adapt as the climate warms, and populations have been steadily
declining over the last several decades. Given the cultural and ecological
significance of Chinook salmon there is significant interest in restoring this
species to its once abundant levels, however the ability of these fish to cope
with the consequences of climate change are not known. This research will
investigate the physiological determinants of thermal tolerance in Chinook
salmon and determine the capacity of existing populations along the west coast
of North America to adapt to warming stream temperatures. This work has the
potential to benefit society by improving our understanding of salmon thermal
tolerance and adaptive capacity. Additionally, the fellow will also recruit and
train junior scientists from minority-severing undergraduate programs with a
specific emphasis on academic network building to improve the career trajectory
of the trainees and broaden participation of underrepresented groups in science.

This work will leverage naturally occurring variation across populations of
Chinook salmon to understand how standing genetic and environmental variation
interact to produce adaptive phenotypes. This work will be accomplished through
two aims. In aim one, the fellow will utilize CRISPR to introduce mutations in
mitochondrial metabolism genes to test the hypothesis that the ability to
maintain mitochondrial metabolism in cardiac muscle cells during thermal stress
is a key determent of thermal tolerance. In aim two, the fellow will integrate a
suite of physiological assays with transcriptomics in both fish from warm
southern locations and cooler northern locations to determine the genetic and
phenotypic adaptations to warm stream temperatures and assess the adaptive
capacity of these populations. The training program the fellow will receive
includes both methodological training including CRISPR and high throughput
phenomics in addition to lab management and scientific mentorship training both
in the United States and Canada.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.