* 2109255
* Interactions of Transition Metal Ions with RNA:  Structure and Function
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Victoria DeRose, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 10/31/2024
* USD 499,500.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the NSF
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Victoria DeRose from the University of Oregon is
investigating the influence of platinum compounds on processes involving
cellular RNA (ribonucleic acid). RNA performs many critical functions in cells,
including performing protein synthesis in ribosomes. Ribosomes are synthesized
in the cell nucleolus, a subcomponent within the nucleus of cells. Ribosome
synthesis is a crucial function in cells, and inhibitors of ribosome synthesis
cause cell death by a process known as nucleolar stress. Dr. DeRose will study
how nucleolar processes are inhibited by small metal platinum compounds that can
cause nucleolar stress, using biochemistry, chemical synthesis, and cell biology
methods. This study will help establish principles of how metal complexes
interact in the nucleolus, and which properties determine whether metal
complexes are inhibitors of nucleolar function. The study will also aid in
understanding how different steps of ribosome biosynthesis can be influenced by
small molecules. The project is anticipated to develop a new set of small
molecules that can be used by other researchers seeking to study the nucleolus.
The project will support students from groups currently underrepresented in
STEM, and will create a strong interdisciplinary training environment for
workforce development, by combining synthetic chemistry, RNA biology,
bioinformatics, and molecular and cell biology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ribosome
biogenesis is a highly conserved process required for all domains of life, and
its disruption leads to cell death. Factors governing nucleolar architecture,
which is dynamic through the cell cycle, are not well-understood. Existing
methods to inhibit nucleolar processes include broad ‘stress’ inducers such as
reactive oxygen species or heat shock, which are not specific to nucleolar
stress. The mechanisms of the few existing small-molecule inhibitors of ribosome
biogenesis and specifically RNA Polymerase I, which transcribes rDNA in the
nucleolus, are an area of active research. It has recently been determined that
a small subset of platinum compounds is able to cause ribosome biogenesis
stress, providing a unique avenue to study this central, conserved process. This
study will investigate the influence of platinum compound modifications on
nucleolar processes, and also seek to identify the main nucleolar targets of
platinum compounds by bioanalytical and chemical biology methods. Developing a
molecular-level understanding of the interactions responsible for Pt(II)-induced
nucleolar stress would lead to a better understanding of the determinants of
nucleolar structure and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.