* 2109884
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Neural integration of acoustic signals across reproductive states
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Mariana Rodriguez-Santiago, Rodriguez-Santiago, Mariana
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This work
examines how reproductive state affect the way in which the brain processes
auditory signals important for social decision making. Animal communication
signals comprise a large number of sound elements which change rapidly over
time. How these auditory elements change in one animal can significantly
influence how another animal responds to that animal’s behavior. This project
will generate a greater understanding of how hormones modify the way neurons
integrate sounds in order to drive animal choice, and, ultimately, social
behavior. The Fellow will also broaden participation through resource
development and outreach to individuals with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frog species are acoustic specialists that use these
signals to make decisions important for their survival. In particular, Cope’s
grey treefrog (Hyla chrysoscelis) communicates in large choruses, where females
exploit spectral variation, temporal patterning, and spatial cues to
differentiate between species and make mating choices. This project tests the
hypothesis that hormones modulate this behavioral response by regulating
neuronal activity in the torus semicircularis (TS, midbrain area homologous to
the inferior colliculus), a region important for sensory integration. This work
will employ a series of electrophysiological experiments to investigate the
sensory processing of neurons in the TS. First, this project will examine the
mechanisms of acoustic integration over time in females as they listen to male
signals. Second, the project will examine the acute effects of estrogen on such
acoustic integration, with the prediction that estrogen treatment will result in
state-dependent modulations of neuronal responses that will drive female mating
decisions. A major component of this work is creating opportunities for
scientific learning and creativity for students with disabilities in addition to
developing tools to enhance their experience in STEM labs. This fellowship will
allow Dr. Rodriguez-Santiago to fulfill her postdoctoral training and career
development goals while broadening the participation and inclusion of students
with disabilities in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.