* 2109652
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Identifying high-risk bioregions and predicting the impact of climate change on the distribution of genetic diversity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Robert Boria, Boria, Robert A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Forecasting how biodiversity will change in
the future due to natural and human impacts is a primary focus of both ecology
and evolutionary biology. One factor important to the geographic distribution of
diversity at multiple levels - genes, species, and morphology - is climate. This
proposal will study how populations have responded to past climate change, and
how these responses could influence future climate change responses. This
research will generate maps of future genetic diversity to identify potential
areas where climate change could have a significant impact on species diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the spatial distributions of intraspecific
genetic diversity and the role of climate refugia in evolutionary and ecological
processes is important because it likely determines their potential for
persistence in the face of future climate change. Determining how the
distribution of intraspecific diversity of North American taxa was directly
influenced by climate and landscape changes may illuminate broad-scale patterns
of species’ responses to other climatic events, or more generally, to barriers
impeding or constraining gene flow. This research will study how populations
have responded to past climate change and how the historical distributions and
past areas of climate refugia for four small mammals will influence future
climate change responses. This study will utilize an interdisciplinary approach
– three different data types and/or tools (next generation sequencing; GIS;
bioinformatics) – to understand how historical events have shaped the current
distribution of genetic diversity within a widespread species in North America
and the impacts on future genetic diversity. To broaden participation, the
Fellow will recruit five High School students from underrepresented groups to
help facilitate the research. The Fellow will mentor them through their high
school education and the college application process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.