* 2109387
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Correlating Maize Metabolic and Phenotypic Responses to Heat Stress ...
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Katherine Murphy, Murphy, Katherine Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 12/31/2022
* USD 72,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Katherine Murphy is "Correlating Maize Metabolic and Phenotypic Responses to
Heat Stress for a Mechanistic Understanding of Plant Temperature Stress
Tolerance". The host institution for the fellowship is the Donald Danforth Plant
Science Center and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Malia Gehan and Dr. Doug
Allen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maize, also known as corn, is the most important
crop in the USA, and contributes significantly to diets world-wide. As global
temperatures rise and become more erratic, it is essential that we have crops
that can grow under less-than-ideal conditions in order to feed a growing global
population. High temperatures, in particular, affects plants’ ability to grow
and reduces crop yields. In this project, the investigators will better
understand the fundamental processes occurring in plants under high
temperatures. To do so, they will investigate the molecules in corn and how they
change over the course of growth at high temperatures, as well as how the whole-
plant growth changes using plant images, known as high-throughput phenotyping.
They will compare corn varieties that grow well or poorly under high
temperatures. This will provide foundational knowledge for breeding and
engineering next-generation crops of the future, especially corn. This project
will also provide training to the investigator as a postdoctoral associate to
develop her into a leader in agriculture. An associated outreach project will
take data from this project for a course module for community college students
in St. Louis, MO, to gain a valuable research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As both a model plant species and important crop, maize
(Zea mays) represents a wealth of genetic resources and opportunities for crop
improvement. In the face of a growing population and a warming climate, it is
essential to understand the fundamental maize response to heat stress in order
to maintain and increase crop yields. However, the cellular-level molecular
mechanisms underlying the maize heat stress response, and importantly how some
maize lines are more resilient to heat stress, are poorly understood. The
objective of this project is to determine: What metabolites and their flux are
affected by heat stress, and how do these metabolic hallmarks correlate to
whole-plant heat stress phenotypes? First, a model maize line of short
generation time and stature, Mini Maize, will be analyzed under heat stress
conditions using carbon isotope labeling and high-throughput phenotyping. This
will address hypotheses that heat stress is realized and mitigated through
potential changes in light harvesting, photosynthesis, molecular shunts, small
molecule antioxidants, and possibly photorespiration. Coupling this data to
whole-plant phenotype, such as biomass and leaf damage, will provide metabolic
hallmarks for large-scale heat damage. Next, this research will expand upon
these techniques to investigate maize varieties previously characterized as
tolerant and susceptible to heat stress. This will provide metabolic markers for
heat stress tolerance, as well as provide mechanistic insight into plant stress
resilience, such as through a hypothesized increase in flux to small molecule
antioxidants. This project will provide important foundations for informing
plant breeding and engineering efforts towards resilient
crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.