* 2109995
* Ultracold Triatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Doyle, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 758,000.00

Atoms and molecules are the microscopic building blocks of the world. Their
behavior and interactions are governed by the theory of quantum mechanics, which
describes at a fundamental level much of modern science and technology. However,
advancing quantum science and technology in the second quantum revolution
requires cooling to temperatures around one millionth of a degree above absolute
zero. Over the past several decades, powerful laser cooling techniques have been
developed to reach these “ultracold” temperatures with atoms; in turn, a number
of discoveries were made that shed light on the intricacies of quantum physics
in complicated systems and led to the creation of a useful quantum computer.
These techniques have more recently been extended to diatomic molecules
(containing two atoms), but larger molecules (“polyatomic”) have so far eluded
full quantum control. Cooling polyatomic molecules will shed light on the
quantum nature of chemical reactions and be a resource for yet even more
powerful quantum simulation, which can lead to the development of new
technological materials. In this project, Professor John Doyle and his research
team of graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral researchers will
use laser cooling to trap CaOH (calcium monohydroxide) molecules at ultracold
temperatures and then study their collisions, which will shed light on the
quantum physics underlying molecular interactions. The aim is to eventually
build a quantum computer using single molecule arrays of CaOH
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental starting point of this work
will be to cool and trap CaOH molecules in a magneto-optical trap (MOT). This
will require scattering tens of thousands of optical photons from the molecules
to remove energy and momentum, which is enabled by a careful understanding of
the vibrational structure of CaOH developed recently by Professor Doyle and his
research group. Because polyatomic molecules like CaOH cannot scatter photons
indefinitely, they will then be transferred into a conservative optical dipole
trap (ODT) -- where they can be held for several seconds without being lost.
There, they can also be sub-Doppler cooled to temperatures near 1μK. By loading
approximately 104 molecules into the ODT, sufficient density should be obtained
to study collisions between CaOH molecules. After populating the molecules in an
excited vibrational state and applying modest DC electric fields of ~1 kV/cm, it
is expected that inelastic collisions will be effectively shielded, enabling
evaporative cooling of triatomic molecules to even lower temperatures. The
researchers additionally propose to load CaOH molecules into optical tweezers,
which present an alternative route to collisional studies and could also be used
to implement novel quantum simulation and computation
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.