* 2109281
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Winners and losers: inter-individual variation in heat tolerance as a window into understanding how genotypes produce phenotypes
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Nicole Moyen, Moyen, Nicole E
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 10/31/2023
* USD 0.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Climate change is increasing temperatures
globally, resulting in mass extinctions of animals all over the world. However,
some organisms can tolerate this changing temperature much better than others.
The reasons why some individuals can acquire heat tolerance during their
lifetimes, allowing them to survive extremely hot days, whereas others cannot
are relatively unknown. This research will use mussels as an experimental system
to understand how organisms adapt to heat, by linking temperatures mussels
experience in their habitat to changes in the activation of their genes in the
lab. Findings will help elucidate how an animal’s habitat impacts their ability
to adapt to the heat on a molecular level, through studying individual and group
responses. These results can provide insights in to which animals might be most
susceptible to heat-related mortality, and how to protect these species. The
Fellow will broaden participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
STEM through educating parents about STEM careers and how to best support their
children in STEM, via quarterly “Parent STEM Training Days” and a website
(resource tool) for parents.

While it is known that heat stress can cause epigenetic changes, it is unclear
whether these epigenetic modifications actually result in a heat tolerant
phenotype, and furthermore, how long these protective modifications last in the
absence of additional heat stress. Therefore, the main goals of this research
are to (1) Pinpoint the most important environmental factors that predict the
heat tolerant phenotype by using long-term field-temperature monitoring combined
with laboratory survival assays to generate a predictive model; (2) Determine
how an animal’s environment affects the magnitude of the epigenetic
modifications that it undergoes, by using field data combined with molecular
work (using transcriptomics and chromatin accessibility (ATACseq) assays) to
understand this causal relationship; and (3) Quantify how long these epigenetic
modifications last in the absence of heat stress, and whether the duration of
these adaptive modifications are related to the animal’s thermal history.
Through the use of repeated (hemolymph) sampling in the same individuals across
time, these experiments will pioneer a new field of thermal biology, whereby the
magnitude and duration of an individual’s and group’s epigenetic responses in
relation to their environment will be uncovered. Altogether, these experiments
will answer fundamental questions in thermal biology surrounding how an animal’s
environment (thermal history) modifies its gene regulatory capacities to heat
acclimate and survive extreme heat events. Training objectives include learning
new skills in modeling (machine learning), fieldwork, and molecular biology
techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.