* 2109724
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The genetic basis and fitness  consequences of thermogenic flexibility in juncos
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Maria Stager, Stager, Maria
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research aims to document the ability of
natural populations to respond to environmental change in order to help
understand and predict the consequences of ongoing global change. The fellow
will investigate how common songbirds in particular, cope with changes in
environmental temperature by modifying their physiology and how the ability to
do so is encoded by their DNA. This research will make use of samples that the
fellow previously collected, as well as provide opportunities for students and
community members to engage in additional data collection at neighborhood bird
feeders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the causes and consequences of
variation in an individual’s ability to reversibly modify its trait values
(‘phenotypic flexibility’) necessarily requires linking genotype to phenotype to
fitness, though such connections remain rare in vertebrates. Using field studies
and laboratory acclimation experiments, the fellow has previously provided
empirical evidence that temperature variability drives spatial patterns of
variation in physiological flexibility within songbirds in the genus Junco.
Utilizing junco tissue samples that the fellow previously collected, they will
quantify: (1) genomic patterns of variation associated with differences in
physiological flexibility; (2) variation in gene expression underlying flexible
physiological changes; and (3) selection on loci associated with physiological
flexibility in the wild. This will be achieved using association methods to
identify loci related to flexibility, performing validation of these results
with gene expression profiles, and assessing selection on these genotypes in the
wild. Taken together, this work will identify the genetic basis of junco
physiological flexibility and provide a mechanistic understanding of the ability
of natural populations to respond to environmental change. A major training goal
of this work is to expand the fellow’s proficiencies generating and analyzing
genomic data, as well as to develop their skills in science communication and
mentoring. Throughout the fellow’s tenure, they will work with their mentor to
help recruit and provide support for undergraduate students from
underrepresented backgrounds, as well as engage the surrounding communities in
the scientific process and communicate with them through public presentations
and classroom visits. Additionally, the research endeavors to extend the current
utility of radio frequency identification technology for avian
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.