* 2109557
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: General plasticity kinetics: developing a universal framework of developmental plasticity
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Julie Jung, Jung, Julie
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. All multicellular organisms develop according
to a body plan defined by their genes. However, developmental trajectories must
also be flexible enough to respond to different environmental conditions.
Plastic traits can persist through a process known as genetic accommodation,
which has been increasingly discussed as a major facilitator of novelty and
divergence. This project aims to demonstrate developmental plasticity's value
and prominence in evolutionary theory and to elucidate how phenotypes arise from
the interplay between genotypes and the environment. To promote broad
dissemination, the Fellow will create an interactive web interface to visualize
the parameters of any plastic trait and teaching modules for undergraduate
courses in Mathematics Modeling and Developmental Biology. To promote retention
and inclusion of historically excluded students in biology graduate programs,
the Fellow will develop workshop materials and establish a mentorship program
for the Diversity Fellows Program at the University of Utah.

The project will introduce a general framework for studying plasticity, drawing
from principles of theoretical ecological and mathematical modeling (Aim I) and
then apply that universal model to a laboratory case study of mouth-form
plasticity in the Pristionchus genus of Diplogastrid nematodes (Aim II). This
research will span several scales in the hierarchy of life and use diverse
methodologies to reveal three predicted outcomes: changes in plasticity,
corresponding changes in trait evolution, and the underlying molecular
mechanisms of both. This work identifying the process of genetic accommodation
in real time will tie developmental plasticity in response to environmental
perturbations to rigorous theoretical and empirical laboratory approaches in an
emerging model study system. This research has the potential to revise
mainstream evolutionary biology to include a mature theory of how the
environment and genes determine phenotypes during development. The Fellow will
experience training on mathematical modeling, functional genomics, and
mentorship practices; these skills are required to tackle many of the most
important modern problems in ecology and evolutionary biology. Outreach
activities include organizing a local peer-to-peer learning community to promote
the practice of OpenScience and reproducibility in R.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.