* 2109488
* ADVANCE - Catalyst: AGREE: Self-Assessment of Gender, Racial, and Ethnic Equity in STEM Faculty at Bucknell
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Erin Jablonski, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 271,594.00

The ADVANCE- Catalyst: AGREE project will support a two-year self-study at
Bucknell University, a primarily undergraduate institution in rural
Pennsylvania, to identify any existence of systemic inequities and advancement
barriers related to gender, race and ethnicity in STEM faculty through an
intersectional approach. Informed by quantitative and qualitative data, the
project aims to develop and implement a plan to remove such barriers, solidify
evidence-based best practices that support faculty success, establish a review
mechanism that allows frequent reflection and improvements in institutional
policies, build a supportive community where all members of Bucknell enjoy
equitable resources and opportunities, thus extending the ADVANCE network, and
produce generalizable strategies to extend the impact from this project to all
faculty on Bucknell campus and those at institutions similar to Bucknell. This
project will bring significant insights into issues facing women and
underrepresented minority (URM) faculty that are unique to STEM disciplines and
in a primarily undergraduate institution that strives to enhance diversity in
students, faculty and staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ADVANCE- Catalyst: AGREE
project aims to uncover systemic inequities centered around recruitment,
retention, and promotion processes facing women and faculty members
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. The project adopts an intersectional
approach to collect quantitative and qualitative data from faculty through
questionnaires and focused small group interviews followed by comprehensive
analysis. The project will investigate factors that are unique at different
career stages such as pre-hiring recruitment, tenure-review, and promotion and
advancement to track the career progression of faculty of different genders and
racial/ethnic backgrounds. The comprehensive self-study is expected to bring
insights into addressing the historical and emerging barriers to equity and
inclusion facing women and faculty who are underrepresented minorities in STEM.
The outcomes of the self-study will enable the institution to improve strategies
to support and retain more women and underrepresented minorities in all
disciplines. The implementation of these strategies will also provide
generalizable practices to liberal arts institutions. The NSF ADVANCE program is
designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and
elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full participation and
advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers
that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the
organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support
for institutional equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty
equity strategic plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.