* 2109965
* SG: The ecological and evolutionary consequences of mutualisms for species range expansion
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* William Harcombe, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,586.00

It is a common sight to see bees flitting around flowers during springtime or
see several bird species consuming fruits from trees through the year. Although
the two events seem unrelated, an underlying phenomenon connects them: namely,
that the interacting species benefit each other. In the first case, the bees
transport pollen for the flowers thereby dispersing and aiding them in
reproduction, and the flowers in turn provide nectar to the bees. Birds disperse
seeds by consuming the fruit (a benefit to them) and defecating the seeds away
from the parent plant. This seed dispersal helps trees from competing against
their offspring. These bidirectional positive interactions between species are
termed mutualisms. The aim of this project is to develop a mathematical
framework to understand how mutualisms impact species dispersal ability in an
ecological and evolutionary context. The outcome of this work will help to
identify when dispersal should evolve for species participating in a mutualism
and how it impacts the spatial spread of the species. The researchers will use
their results to foster undergraduate research, implement interdisciplinary
teaching modules at the University of Minnesota, and develop management
strategies against co-invading mutualistic
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there exists theory on how antagonistic
interactions such as predation, competition, or parasitism impact species
dispersal, there exists very little on the role of mutualisms. Current theory
offers contrasting predictions on whether mutualisms promote or hinder how fast
species can disperse into new areas (range expansion). More fundamentally, it is
unclear whether and how dispersal ability should evolve for species
participating in a mutualism. This research will therefore set up a mathematical
framework that will help determine under what conditions mutualisms (through
effects on demography and dispersal) speed up versus slow down range expansion
of the participating species. Secondly, the research will test the conditions
under which motility is evolutionarily beneficial in a spatially explicit
mutualism between two microbial species. These questions will be addressed
through a combination of mathematical models and a tightly controlled microbial
experimental system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.