* 2109735
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Inference of the repeated evolution of prothoracic defensive glands in the Tenebrionidae (Coleoptera)
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Adam Rork, Rork, Adam M
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Insects use chemical secretions for many
reasons, including to find food, mates, and defend against predators. Chemical
secretions from glands are especially important for self-defense. However, our
understanding of how glands evolve to produce specific chemicals from specific
body regions is limited. Studying gland function and evolution is essential to
understanding the evolution of insect chemical defenses, insect communication,
and insects as a whole. The Fellow will use darkling beetles and their thoracic
defensive glands as a model system for testing hypotheses about mechanisms of
insect gland evolution. The outcomes of this research will also aid the
development of educational materials for public outreach and K-12 students from
diverse backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research primarily aims to
address whether prothoracic defensive glands (PDGs) of darkling beetles
(Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae), have evolved via parallel or convergent evolution.
Specifically, this research aims to examine 1) the genes and gene regulatory
networks involved in PDG development across Tenebrionidae, 2) the anatomically
homologous features of Tenebrionidae PDGs, and 3) life history traits correlated
with PDG evolution. Comparative transcriptomics will be used to compare the gene
expression profiles of developing PDGs and glandless body tissue in five
representative taxa to identify candidate genes and gene regulatory networks
involved in gland development. Morphological investigations examining gland
origin points, musculature, locality, gross structure, and ultrastructure will
be carried out to examine whether they are derived from homologous or non-
homologous tissues. Examining correlations between PDG evolution and life
history traits will be carried out using gland occurrence and life history data
mined from literature and placed in the context of the latest phylogenetic
hypotheses for Tenebrionidae. The Fellow hypothesizes that the PDGs of
Tenebrionidae have evolved through parallel evolution (i.e., develop through the
co-option of homologous gene regulatory networks and prothoracic tissues), but
are not correlated with known life history traits. In addition to collaboration
with professional educators, this project will also provide excellent research,
training, and scientific communication opportunities for the Fellow as well as
for graduate and undergraduate students interested in insect morphology,
bioinformatics, and phylogenetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.