* 2109970
* Building a diverse ocean science community through collaboration: Reframing the R1-MSI research partnership model.
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Corey Garza, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The project addresses the lack of representation of minority serving
institutions (MSIs) within the research funding portfolio of the National
Science Foundation (NSF). To address this issue, this project provides a unique
training program to support faculty and staff at Alaska Native Serving
Institutions, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Hispanic Serving
Institutions, Pacific Islanders Serving Institutions and Tribal Colleges around
the process of developing competitive grant applications for the Division of
Ocean Science at NSF. Participants will learn the process of writing proposals
within the context of different NSF funding programs and learn how to develop
research networks that can be leveraged within a proposal. The team is also
working with Tier 1 Research Institutions (R1) to help them understand how to
incorporate MSI partners in grant proposals beyond the role of outreach and/or
education specialists. In a culminating workshop, this project brings together
participants from MSI and R1 institutions to develop collaborative research
projects that draw upon their respective expertise and to design unique research
ideas that will advance 21st century ocean science. This approach provides a
model for how MSI and R1 institutions can adapt their current collaborative
approach to improve the number of MSIs receiving ocean science research funding
from NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to cultivate an ocean science
community with the knowledge and skills to reframe how MSIs and R1s collaborate
within the grant proposal development process. To bring about this change, the
team is developing workshops that will train personnel at MSIs and R1s on how to
navigate barriers to inclusion in the NSF ocean science grant community.
Workshops will focus on improving participant familiarity with NSF programs and
processes, developing synergies that overcome inequities in grant development
resources available between MSI and R1s, and improving familiarity by R1
personnel with the research and overall culture inherent within MSI
institutions. Beyond including faculty, this project also works with sponsored
programs staff at each institution type to 1) help them better understand how to
navigate administrative requirements associated with NSF grants, and 2) develop
ways in which each respective institutions’ internal grant support structures
can be leveraged within collaborative proposals. This latter category can be
particularly restrictive for MSIs which may not have the sponsored program
infrastructure available at R1 institutions. This model promotes authentic
collaborations between MSIs and R1 to support NSF’s ocean research mission while
meeting broader goals of increasing the diversity of those engaging in ocean
science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.