* 2109376
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Dopamine Modulation of Caregiver Recognition and Affiliation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Julie Butler, Butler, Julie M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Infants rely on their caregivers for their
basic needs, with caregiver-infant bonds having lifelong impacts on health and
wellbeing. Despite this, little is known about how this bond develops in the
youngest members of society. Using Mimetic poison frogs and their tadpoles, this
work will study how tadpoles recognize caregivers and communicate their needs.
Mimetic poison frog tadpoles beg for food from their parents, but begging to the
wrong individual is energetically costly and can increase the risk of predation.
Dopamine is a chemical in the brain that signals reward, or goodness, of
something like an individual or action. This work will study the role of
dopamine in tadpole interactions with potential caregivers, with the goal of
identifying a pathway in the brain that allows for caregiver recognition and
bonding. The project will provide some of the first evidence of how the neonate
brain functions during social interactions, specifically focusing on the crucial
early interactions with caregivers that can shape how an individual communicates
and interacts with others throughout their life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide invaluable insights into the biological rules governing
caregiver recognition in the neonate brain. Using pharmacology and genetic
manipulations of dopamine signaling, the fellow will test the hypothesis that
increased dopamine signaling facilitates caregiver recognition and bonding,
leading to increased affiliative begging behaviors. Next, this work will use
chemogenetics to manipulate activity of motor neurons in the accessory motor
nucleus to functionally test their role in begging behavior output. Because
olfactory cues underlie caregiver recognition, neural tracing techniques will be
used to map the circuitry between the olfactory bulbs, dopaminergic neurons, and
motor neurons. The fellow will gain professional development in mentoring,
teaching, grant-writing, and data management through lab activities and courses
offered through Stanford’s Office of Postdoc Affairs. As part of this project,
the fellow will create a children’s book loosely based on their research,
including tadpole recognition of caregivers. Technical and professional
development experiences through this fellowship will allow the fellow to
successfully transition into an academic career as an independent principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.