* 2109109
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Integrating from genes to the environment to understand nutrient foraging behavior in honey bees
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Gabriela Quinlan, Quinlan, Gabriela
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research will integrate from genes to the
environment to understand nutrient foraging in honey bees. A honey bee colony is
made up of thousands of bees that work together to complete tasks such as
foraging for food. Foraging is influenced by several interacting factors,
including the environment (food availability), colony (social cues related to
food supply and demand), individual bees (food preferences/ foraging behaviors),
and the underlying physical conditions/ genes driving individual behaviors.
Understanding how each of these factors influences foraging and nutrition could
provide beekeepers with ways to support colony nutrition (e.g., colony-tailored
diets). Poor nutrition is a key stressor underlying declining pollinator health,
so improving honey bee nutrition would support crop pollination. More broadly,
understanding how foraging for nutrients is regulated in these multi-level
systems will deepen our understanding of nutrition, animal behavior
(particularly foraging), and the evolution of social groups in other biological
systems. To broaden participation, the fellow will mentor two undergraduates
from groups underrepresented in STEM during this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine the effect of colony-level social
cues and the forage environment on pollen foraging, this research will assess
the protein and lipid content and taxonomic identity of pollen collected by
colonies with different amounts of brood (developing larvae) and at different
times during the summer. Then, to determine how colonies adjust foraging
behavior of individual bees to respond to changing environmental foraging
conditions, the fellow will monitor individual forager behavior under different
nutrient stress conditions in foraging arenas. Foragers from this experiment
will be collected and their transcriptome will be assessed to determine the
genes underlying individual foraging preferences and if these genes are
responsive to environmental conditions. To determine how individual physiology
and colony social cues interact to influence individual gene expression and
foraging preference, a cohort of foragers will be fatty-acid synthesis inhibited
and observed in the foraging arenas under different nutrient stress conditions.
Results from this research will be disseminated through scientific and
stakeholder articles, conferences, and outreach. The fellow will gain career
training in molecular techniques and Bayesian statistical analysis. She will
also enhance her teaching/mentoring and broaden her professional
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.