* 2109772
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: From parasitism to mutualism in a Wolbachia-Drosophila symbiosis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jessamyn Perlmutter, Perlmutter, Jessamyn
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Animal-microbe symbioses are ubiquitous in
nature and are found in biological processes that include host immunity,
development, nutrition, and fertility. Many mutualisms are thought to have
developed from parasitic relationships but it is rare to find a symbiosis at the
transition point between these states. The Fellow will investigate a symbiosis
wherein previously parasitic bacteria of fruit flies have now developed a dual
parasitic-mutualistic relationship with the host. While maintaining the ability
to kill male hosts (male-killing), the strain is also required for host
development. This system represents a unique opportunity to study a mutualism at
a symbiotic transition point, allowing the Fellow to investigate the genetic
basis for the change and in what contexts this condition may develop. The work
includes outreach to local students from diverse backgrounds through a database
of online, low-cost activities that teach important scientific
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will address this research topic by
performing experiments with a strain of Drosophila bifasciata infected with
male-killing Wolbachia to address two main points: the genetic basis of this
symbiotic transition and the contexts in which dual male-killer-mutualists
successfully invade a population. The hypothesis is that the infected host
strain has developed a critical developmental defect that is rescued by the
parasite. To address the first question, the Fellow will perform comparative
genomics on the infected host strain and an uninfected strain using fluorescence
microscopy, gene expression analysis, and trans-infection experiments to
identify the hypothesized host defect(s) at genetic and cellular levels. To
address the second question, the Fellow will use theoretical population genetic
modeling, experimental cage experiments, and population genetics of wild-caught
D. bifasciata flies to determine the conditions in which a dual mutualist-male-
killer may succeed in a mixed population. This work will be completed with
training from Drs. Robert Unckless and Erik Lundquist at the University of
Kansas and will focus on population genetics, bioinformatics, theoretical
modeling, and microscopy. The research is complemented by development of a local
program where diverse scientists will engage local kids in games and activities
that teach scientific concepts and that will be available to anyone
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.