* 2109836
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Investigating the behavioral and genetic mechanisms underlying invasiveness
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Tracy Burkhard, Burkhard, Tracy T
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The research will examine how behavioral and
genetic characteristics of populations affect the ability to adapt to
environmental change. Invasive species are a prime model for this investigation
because invasions require populations to tolerate and rapidly adapt to local
conditions. The Fellow will use the house mouse (Mus musculus) as a model
species. House mice are a highly successful invasive species and have
established populations across six continents, demonstrating their great
capacity for adaptation to diverse environmental conditions and stressors. Mus
subspecies differ in behavior, genetics, and degree of invasiveness,
facilitating investigation of how variation in behavior and genetics contributes
to the ability to adapt. To increase public engagement and broaden participation
in STEM, the Fellow will collaborate with elementary schools and develop
scientific storytelling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will focus on
behavioral and genetic variation in the proactive-reactive behavioral syndrome.
The proactive-reactive syndrome comprises the correlated behavioral axes of
boldness, activity, aggression, and exploration (BAAE). The genetic structure of
these behavioral correlations can affect a populationâ€™s capacity for adaptation:
if genetic correlations underlie behavioral correlations, populations may be
constrained in their ability to evolve novel behavioral combinations. Invasive
populations are predicted to have higher levels of BAAE than less invasive or
non-invasive populations, and they are predicted to be relatively unconstrained
by genetic architecture; however, these hypotheses have seldom been tested with
invasive models. The Fellow will first ask whether behavioral differences in
BAAE in two subspecies of house mice predict their differences in invasiveness.
The Fellow will then perform low-coverage whole-genome sequencing on wild,
hybrid mice and use association mapping to identify the loci underlying
behavioral traits and determine the genetic mechanisms linking behavioral
correlations. Finally, the Fellow will study the genetic (co)variance of
behavioral correlations and ask how this genetic structure impacts the ability
for populations to evolve novel trait combinations. Results from this study will
help address outstanding challenges in behavioral ecology and evolution while
also providing insight into understanding broad-scale ecological phenomena. In
addition to research skills, the Fellow will gain a strong collaborative
experience with the MEME Msc program which serves a wide body of international
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.