* 2109520
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021:Parasitism-induced changes in host behavior across scales: linking molecular basis to community impacts
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Gordon Fitch, Fitch, Gordon
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Diverse animal species respond to parasite
infection with self-medication, seeking out resources that reduce the severity
or duration of infection. Yet we know little about the molecular drivers of
self-medicating behaviors, or about how self-medicating behavior scale up to
affect populations of the ‘medicinal’ resource species. The fellow’s research
will tackle these questions by studying the response of bumble bees to infection
by a common and ecologically important gut parasite, Crithidia bombi. In doing
so, the fellow will develop a framework for understanding how parasite infection
operates across scales of organization from the biomolecule, to the individual,
to the community, and will also contribute to understanding of the effects of
Crithidia on bumble bee pollination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
first determine how Crithidia infection alters foraging-related gene expression
in bumble bees, using comparative transcriptome analysis of brain and gut
tissues from infected and uninfected bees allowed to choose between nectar
solutions that differ in ‘medicinal’ secondary metabolite concentration. Then,
laboratory choice experiments with captive bees will be used to determine the
behavioral mechanism (i.e. preference vs. reduced discernment) underlying
increased consumption of nectar high in ‘medicinal’ secondary metabolites by
infected bees. Finally, tent experiments with infected and uninfected
microcolonies, provisioned with a field-realistic floral community that includes
thyme plants of distinct chemotypes, will test whether parasitism-induced
changes to foraging have differential fitness consequences for two thyme (Thymus
vulgaris) chemotypes (one with high nectar concentrations of ‘medicinal’
secondary metabolites, the other with low concentrations). Bee foraging behavior
and thyme seed production will be compared across treatments in a factorial 2 x
2 infection status x plant chemotype design. Through this project, the fellow
will develop critical skills in transcriptomics, chemical ecology, and
behavioral ecology. The fellow will also develop and deliver related educational
outreach activities to engage middle-school youth in science and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.