* 2109975
* Collaborative Research: Plant phenology, local adaptation, and growing season length in the changing Arctic tundra
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Ned Fetcher, Wilkes University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 512,776.00

In the Arctic, plants begin their growth after winter snow melts in June. They
stop growing when cold temperatures return in August. The growing season in the
Arctic is shorter further north and longer towards the south. This causes the
timing of their growth to vary between different populations of common plants.
Because of climate change, the Arctic is getting warmer faster than areas that
are further south, and the growing season is getting longer. Some plants may not
adjust to the longer growing season because of their genes. In contrast, others
may have genes that permit them to change. We find both kinds in the Arctic.
This research will examine how light, temperature, and genetics work together to
determine how arctic plants respond to changes in the growing season. For some
plants, we will adjust the amount of light they receive to see how the plants
respond. We will study if the plants have genes that allow them to stay active
if the growing season changes. This approach will help to understand whether the
plants will grow in a future warmer Arctic. To help the scientists working in
Alaska, high school students in Pennsylvania will grow arctic plants in a
laboratory to see how they respond to changes in light. College students from
the University of Texas at El Paso will help with fieldwork in
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant phenology, or the timing of leaf
initiation, leaf death, and flowering, is one trait most affected by climate
change. In the Arctic, changes in plant phenology can alter how ecosystems
function at multiple levels. Previous research by our group identified a
significant difference in growing season length between northern and southern
populations of tussock cottongrass. This finding suggests that the phenology of
this species is under genetic constraint. The present project will investigate
the effect of local adaptation on the phenology of tussock cottongrass and two
of its competitors, the dwarf birch and tealeaf willow. The hypothesis is that
temperature, light, and genetics, in different combinations, are responsible for
differences in phenology in the Arctic. The strength of these controls will vary
between populations that are found in different environments. Field and growth
chamber experiments will determine the role of temperature, light, and genetics
on plant phenology. We will monitor plants at the leaf and ecosystem scales to
understand how phenology and growing season length affect plant function and
ecosystem responses. A combination of methods will provide a unified approach to
plant response to climate change in the Arctic. This project will have broader
impacts on arctic science by building on a strong tradition that involves
undergraduates in arctic field research. The project will recruit assistants
from a small university with many first-generation students and from a leading
Hispanic Serving Institution. It will also involve high school students from
Wilkes-Barre in laboratory studies of phenology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.