* 2109938
* The Path to College and Career: Exploring the Role of High School Engineering Courses for Students with Learning Disabilities
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Michael Gottfried, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2023
* USD 349,999.00

“This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)” &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As demand for a capable workforce
in engineering continues to grow, there is also a concerning pattern of decline
in the proportion of students pursuing engineering fields. Part of this decline
is attributed to a lack of students from under-represented backgrounds – such as
those with learning disabilities – taking engineering courses in high school.
Therefore, to reduce these disparities, pursuit and persistence in engineering
courses must be sustained such that all students can have the potential to be
set-up for success in these highly-rewarding fields. And more so, any disparity
in the pursuit of and persistence in engineering courses in high school will
only reinforce preexisting educational stratification in the nation. To address
this, we propose that engineering career and technical education (E-CTE) may
serve as one potential educational pathway to better align opportunities in the
engineering pipeline and specifically for students with learning disabilities.
Thus, understanding if E-CTE coursetaking patterns can support engineering-
related pursuits is crucial to determining both STEM and disability policy in
order to improve access to and success in engineering fields. And if positive
links are observed between E-CTE coursetaking and long-term E-CTE pursuits, this
has implications for schooling practice as well – e.g., schools’ E-CTE
offerings, and access to E-CTE for students with learning disabilities. Yet,
prior to this study, these policy conclusions remain speculative – although
studies have examined the importance of traditional STEM courses for college and
labor market outcomes of students with learning disabilities, none have looked
at whether specific E-CTE coursework can be successful in preparing students
with learning disabilities to pursue and persist in engineering fields as they
transition from high school to college and careers. At present, there is
currently not enough research in the area of the pipeline effects of taking
E-CTE courses, particularly for students with learning disabilities, to come to
any definite conclusions in regard to policy or
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hence, our project will fill this important void
and will be the first to document the landscape of these experiences for
students with learning disabilities in E-CTE and along the engineering pathway.
Using the most recently available, nationally representative data from the High
School Longitudinal Study, this project will be the first to evaluate the
efficacy of E-CTE courses and to understand how these courses might link to the
transition from high school into engineering fields in college as well as career
aspirations with an emphasis on potential benefits for students with learning
disabilities. Specifically, the project will identify which E-CTE courses
students with learning disabilities are taking, how E-CTE coursework may
encourage persistence along the engineering pipeline (e.g., STEM attitudes,
college enrollment, earning an engineering credential), and the link between
E-CTE participation and engineering-related career aspirations. Using multi-
level modeling methods to identify both individual and school contextual
influences, as well as propensity score matching techniques to account for
observable differences in E-CTE participants, this project will produce results
that will assist policymakers and educators in facilitating access to and
promoting interest in engineering for students with learning disabilities in an
effort to prepare them for later opportunities in these engineering fields.
Given the hands-on, experiential nature of E-CTE coursework (and CTE coursework
in general), we anticipate that E-CTE participation will be particularly
beneficial for students with learning disabilities, a group that has
traditionally been marginalized in engineering fields. Ultimately, E-CTE
coursetaking may be one avenue to improve reduce the inequities in STEM
participation for students with learning disabilities and encourage interest and
persistence in engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.