* 2109915
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: A Novel Model System for Studying the Evolution and Genomics of Longevity
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Juan Vazquez, Vazquez, Juan Manuel
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Lifespan is
one of the most diverse traits across the tree of life. Work in model organisms
demonstrates a strong role of genetics in determining an organism’s maximum
lifespan. However, the full extent to which genes, environment, and life
histories interact to influence the lifespan of particularly long-lived animals
is still uncertain. Bats provide the perfect system to study the genetics of
lifespan and the evolution of exceptional longevity. This project will establish
a comprehensive system for studying the evolution and genetics of lifespan in
bats at multiple levels of biology. Moreover, the methodology and resources will
benefit all bat biologists by allowing researchers to comprehensively study
other traits, such as the evolution of disease tolerance, and the genetic
adaptations to their environments. This research also adds to the long list of
reasons why bats are vital to the environment and provides a novel angle for
people to become interested in both evolution and ecology as tools to address
both new and old questions. This project will also broaden participation in
biology by bringing in students from underrepresented and disadvantaged
backgrounds, as well as by providing a wealth of educational experiences for the
public via a new and exciting view into how evolution be used as a tool to
understand the modern world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on 9
species of bats (genus Myotis) in the western United States and involves
generating primary cell lines from wing-punch biopsies of multiple individuals
in order to create three new resources: 1) a chromosome-level reference genome
per species; 2) phased population genetic data for each species; and 3) cell
line biobanks for in vitro functional experiments. By analyzing the high-quality
genomes for each species alongside the population genetic data, the fellow will
determine which genetic changes – both ancient and recent – are associated with
the evolution of longevity in bats which are either longer- or short-lived than
their ancestors. These hypotheses will then be validated using the primary cell
lines from each species, enabling a comprehensive study into the evolution of
longevity and longevity-associated traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.