* 2109523
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Microbes and Microplastics:  Microbial Adaptations during the Anthropocene
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Cody Garrison, Garrison, Cody E
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Plastic pollution within global marine systems
has created artificial surface environments for microorganisms to grow and
establish unknown ecological roles. Some microbes have the ability to degrade
microplastic polymers in the environment, but it remains unclear whether certain
genes that allow this degradation result normally from evolution. Understanding
how these potential adaptations microbes undergo to degrade human-made plastics
is critical for better understanding the impacts plastics have on the
environment. Training of this fellow will further help broaden participation by
integrating research activities and instructional workshops aimed at
undergraduate students within Stony Brook University’s Women in Science and
Engineering (WISE) and Institute for STEM Education (I-STEM) programs.

This project will test the hypothesis that microbial microplastic degradation
effectiveness is controlled by microplastic polymer type and unveil the core
genomic adaptations that might contribute to alteration of the global carbon
cycle. Deployment of sampling arrays containing clean microplastic debris of
common polymer types (polypropylene, polystyrene, polyethylene, and
polycarbonate) along a contaminant gradient in the Long Island Sound will
promote natural microbial colonization for hypothesis testing. Determining rates
of microplastic degradation according to polymer type in a laboratory setting
will further complement field sample analysis by linking microbial identities to
function via predictive models of plastic-degraders’ impact on global budgets.
Integrative training in advanced molecular techniques (i.e., stable isotope
probing, fluorescence in-situ hybridization of cells, and Raman
microspectroscopy) and advanced genomic techniques (i.e., metapangenomics and
metatranscriptomics) will advance the fellow’s early academic career development
and increase understanding of the impacts of microbial microplastic degradation
across all three domains of life. Hands-on exposure to these advanced techniques
within Stony Brook University’s WISE and I-STEM programs will most importantly
lay the foundation for young aspiring minds to pursue career paths in global
change biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.