* 2109854
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Quality over Quantity: Uncovering the genetic mechanisms linking egg quality to fitness.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Patricka Williams-Simon, Williams-Simon, Patricka
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Species
survival depends upon offspring surviving to adulthood, to pass their genes unto
the next generation. Current research demonstrates maternally derived egg
nutritive content such as some fats and proteins, can impact offspring survival.
Most importantly, studies show survival is profoundly influenced by altered egg
nutritive content. What remains unclear however, are the genes responsible for
egg content and survivorship, and whether there is a genetic correlation between
egg size and quality and offspring viability. This research proposes to
successfully identify the genetic relationship between egg size, egg quality,
and offspring. Identifying genes that control these traits is important for
understanding fundamental evolutionary and ecological questions regarding the
importance of egg quality and its influence on species survival. Furthermore,
findings from this proposed study can be used as building blocks to better
understand human related reproductive difficulties. This research’s broader
impact initiative would provide underrepresented undergraduate students the
opportunity to conduct scientific research and participate in other science
related workshops and meetings. This initiative was developed to address current
low numbers of underrepresented individuals in STEM fields. Participants will be
exposed to a variety of training opportunities, while acquiring technical
experience and mentorship alongside the fellow, a Black, female
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study combines QTL mapping with classical
genetics and evolutionary and re-sequencing approaches, allowing for the
comprehensive discovery of genes influencing complex egg traits critical for
fitness. This research will test the hypothesis that there are various and large
effects on genomic loci that regulate egg content, and that egg content, size,
and offspring viability have a positive linear genetic relationship. The
postdoctoral level initiative attached to the project is developed to establish
the first university-wide Black postdoctoral organization, Blacks Supporting
Blacks in STEM (BSBS). Member scholars of this organization will build a robust
relationship with local communities, establish networking platforms, and create
mentor/mentee pipelines to provide social support and possible research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.