* 2109619
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The mechanisms and evolution of decision-making under conflict: scaling up from molecules to individuals and populations
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Tina Barbasch, Barbasch, Tina
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project seeks to answer a fundamental
biological question: how do parents decide how much care to provide to their
offspring? Parents can go to incredible lengths to provide care, yet parents are
constantly faced with competing demands on their time. For example, parents must
decide how much time to invest in caring for offspring versus defending their
nest from intruders or courting new mates. Using stickleback fish, where fathers
are the sole care providers, this research explores how parents make decisions
over when to care, court mates, or defend their territories - decisions that are
profoundly important to a parentâ€™s ability to pass on their genes to the next
generation. This research will help uncover what happens in the parental brain
when these decisions are made and, ultimately, help us understand why some
individuals are better at decision-making than others. This project will also
provide research opportunities for undergraduates and results will be
incorporated into outreach activities at local museums, with a particular focus
on broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in science.

This project uses an emerging model system for studying behavioral genomics, the
three spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus), to study the mechanisms and
evolution of parental decisions over care, courtship, and territory defense.
First, experimental methods will reveal the behavioral decision-making process
within individuals, across individuals, and among populations. Second, molecular
techniques will uncover the proximate neural, molecular, and hormonal mechanisms
by which parents juggle competing demands. Comparing decision-making within and
among individuals, as well as across populations will provide insight into the
ecological and evolutionary consequences of parental care. Studying the
proximate mechanisms will uncover how the brain manages conflicting demands, as
well as provide insight into the mechanistic constraints. Together, results will
help explain how vital decisions between competing opportunities to increase
fitness are made, and more generally, how patterns of behavior emerge from
interactions between genomes, environments, and phenotypes. This project will
provide valuable training to the Fellow in behavioral genomics. Additionally,
results will be broadly disseminated through conferences and outreach
activities, and through the development of educational materials for middle and
high school students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.