* 2109515
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Understanding the Demographic History of Populations using Identity-by-Descent
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Jazlyn Mooney, Mooney, Jazlyn
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This project
will expand the fellow’s skills in mathematics and will advance the fellow’s
research on understudied population makeup in the field of genomics. The goals
of this project are to deliver insights about the historical processes that
affect different types of shared genomic segments in the human genome. In
particular, this work seeks to deepen knowledge of African American demographic
and genetic history in the field of genomics by using mathematical and
statistical models. The fellow’s work contributes to increasing the
representation of diverse populations in genomics, and addressing imbalances in
current genomics data sets. The project will promote the fellow’s activities in
teaching, mentoring, and working within the Stanford postdoctoral
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand upon the fellow’s
previous research, while enabling the fellow to develop skills in theoretical
population genetics and stochastic simulation. The project will deliver insights
about the underlying demographic processes that affect the length distribution
of runs of homozygosity (ROH) and identical-by-descent (IBD) segments in the
human genome, and it will provide historically relevant information about
admixed populations. First, forward-in-time simulations will be used to generate
a spectrum of demographic histories to determine the expected length
distribution and genomic burden of IBD and ROH. Next, the simulated models will
be applied to empirical data to assess model accuracy and to assess possible
demographic histories of understudied populations. Lastly, the fellow will use a
mechanistic model of admixture to estimate the number of distinct genealogical
ancestors from a source population that are required to generate current
admixture fractions in an admixed individual. This admixture model will be
applied to African American populations to estimate the expected number of
African and European individuals that contributed to the genomes of modern
admixed individuals. This project will bridge the fields of anthropology,
biology, and statistics by using mathematical models to understand how
populations evolve over time and to understand the evolutionary forces acting on
modern genomes. In addition to academic research, the fellow will continue
teaching, cultivating relationships with other underrepresented students in STEM
through mentorship, and active participation in diversity efforts at
Stanford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.