* 2109863
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Evolution of the extended floral phenotype
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Grace Freundlich, Freundlich, Grace
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The Fellow will investigate the effect of
biotic interactions on the expression and evolution of floral traits.
Pollinators are a significant force of selection on floral traits, including
size, color, and scent. Floral tissues frequently harbor a diversity of
microbes, however, which impact cues important for pollinator attraction, with
consequences for host reproduction. Despite the potential for such effects, it
remains unclear whether microbes can modify pollinator-mediated selection on
floral traits. After manipulating interactions among a flowering host,
pollinator, and microbes the Fellow will use chemical and molecular techniques
to assess the strength and direction of selection exerted on floral traits by
these biotic interactions. Such research will advance pollination biology and
inform understanding of factors promoting floral diversification. The Fellow
will also collaborate with local institutions and programs to broaden
participation of underrepresented groups at the middle school, high school, and
undergraduate levels through providing opportunities for learning and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will test the hypothesis that floral microbes
and pollinators jointly shape selection on floral phenotype. Using fast-cycling
Brassica rapa plants and an experimental evolution framework, the Fellow will
manipulate interactions among host plant, bumble bee (Bombus impatiens),
bacterium (Bacillus subtilis), and/or yeast (Metschnikowia reukaufii) to dissect
biotic drivers of floral phenotypic evolution. More specifically, the Fellow
will address the following three objectives: 1) examination of interactive
effects of microbes and pollinators on floral evolution, 2) characterization of
molecular mechanisms underlying shifts in floral phenotype, and 3) assessment of
reciprocal selection on microbial inhabitants of flowers. By considering such
eco-evolutionary dynamics among interacting partners, and taking a multi-level
selection approach that employs genomic, transcriptomic, and metabolomic
approaches, this study will address an important but understudied component of
pollination mutualism and the sources of variation upon which natural selection
can act. In performing the research, the Fellow will acquire new skills in
genomics, transcriptomics, and metabolomics. Finally, middle school, high
school, and college students from groups underrepresented in the sciences will
be included in the research, with the Fellow also giving guest lectures in plant
science courses and at outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.