* 2109411
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Tracing coral reef energy fluxes  from genes to ecosystems in a changing climate
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Jennifer Bigman, Bigman, Jennifer
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Understanding and measuring aspects of the
biology of species and the communities in which they live is crucial to
predicting how they will respond to a changing climate. Metabolic rate, or the
rate at which organisms acquire and allocate energy to life-sustaining processes
such as growth and reproduction, links species to their environments. Thus,
metabolic rate may be a useful tool to understand the structure and dynamics of
species and their ecosystems, as well as provide an opportunity to predict the
effects of climate change. This is especially important for ecosystems that are
sensitive to climate change such as coral reefs, which are globally in decline
due to climate change, overfishing, pollution, and other human-induced threats.
Thus, this project will use coral reef ecosystems as a model to test whether the
metabolic rate of individual fish species can be used to explain and predict the
dynamics of ecosystems now and in the future. The project supports education and
outreach for other scientists, local communities, and students and other members
of the public through a variety of methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to empirically test ecological theory that posits that metabolic rate
governs biological processes at all scales of organization and as such, can be
used to predict current and future ecosystem dynamics that are traditionally
difficult-to-estimate. The Fellow will use cryptobenthic fishes in the gobiid
genus Eviota as a model system to test the validity of using metabolic rate to
understand and predict these processes. Specifically, the Fellow will couple
field-based collections, molecular ecology, and physiological trials alongside a
novel theoretical modeling framework to (1) validate the use of metabolic rate
to explain and predict the demography and life history of cryptobenthic fishes,
(2) assess whether metabolic rate governs ecosystem functioning through its
influence on life history, demography, and interspecific interactions, (3)
quantify the cascading effects of increasing temperature on ecosystem
functioning through its effects on individual metabolism, and (4) explore the
eco-evolutionary determinants of metabolic rate through a population genomic
framework. Through this project, the Fellow will become broadly trained in
diverse and cutting-edge methodologies and contribute to other broader impacts
including engagement with other researchers via working groups, outreach with
local communities, no-cost quantitative ecology workshops for under-represented
groups in science, and opportunities for student participation in metabolic
theory and coral reef ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.