* 2109897
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Habitat suitability: ecocultural restoration in the Klamath Basin
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Kimberly Yazzie, Yazzie, Kimberly
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 11/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology, particularly
Karuk youth and Indigenous students at the University of Washington. The Fellow
will utilize habitat suitability models to characterize the abundance and
distribution of cultural keystone species, willow and salmon, in response to
ecocultural restoration and ecological disturbance. The project will assess the
effects of Indigenous fire stewardship on climate adaptation to understand how
fire promotes diverse landscape values (e.g., cultural foods and basketry) and
restores ecological function (e.g., stream temperature). This research will
provide insight to ecological resilience and ascertain the effects of
disturbance on the landscape, including floods and fire. With the largest dam
removal project in U.S. history slated to begin on the Klamath River in 2023,
this research is timely. The Fellow will survey pre-dam removal conditions that
Tribes can use to prioritize and identify optimal pathways for ecocultural
restoration across co-managed landscapes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will
assess a habitat suitability model framework coupled with place-based science to
characterize habitat loss and species diversity of cultural keystone species,
plants and salmon, within selected habitat zones identified by the Karuk Tribe
in the mid-Klamath basin, California. Spatially explicit data and known
occurrences of focal species will be used in the model, including a combination
of fine-scale and broad-scale ecologically relevant variables (e.g., topography,
soils, geology, climate). The Fellow will use geospatial methods, aerial imagery
and drone footage to quantify standing forest composition. Species occurrences
will be confirmed with field surveys and independent test locations at different
resolutions will determine local-scale model accuracy. The Fellow will assess a)
the utility of habitat suitability models to determine that ecocultural
restoration activities, cultural burns, increase habitat diversity of focal
species, and b) explore the influence of grain and extent in local to broad-
scale model predictions of environmental suitability at different site
locations. An intergenerational knowledge exchange, co-mentorship and community
participation will enhance research interpretation and outcomes. The Fellow will
serve as a mentor to tribal youth through a summer internship program and co-
develop research materials and publications from this research with the Karuk
tribe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.