* 2109676
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Ecological and evolutionary dynamics of biparental inbreeding and outbreeding in the intertidal copepod
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Kevin Olsen, Olsen, Kevin
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The degree that mates are related, and the
amount of common ancestry shared between them is an important element in the
evolution of future generations of organisms. Inbreeding and outbreeding
represent a spectrum of breeding strategies for many organisms, and both have
costs and benefits that can stabilize or push patterns of mating toward one end
of this spectrum or the other. This research aims to advance our understanding
of why inbreeding is often prevalent in some species, and how environmental and
genetic factors contribute to the balance between inbreeding and outbreeding.
The fellow will gain invaluable experience guest lecturing in undergraduate
courses, mentoring an undergraduate in an independent research project, and in
designing an inquiry-based learning activity for K–12 students focused on
evolution.

Recent evidence of associations among organismal traits and inbreeding in marine
invertebrates suggest that the dynamics between inbreeding and outbreeding plays
an important role in driving major evolutionary transitions between reproductive
modes and forms of dispersal. Adaptive differentiation in response to
environmental heterogeneity may be a key process favoring the maintenance of
coadapted genotypes and contributing to the surprising magnitude of inbreeding
in some marine invertebrates with separate mating phenotypes. This research
employs multigenerational breeding experiments, genomics, cellular assays, and
assessments of fitness in the intertidal copepod (Tigriopus californicus) to
investigate how mating systems emerge from genomes, phenotypes, and
environments. The research addresses the hypothesis that local adaptation
facilitates the evolution of inbreeding mating systems, and uses a common garden
experiment to test the severity of inbreeding depression under conditions that
match and mismatch temperature extremes in the site of origin. Moreover, the
research evaluates the genetic factors that constrain mating systems, and
quantifies inbreeding and outbreeding depression across a spectrum of parental
relatedness. Under the guidance of prominent researchers in the fields of
evolution and conservation genetics, the fellow will develop a multifaceted
skillset focused on multigenerational hybridization, modern approaches to
computational genomics, and population-level patterns of adaptation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.