* 2109634
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Laura Lee, Lee, Laura R
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 11/30/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Laura Lee is "Cell cycle and cell identity regulation are linked during
regeneration" The host institution for the fellowship is New York University and
the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Kenneth Birnbaum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants
have incredible regenerative capacity. Through regeneration, plants can rebuild
lost organs and entire plants can be regrown from single plant cells. Clonal
propagation, in which clones of plants are produced via regeneration, is a
critical agricultural technique. It enables stable transmission of desirable
traits in crops that might otherwise be lost through sexual reproduction.
Further, it is a necessary step in some techniques used in crop engineering.
However, not all varieties of plants from the same species regenerate with the
same efficiency. Additionally, many important crops do not regenerate well,
including maize and wheat. Improving regeneration capacity in important crop
species will allow for crop optimization to combat food insecurity due to
climate change. The goal of this work is to uncover the mechanism underlying
differential regeneration capacity among maize varieties. Pursuit of this
research will provide postdoctoral training opportunities in working with cereal
crops like maize, including studying complex crop genomes and root development.
The broader impacts of the project are focused on increasing access to academic
and research careers for scientists from underrepresented communities through
undergraduate mentorship programs. In addition, the activities funded in this
initiative will support participation in the New York University department of
biologyâ€™s antiracism task force, which will improve support for current and
future trainees from underrepresented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term objective of this research is to elucidate the epigenetic regulation
of regeneration capacity in crop plants. The work will test the hypothesis that
dynamic changes in chromatin regulate a tradeoff between regeneration and
defense and is motivated by several key findings: (1) cell cycle advancement and
histone acetylation remodeling are both required for regeneration, (2) changing
chromatin accessibility regulates regeneration capacity, and (3) altering the
defense vs. regeneration response, hypothetically controlled at the chromatin
level, can improve regeneration. The research takes a unique strategy to uncover
the differences in chromatin regulation between maize varieties with known
differences in regeneration capacity. Chromatin will be profiled in distinct
cell cycle phases and over the course of successive cell divisions to determine
how cell cycles alter chromatin during regeneration. Additional experiments will
monitor chromatin remodeling over the course of a regeneration assay using high-
regeneration (Hi-II) and regeneration-recalcitrant (B73) Zea mays lines.
Candidate genes identified in these approaches will be functionally
characterized in Zea mays. The work will produce genome-wide datasets that
reveal a mechanism that identifies key regulators of differential regenerative
capacity. As such, this work will answer longstanding questions about the
connection between cell cycle and chromatin while producing tools to improve
regenerative capacity in recalcitrant crops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords:
regeneration, chromatin, cell cycle, Zea mays, Arabidopsis thaliana,
epigenetics, histone acetylation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.