* 2109819
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Viral communities in a warming world
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Catherine Hernandez, Hernandez, Catherine Amanda
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. As climate
change alters temperature patterns across the globe, environmental viruses will
face the same challenges as macroorganisms. In this work, the Fellow will
investigate how environmental bacteriophages (phages; viruses that infect
bacteria) may be impacted by changing temperatures. After isolating a set of
soil bacteria and phage strains from different climates and seasons, the Fellow
will characterize their growth at different temperatures, quantify relationships
between thermal performance and other traits, and test how viruses can adapt to
overcome extinction risk under thermal change. This work will determine natural
variation in viral thermal performance as well as constraints and mechanisms of
adaptation to temperature, which will inform predictions of climate change
impacts on viruses. Given the important role that bacteria and phages can play
in shaping ecosystem-level processes, these results may have broad implications
beyond microbial communities. The Fellow will also broaden participation
primarily through a transitional mentoring program for underrepresented, final-
year graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While host-virus interactions are
known to be temperature-dependent, relatively little research has focused on
understanding the factors that shape thermal performance in environmental
viruses. This research seeks to address this gap through observational and
experimental studies of thermal performance in novel soil bacteria and phage
isolates. Isolations will be done in two seasons (summer and winter) at two
sites (subtropical and temperate climates) to determine how viral thermal
performance varies across time and space. The Fellow will then experimentally
evolve the viruses to adapt to changes in biotic (bacterial hosts) and abiotic
(thermal) conditions. To determine the dynamics and mechanisms of adaptation,
experimental evolution will be followed by population and individual-level
sequencing and phenotypic assays. The Fellow will be trained in environmental
microbe isolation, measurement of thermal reaction norms, and the generation and
interpretation of molecular data throughout experimental evolution. In addition
to the transitional mentoring program, this work will broaden participation
through the Fellow’s commitment to equitable access to research opportunities
and mentorship of diverse groups in the lab, as well as engagement with outreach
efforts in the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.