* 2109361
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: An integrative investigation of  host-parasite coevolution across heterogeneous environments
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jessie Salter, Salter, Jessie Frances
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Host-parasite interactions provide a window
into how environmental conditions shape traits of interest, which is a key
process in evolution that generates biological diversity. This research aims to
understand these processes using the Northern Bobwhite quail (Colinus
virginianus, which display impressive geographic variation in feather color) and
their parasitic feather lice as a model system. Understanding how environmental
change induces changes in traits provides insight into how species evolved and
may respond to climate change. Bobwhites are a commercially important game
species that have experienced population declines of &gt;70% over the past forty
years. The interactions between bobwhites and their feather lice are poorly
known; this research will provide insight into how feather lice impact bobwhite
populations and may contribute to conservation strategy for this species, which
is actively managed in 25 states. To increase broader participation in science,
the Fellow will develop public exhibits and educational activities based on this
research through the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles
County.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parasitism is the predominant life history strategy
on earth, yet we have a limited understanding of how host-parasite interactions
shape the coevolution of traits in wild populations. Bobwhites and their feather
lice are a tractable wild system for testing current evolutionary theory and
developing new models of host-parasite coevolution across heterogeneous
environments. The Fellow will analyze phenotypic and ecological data, including
parasite abundance, to assess whether feather lice are associated with plumage
phenotypes in bobwhites. The Fellow will quantify phenotypic and genetic data
from lice collected from bobwhite specimens to assess the effects of plumage
variation on the phenotypes and genotypes of coadapted lice. Finally, the Fellow
will use cophylogenetic analyses and whole-genome sequence data from range-wide
pairs of coadapted bobwhites and lice to test current theories of coevolution
and identify regions of the genomes of both species that are under selection due
to environmental variation and host-parasite interactions. Through these
activities, the Fellow will support the mentorship and training of two students
from underrepresented STEM groups. Additionally, this research will be conducted
in a museum setting, and will develop and improve methods for collecting
phenotypic and genomic data from museum specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.