* 2109519
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Towards an integrative understanding of conspicuous signals: phenotype, genotype, and adaptive function of a selected trait
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Sarah Khalil, Khalil, Sarah
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This project
aims to broaden participation of groups underrepresented in biology in two ways:
(1) by implementing a program that will directly increase the diversity of
postdoctoral scientists and (2) by funding the fellow to engage in novel
research in functional genomics. This research investigates how red-backed
fairywrens, a small Australian bird, produce their red feathers, and how this
individual redness may affect male reproductive success. Connecting how a signal
is produced to the associated reproductive outcomes is a fundamental question in
evolution, yet these components are often studied independently. This research
will characterize how red feathers are produced by identifying the genes
underlying red pigmentation and will use long-term breeding data to track the
reproductive success of red-backed fairywren males that vary in plumage
color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Showy male traits have long captured the imagination
of evolutionary biologists. However, insular approaches to studying these
mechanisms can hinder an integrated understanding of these traits. The proposed
research spans different levels of inquiry to investigate the evolution of the
sexually-selected, red plumage in the red-backed fairywren (Malurus
melanocephalus). The fellow proposes to explore the proximate and ultimate
mechanisms responsible for the production and maintenance of hue variation,
which varies extensively across the species' range. The fellow will collect
samples in Australia and use genomic and transcriptomic tools to identify
candidate loci associated with color production. In addition, this work will
identify the direction and strength of selection on loci in response to the
observed female preference for redder plumage. The fellow will leverage
demographic data from two populations and use quantitative modeling to quantify
the adaptive function of plumage and its relationship to reproductive success.
The integration of an ecologically relevant trait that influences fitness with
species-wide genomic data will prove critical in understanding phenotypic
evolution. The project's broader impacts are designed to close a gap for
underrepresented minority scientists by developing a program to target and
support graduate students from underrepresented backgrounds when they are at the
critical career stage of applying to postdoctoral positions. The proposed
research will further broaden diversity by providing opportunities for
underrepresented minority students to gain research experience at the high
school and undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.