* 2109443
* EAGER: Peering a generation into the future: NSF's Young Scholars Program and the nation’s STEM workforce
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Eric Hamilton, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,998.00

The first pre-college programs that the National Science Foundation (NSF)
administered when it restarted pre-college education funding in 1988 included
the Young Scholars Program (YSP). The YSP reflected NSF’s intention to reach
high-achieving students and to increase the likelihood that they would
subsequently enter science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
majors and the STEM workforce. YSP targeted adolescents, grades 7-12, with
summer, weekend, and after-school enrichment programs. It made just over 600
awards to 316 separate projects between FY88 and FY96, involving approximately
18,000 students. A significant fraction of these YSP participants is now part of
the national STEM workforce. Anecdotal evidence suggests that many of these
participants would not have pursued a STEM career without their YSP involvement.
The major purpose of this project is to assess and document YSP's actual impact
on the national STEM workforce. A priority interest in doing so involves current
STEM workforce participation of Black, Latinx, Native American, and female
individuals, and the relationship between their YSP participation and later
career pathways. Using archival records and social media, the project team will
contact as many YSP alumni as possible, seeking participation both in online
surveys and in interviews. Probing current professionals about the impact of
programs they participated in during middle or secondary school a quarter
century ago is an opportunity that could not have been realistically
contemplated when the program was in operation. This project allows a fast-
forward view to see how strategies played out, by directly communicating with
participants and creating analyses that can inform current and future
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will apply several techniques for
contacting former YSP students, reaching out to former YSP host institutions and
project directors, multiple internet search methods, and snowball sampling.
Surveys and interviews will be shaped by social-cognitive career theory,
epistemic frame theory, and interest-driven creator theory. The project will
contribute to the research literature associated with these theories, with
deliverables that reflect analysis and synthesis of the surveys and interviews.
It will also furnish research- and historically, grounded guidance for current
programs by NSF and other organizations to create a sophisticated and inclusive
future STEM workforce. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.