* 2109647
* Data-Driven Modeling to Improve Understanding of Human Behavior, Mobility, and Disease Spread
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Sean Luke, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,822,154.00

Models of disease dynamics are important tools used to predict the numbers of
cases and deaths over time and to support policymakers as they prepare for and
respond to infectious disease outbreaks. However, despite significant advances,
many models still lack realistic representations of human behavior and mobility,
which are key drivers of disease spread. Without accounting for the complexity
of human behavior, models are limited in their ability to make accurate
predictions, especially over longer time horizons. This project investigates the
inclusion of realistic human behavior and mobility in models of disease spread
to 1) better explain the different ways that humans respond to disease
outbreaks, 2) improve predictions of infectious disease spread, and 3) help to
prescribe the most effective mitigation policies. The investigators use publicly
available data so that models can be rapidly deployed for any county or state in
the U.S. to predict and mitigate future outbreaks of infectious respiratory
diseases (e.g., COVID-19, seasonal influenza, measles, and smallpox). These
models may provide more timely and accurate predictions to help the general
public, key institutions, and policymakers anticipate what is to come and
provide support for evidence-based policy making. This project will support
professional development opportunities for early-career researchers and training
opportunities for a postdoctoral researcher, graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students in the Aspiring Scientists Summer Internship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a data-driven approach to
explain the spatio-temporal variations in the behavioral response to a disease
outbreak. They hypothesize that regional variables such as average income, age,
political leaning are associated with spatial patterns of behavioral response,
and will leverage very large data sets to mine association rules between such
variables and observed behavioral response, including social distancing, stay-
at-home behavior, mask usage, and vaccine acceptance. These association rules
will be used to develop a novel modeling framework that captures spatio-temporal
variations of human response to disease. The proposed modeling framework will be
implemented to simulate the spread of COVID-19 using Fairfax County, VA, as a
case study. This framework also will be leveraged for prescriptive analytics to
find the best course of action in the event of future infectious disease
outbreaks. The researchers will simulate and optimize policy measures aimed at
mitigating disease spread and minimizing socio-economic impact. This
optimization will combine automatic optimization tools with the expertise of
researchers in policy, epidemiology, health geography, and
psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.