* 2109399
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Macrophysiological patterns in the thermal and optical properties of ant cuticular structures
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Meghan Barrett, Barrett, Meghan
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The project
seeks to understand the connection between the structure of ant hairs and
cuticles and their thermal and optical properties in variable environmental
conditions. Variation in the thermal properties of ant cuticles and hairs may
allow them to heat up in cool environments and stay cool in hot environments.
Patterns in thermal and optical properties will be analyzed across species along
an elevational gradient in the Chiricahua Mountains in Arizona, and within
species across latitudinal gradients in North America (from Canada to Mexico).
As the first survey of biodiversity in cuticular structures with unique
thermal/optical properties, this project will inspire engineering applications
for global thermal and energy challenges (solar energy capture, radiative
cooling, biomimetic materials, etc.). The Fellow will also develop curricular
materials about thermal properties of living organisms to be used in high-need
Los Angeles schools and published in peer-reviewed education journals as well as
hosting culturally responsive mentoring and grant writing workshops for
minoritized students at the host institutions and national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will use scanning electron
microscopy to analyze the microstructure of ant cuticles and hairs, using both
existing museum collections of widespread North American ant species and
specimens collected by the Fellow along an elevational gradient at the
Southwestern Research Station in Arizona. Fourier-transform infrared
thermography, reflectance spectrophotometry (from ultraviolet to mid-infrared),
and finite element method modeling will be used to analyze the thermal and
optical properties of ant cuticular structures. Environmental data collected
using local weather stations will be used to understand if solar radiation and
temperature can predict the optical/thermal properties of ant cuticular
structures. The research is integrated with an education plan aimed at
increasing participation of underrepresented groups by 1) developing K-12 lesson
plans in partnership with Noyce Scholars and Master Teacher Fellows to be used
in high-need Los Angeles schools, and 2) publishing these plans in peer-reviewed
and open access education journals. In addition, the Fellow will expand
culturally responsive mentoring programs for minoritized postdocs and students
at California State University Dominguez Hills and University of Southern
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.