* 2109825
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Investigating evolutionary mechanisms that facilitate local adaptation via inversions in the Atlantic silverside
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Jessica Rick, rick, Jessica A
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Natural environments are often heterogeneous,
with strong spatial variation in conditions within a species’ range. Populations
within a species gain an advantage by adapting to these differing environments,
and such local adaptation can be facilitated by structural variation within an
organism’s genome. The Fellow will investigate how structural genomic variation
allows populations to adapt to their environments, as well as how these types of
variation enable population divergence and speciation. This research is
important to understanding the mechanisms involved in the origin and maintenance
of biodiversity, and how species may adapt to changing climatic conditions.
Through this research, the Fellow will also broaden participation in STEM
through mentoring undergraduate students in independent research projects,
advocating for open science and reproducible research practices, and training
early-career students in open science principles and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will integrate data from common garden
experiments, genomic analyses, and evolutionary modeling to investigate how
structural genomic variation—specifically, inversions—facilitate local
adaptation in wild populations. It will use the large inversion regions
associated with locally adapted phenotypes in the Atlantic silverside (Menidia
menidia) as a model system. Key outcomes of this project will include: (1)
identifying regions within inversions associated with local adaptation
phenotypes using a common garden framework; (2) a population-wide selection scan
to determine whether differentiation is greatest at inversion breakpoints or at
candidate loci within inversions; and (3) simulations to quantify the conditions
within which recombination suppression within inversions is a viable
evolutionary mechanism for maintaining local adaptation. To achieve these
outcomes, Atlantic silversides will be collected and raised in a common garden
experiment, and phenotypic and whole genome data from these individuals will be
collected for analyses. The Fellow will additionally facilitate two workshops on
the topic of reproducible research, with a focus on bioinformatic workflows,
targeted at upper division undergraduate and early career graduate students from
historically underrepresented backgrounds in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.