* 2109633
* Maximum Bound Principle-Preserving Time Integration Methods for Some Semilinear Parabolic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lili Ju, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The project will focus on the algorithms and analysis for a class of equations
with applications in fluids dynamics, solid mechanics, materials science,
chemistry, and cell biology to image and data sciences. Specifically, a class of
semilinear parabolic equations will be considered, and the focus will be on
ensuring that the computational solutions possess particular important
properties called the time-invariant maximum bound principle (MBP). Such
properties are important for the models of grain growth and coarsening, thin
film microstructure, crystal growth, dislocation-solute interactions, and image
restoration and deblurring. The project will design and analyze efficient and
accurate MBP-preserving time integration methods of high-order accuracy. The
project will develop and disseminate software and provide an interdisciplinary
training opportunity for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activities contain diverse research topics in computational and applied
mathematics, ranging from algorithm design, numerical analysis, and efficient
implementation to practical applications in science and engineering.
Specifically, the project presents an important step toward developing and
analyzing efficient and high-order accurate MBP-preserving time integration
methods. Rigorous analysis for a wide class of semilinear parabolic equations
within or beyond the current analytical framework will be carried out. This
project will not only lead to significant innovations in numerical tools and
computer codes for solving these types of equations, but also offer new insights
into a number of outstanding theoretical issues on MBP preservation and energy
stability in both time-continuous and time-discrete settings. The goals include
the design and analysis of linear schemes with high-order accuracy based on the
Runge-Kutta integrating factor and the modified scalar auxiliary variable
approaches. The project will also extend and develop MBP-preserving time
integration methods for some important phase field models beyond the existing
analytical framework, including but not limited to, the mass-conserving Allen-
Cahn equations with different types of constraints, the convective Allen-Cahn
equation and the coupled Navier-Stokes/Allen-Cahn system. These research
problems are very useful and challenging with important applications in science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.