* 2109155
* Learning with Confidence: Bootstrapping Error Estimates for Stochastic Iterative Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rachel Ward, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,966.00

In this age of large-scale high-dimensional data analysis, stochastic iterative
optimization methods constitute a popular class of algorithms, which look at one
data point at a time. These algorithms are increasingly entrusted with decision-
making tasks, from discarding emails as spam to recommending routes when one
drives to work, to the future decisions made by self-driving cars and medical
images produced for diagnostic purposes. These applications give rise to noisy
data resulting from measurement errors and variability in the experimental setup
or environment. Despite this, almost all current theoretical results focus on
the accurate estimation of underlying parameters. However, it is crucial to pay
attention to confidence intervals that quantify the variability of the learned
parameters, which allows one to make decisions with confidence. This research
will develop a mathematical framework for the estimation of uncertainty of a
broad class of stochastic iterative optimization methods. This project will also
help train graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in uncertainty estimation
for large-scale learning problems, thus making them better prepared for careers
in both industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
establish central limit theorems and consistent online bootstrap procedures for
fundamental stochastic iterative learning algorithms, incorporate these
algorithms in software packages, and develop a framework for assessing
confidence in point estimate predictions in a broad range of applications. These
goals will be achieved using a variety of recently developed tools, including
concentration inequalities for products of random matrices, high dimensional
statistics, and theoretical advances in deep learning optimization
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.