* 2109428
* TOWARDS A SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF INSECT COLLECTIONS IN THE U.S. THROUGH THE ENTOMOLOGICAL COLLECTIONS MANAGEMENT WORKSHOP
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Zaspel, Entomological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,000.00

Natural history collections are an archive of Earth's biodiversity, informing
our understanding of the planet and ecological interactions that impact society.
Recent global initiatives to digitize biological collections have transformed
the scope and scale of how these biorepositories contribute to integrative
biological research. Interest in collections and their data is increasing,
however much of the workforce capacity remains the same. Entomological
collections are especially important because insects represent the most diverse
and abundant group of animals with over one million known species. Insects are
ubiquitous in our everyday lives and an essential part of most ecosystems. They
are also important to human health, as the majority of plant pollinators,
disease vectors, and agricultural pests are insects. Collections are organized
and maintained only through the specialized knowledge and experience of museum
personnel, generally passed directly from one generation to the next, as no
formal program has existed to do this across the community. This generational
knowledge transfer has been especially important in smaller collections with
limited staff, which represent ~70% of all U.S. insect collections. Despite
their size, these collections are often extremely valuable due to their strong
regional holdings. This effort will produce a comprehensive program to provide
formal best-practices training, both in-person and online, to collections
personnel, as well as providing much-needed networking opportunities for
collections workers across career stages and institutions to share their
knowledge and experience with the broader collections'
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the progressive advancement
of the Entomological Collections Management Workshop Series, including virtual
participation and material, co-sponsored by the Entomological Collections
Network (ECN) and the Systematics, Evolution, and Biodiversity (SysEB) Section
of the Entomological Society of America (ESA). The workshops are scheduled to
take place annually in summer 2022 to 2024, with hosting rotating between the
Yale Peabody Natural History Museum, Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and
Arizona State University. The workshop will be developed as a hybrid virtual and
in-person event. During the 3-4 day workshop, participants will receive training
in entomological collections management covering a wide range of topics, various
topics including policies, specimen handling, curation, conservation, and
digitization. This project will encourage the participation of collections staff
managers and students associated with smaller collections, as they often have
with more limited resources for training and collection development. This
workshop will also help fund participation by students and early career
researchers, the largest and most diverse (in terms of gender, ethnicity, and
socio-economic background) segment of the collections management community. The
professional development opportunities provided by this workshop will thus lead
to a more highly skilled and integrative community of collections management
personnel. The virtual components of this workshop will be shared to the broader
community through the ECN website, with the results of in-person workshops also
presented at the ECN annual meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.