* 2109898
* CIBR: New Methods for Multi-Omics Data Analysis and Genome Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Peter Karp, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,496,271.00

Scientists today are faced with a deluge of single- and multi-omics data, and of
sequenced genomes. Although these data hold great promise, they present sizable
analysis challenges: data analysis is a major bottleneck to discovery from
multi-omics technologies and genome sequencing. Examples of multi-omics data
include transcriptomics data plus metabolomics data, reaction flux measurements
plus transcriptomics data, and transcriptomics data plus proteomics data.
Pathway Tools (PTools) is an extensive bioinformatics software system whose
capabilities include genome informatics, pathway informatics, omics data
analysis, and metabolic modeling. PTools accelerates the research and education
of the thousands of scientists and students who have downloaded it, and for the
thousands of scientists and students who access PTools-powered websites. As
genomes are the foundation of modern biology, the benefits to society of
improved genome analysis and data management are extensive, including studies of
soil microbes for agriculture; studies of animal pathogens for animal health;
metabolic engineering of microbes for greener fuels and chemicals; studies of
microbes to enhance human foods; studies of invasive microbial species; studies
of wastewater treatment; and studies of microbes involved in global chemical
cycles, including those that will be affected by climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this funding, significant extensions to PTools
for both single-omics and multi-omics data analysis will be developed. The goal
of the project is to provide tools for multi-omics data analysis that will
enable simultaneous visualization of up to four types of omics data on three
different pathway-related diagrams. These visualization-based analysis tools
will enable faster, deeper understanding of omics datasets than is possible with
current tools. A key insight for the latter tool is to create software that maps
multiple input omics data dimensions to intuitively navigable pathway and whole-
metabolic network diagrams that are tightly coupled to multi-omics scoring
tools, enabling scientists to interpret these data in a functional context.
During the award period, two robust new versions of the software will be release
per year, and its user community supported through user outreach and training,
answering questions, and fixing bugs. To access P-tools, visit
http://bioinformatics.ai.sri.com/ptools/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.