* 2109141
* Molecular Level Understanding of Dynamic Speciation to Inform Complex Reaction Pathways and Control the Rational Synthesis of Ternary Semiconductor Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amy Prieto, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Amy Prieto of Colorado State
University is developing a synthetic toolkit for understanding and controlling
the reactivity of selenium species that can direct the synthesis of phase pure
ternary semiconductor nanoparticles. These nanomaterials, which are composed of
non-toxic, earth-abundant elements, have the potential to offer tunable
optoelectronic properties that could be exploited in photovoltaic devices. Dr.
Prieto involves high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in this
research. The Prieto research team is also developing hands-on learning kits for
middle school students that focus on solar cells to engage them in key energy
topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves elucidating how the
precursor to monomer transformation of Se powder in high boiling point
surfactants can yield phase-pure ternary semiconductor nanoparticles. This
includes probing the speciation of reactive components that lead to phase pure
copper selenophosphate nanoparticles by focusing on the Lewis acidity and
basicity of selenium monomers, understanding these synthetic parameters to
controllably access phosphorous deficient metastable C/P/Se nanoparticles, and
extrapolating this chemistry to synthesize a new silver compound that contains
both phosphorus and selenium. This research is focusing on a diverse range of
tools to identify solution species and crystalline products under both in-situ
reaction conditions and post-synthesis. By developing this tool kit for the
synthesis of semiconductor nanoparticles, reaction pathways for pure phase
ternary and quaternary nanoparticles with tunable composition, structure, and
surface chemistry are expected and these could be exploited in future
photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.