* 2109234
* Simulating the life cycle of star clusters: from birth to death in a cosmological galactic context
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sarah Loebman, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 522,357.00

Our Sun is one of several hundred billion stars in the Milky Way Galaxy. Most of
these stars, including the Sun, likely formed inside a dense collection of stars
called a star cluster. Star clusters form within massive clouds of cold, dense
gas. The investigators will study where, when, and how star clusters form inside
these large clouds, by using galaxy numerical simulations. These simulations
include the physical ingredients - gravity, pressure, energy - to generate both
realistic star formation and large-scale structures like spiral arms. The
investigators will track how these spiral arms change over time and connect this
to the star clusters that form in the simulations. The investigator will build
on the existing Cal-Bridge program to enhance research experiences for
underrepresented scholars. The investigator will involve the students in her
research projects and mentor the students in research experience and career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most star clusters form inside spiral arms,
but it is unknown if the energy released by stars in clusters destroy spiral
arms in a short period of time. Some theories suggest that stars in clusters
dramatically reshape gas in spiral arms through the input of energy from
supernovae explosions, winds, and high energy light. The investigator is
studying how these forms of energy work together, or against one another, to
sculpt the gaseous spiral structure. The investigators will test how physical
phenomena, like magnetohydrodynamic turbulence and cosmic rays, impact the
formation and persistence of spiral structure in galaxy simulations. The
investigators will unite analyses across scale by connecting the longevity of
large-scale galactic structures to the number, properties, and physical
distribution of small-scale star clusters within them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.