* 2109175
* Scaffold-based Biomimetics of Fe-Hydrogenase and Nitrogenase (FeMoco): Interrogating Dynamics, Protein Matrix Effects, and Carbide Motifs
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Rose, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Michael Rose from University of Texas at Austin investigates the
role of scaffold-based ligands and carbides in supporting biomimetic models of
the enzymes hydrogenase and nitrogenase. These enzymes catalyze fundamental
reactions that underpin living systems in numerous environments. Hydrogenases
use dihydrogen (H2) produced by microbiological fermenters to reduce carbon
dioxide (CO2) in organisms called methanogens. Nitrogenases convert atmospheric
dinitrogen (N2, which makes up 80% of the air) into ammonia (NH3), which is
essential for plant growth. These two chemical reactions are critical to
environmental and green chemistry. Studies of the molecular structures and
mechanisms of the active sites of these enzymes are critical to the design,
synthesis and understanding of earth abundant and sustainable catalysts that
will carry out these reactions. This research will be implemented by a diverse
pool of undergraduate researchers from UT Austin and REU programs. These
students will learn laboratory and computational skills that will prepare them
for graduate study and/or STEM careers in. Dr. Rose will continue to focus on
raising and improving safety awareness in the Chemistry Department including
through his support of the Chemistry Student Safety Organization (CSSO), which
promotes best practices in laboratory safety across the Department. The
H2fromH2O educational program will continue to operate in local schools and at
local events; a hands-on water-splitting experiment delivered through the
program emphasizes the importance of renewable fuels and the potential of
sunlight-to-hydrogen conversion as an energy paradigm.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this research will investigate the use
of supramolecular scaffold ligands based on anthracene and related units that
support the chemically complex structure of [Fe]-hydrogenase. This enzyme uses a
low-spin Fe(II)-dicarbonyl bound to thiolate, pyridone and organometallic acyl
donor to perform H2 activation and hydride transfer. The proposed research aims
to discover how molecular flexibility in the scaffold can accelerate H2
activation and catalysis. This will be achieved by installing flexible
‘anthranoids’ such as thianthrene and selenthrene in the scaffold to (i) enable
more facile access to strained and reactive ground state geometries, and/or (ii)
lower the energy of strained transition states to accelerate catalysis.
Secondly, the research will aim to install molecular Fe complexes inside a well-
characterized protein scaffold — namely, β-lactoglobulin (βLG). While it has
been demonstrated that Fe complexes are catalytically competent, the research
will endeavor to enhance catalysis by building structurally well-defined
interactions (H-bonding, ion pairs, molecular motion) between the metal site and
proteinaceous units. This research also aims to synthesize carbide-based Fe
clusters relevant to the nitrogenase active site. Presently there are no known
synthetic methods to access iron-sulfur-carbide clusters. The project will
utilize ‘historical’ iron-carbide-carbonyl clusters as synthons for sulfur and
thiolate incorporation in new Fe model complexes. Both electrophilic (S2Cl2,
RS–Cl) and nucleophilic (Na2S, RS–) addition mechanisms will be explored, with
an emphasis on using under-coordinated versions (non-Wade-Mingos rules) of the
iron-carbide-carbonyl clusters for reactive sulfur
addition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.