* 2109717
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The insatiable sweet tooth: molecular adaptations to nectarivory in mammals
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Jasmin Camacho, Camacho, Jasmin
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. One of the
most unusual events in mammalian evolution, and among the bats, is the evolution
to a sugar diet. Similarly, it is unusual for humans to consume high quantities
of sugar found frequently within our diets, thus leading to conditions such as
cavities, diabetes, and obesity. In most mammals, excessive sugar in the diet
will cause a number of problems including prolonged high blood sugar
(hyperglycemia) and elevated fat synthesis in the liver, which have been
associated with a number of human health problems. Although the mammalian sugar
regulation pathways have been studied extensively in disease states, very little
is known about how to naturally keep the body healthy in response to excessive
sugar consumption. Nectar bats, bats with a diet that is almost exclusively
liquid sugar, live long and healthy lives and are an ideal natural system to
understand how to neutralize the harmful effects of a high sugar diet. The
fellow will apply innovative and non-destructive field methods to wild caught
bats and characterize their metabolism using non-invasive methods. In this
study, the fellow will answer how bats are able to eat all the sugar they want,
and whether it is possible for the modern sugar-rich Western diet to become a
healthy lifestyle. This study will also prepare the fellow for an independent
career as a research scientist through training in emerging methods and
disciplines that will shape her future research program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nectarivory is an ideal system to study the mechanisms of
adaptive evolution, as several lineages have independently derived liquid-sugar
diets. This includes striking similarities between Old World and neotropical
bats (~60 million years of divergence), and within neotropical bats (~20 million
years of divergence). This proposal integrates comparative metabolic physiology,
genomics, and in vitro functional assays to understand the molecular basis of
dietary adaptation. The fellow will develop genomic tools and tissue culture
methods for studying long-lived bat species in the lab, which is an essential
step to evaluate genetic adaptations identified by molecular evolution and
comparative genomic studies. This project will enable the Fellow, who is a
first-generation and underrepresented minority, access to crucial training and
mentored support in genomics, molecular evolution, and mammalian tissue culture,
which will broaden the Fellowâ€™s research, teaching, and mentorship
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.