* 2109543
* Collaborative Research: GEM: Understanding Connections between Earth’s Magnetotail and Ionosphere through Imaging
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Amy Keesee, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 287,063.00

Magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling is the process connecting hot, low density
plasma in the magnetosphere with the cold, high density plasma in the
ionosphere. This coupling is especially important during geomagnetic storms and
substorms when increasing currents in the magnetosphere close through the
ionosphere, resulting in increased outflow of ionospheric plasma into the
magnetosphere and increased precipitation of energized magnetospheric plasma
into the ionosphere. This process, important to understanding space weather
impacts, will be studied with a combination of space-based observations and
ground-based auroral imagers and the NSF-supported Poker Flat meridian
spectrograph. The project supports research of a graduate student from a member
of an underrepresented group in STEM and three women in early career
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coupling between the Earth’s ionosphere and
magnetosphere is a critical component of the dynamics that occur during storms
and substorms. To improve understanding of the connections between phenomena in
the magnetotail and in the ionosphere, the research will combine global imaging
of the magnetosphere using energetic neutral atoms with auroral imaging of the
ionosphere. These techniques will be supported by in situ measurements and
global modeling. Case studies of particular active intervals will be used as
well as statistical studies that include superposed epoch analyses. The
following science questions will be addressed: (1) Under what conditions do we
observe both energized ions in the magnetotail and auroral enhancements? (2)
What is the temporal relationship between ion energization in the magnetotail
and auroral enhancements? (3) What is the spatial relationship between mesoscale
regions of energized ions in the magnetotail and auroral
enhancements?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.