* 2109678
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Understanding protein synthesis in energetically constrained microbial consortia
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Rodney Tollerson, Tollerson, Rodney W
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Understanding of how the planet’s climate
responds to fluxes in levels of carbon is critical for predicting outcomes that
inform how we interact with our environment at an individual level and as a
community. One of the carbon-containing molecules that lead to changes in
climate is methane, a potent “greenhouse gas”. A major source of methane is the
deep ocean floor, though most of this methane does not reach the surface of the
ocean because it is consumed by certain microbes (Archaea, a distinct Domain of
life) as an energy source. To perform this task, these archaea live in
partnership with bacteria and share the energy yield. Currently, little is known
about which cellular components facilitate interactions within these microbial
communities, and how the production of these components is regulated. In this
project, an interdisciplinary approach will be used to determine the mechanisms
that deep ocean microbes use to sense and interact with their environment and
each other. Through the study of the microbes that govern carbon flux in the
ocean, it will be possible to make better models to predict potential feedback
from dynamic changes in the global climate. The fellow will also work to
strengthen the relationship between the host institution and the local community
college, which will provide greater accessibility for student exposure to
research at the university-level.

Through the intersection of molecular biology, biogeochemistry, and microbial
ecology, the fellow will help build predictive models about how methane
oxidizing consortia will respond to changes in their environment, and how those
responses will impact methane flux from the oceans. The majority of deep-sea
methane is consumed before reaching the surface by anaerobic methane oxidizing
archaea that live in a syntrophic relationship with sulfate-reducing bacteria,
coupling methane oxidation to sulfate reduction. Recent work indicates this
archaeal-bacterial symbiosis extends to cooperative behaviors such as such as
direct electron transfer and sharing fixed nitrogen. This study will increase
understanding of the processes driving life in microbial consortia at the
translational level by utilizing 1) proteomics to broadly understand the
metabolic potential of these consortia and 2) ribosome profiling to determine
the translational landscape of the microbial communities at single-nucleotide
resolution. Beyond use in the deep ocean sediments, the products from this
project (such as the experimental design) can be applicable to many different
complex communities, including agricultural soils or other complex microbiomes.
Further, the fellow will work with outreach centers both at the host institution
and the local community college to facilitate research exchanges and help ease
the process of transferring to a four-year college. The fellow will also
participate in current programming within the host institution to increase
participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.