* 2109966
* RAPID International Type I: Collaborative Research: COVID Data Infrastructure Builders: Creating Resilient and Sustainable Research Collaborations
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Ryan Ellis, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 01/31/2024
* USD 69,866.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has sparked thousands of new large-scale data projects
globally. These COVID data infrastructures are essential: they enable the
public, policymakers, public health officials, and others to see and comprehend
particular aspects of the global health crisis. This research compares COVID
data infrastructures in the U.S. and India, countries that share extremely high
COVID infection rates as well as electoral democracy that encourages
transparency; 'Data for Social Good' rhetoric; and large IT workforces. The
project seeks to reveal how project leaders and contributors confront and manage
the disruptions, hardships, and conflicts created by the pandemic. Working
across different geographies and institutional settings, the research project
will highlight how the pandemic impacts different communities in different ways.
The research project will provide policymakers, technologists, and other leaders
with insights and recommendations on how to improve the creation and maintenance
of emergency data infrastructures. By understanding the dynamics of current
COVID data infrastructures, we can be better prepared for the next
emergency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID research project investigates the
creation, maintenance, and real-time transformation of novel critical data
infrastructures. It uncovers the debates, conflicts, orderings, and important
decisions that shape and define COVID data-tracker systems. At a time when the
pandemic is disrupting ongoing research across the globe, these data-trackers
can provide insights into how to create and maintain resilient and sustainable
research-enabling infrastructure under conditions of significant stress. This
RAPID project uses cross-national comparative analysis of public COVID data
projects in the U.S. and India in order to identify the key factors that enable
data infrastructures to endure the social and material disruptions associated
with the pandemic. The project’s cross-national and comparative research design
ensures that research findings are generalizable. COVID data infrastructures are
dynamic: the information, practices, tools, and collaborators that populate
these systems constantly evolve. Often, the important adaptations that shape
critical data infrastructures are not easily preserved using current web
archiving and cumulative public data preservation methods. Additionally, the
project’s research design will capture this otherwise ephemeral data--allowing
the project to analyze and interpret how these infrastructures are created and
maintained under adverse conditions. The project is informed by and will
contribute to the scholarly literature on ethnographies of technology
development, infrastructure studies, and crisis informatics. Research findings
will support concrete recommendations for how these and future data
infrastructure can be made (1) sustainable; (2) accountable to different
publics; and (3) improved in order to help save lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.