* 2109679
* Methods and Results in Language Documentation using Literary Digital Editions
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Rafael Alvarado, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,101.00

Colonial archives present a range of methodological challenges for scholars. On
the one hand, they contain valuable information about Indigenous languages,
histories, and societies in the Pre-European and early colonial periods. On the
other hand, these documents are often written by religious and political
officials who sought to change or eradicate the traditions they described. To
address this well-known problem, scholars must develop methods that disentangle
colonial interventions from Indigenous linguistic, historical, and cultural
data. This project offers one such solution. In collaboration with Indigenous
scholars from the community, this project uses open source, standards-compliant
tools to build a digital collection of five versions of the longest and most
complete pre-1492 book of the Americas. By showing where Indigenous and non-
Native authors record vocabularies, syntactic structures, and morphologies in
different ways and at different moments, this project generates a corpus and
methodology that can be applied to other linguistic and historical contexts,
including future educational efforts. Because there is little data on the
effectiveness of digital materials on Indigenous language acquisition for
heritage learners and non-heritage speakers, this project creates important
materials for future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies the
international, scholarly standards of textual encoding developed by the Text
Encoding Initiative (TEI) to the longest and most complete pre-1492 book to
survive the conquest. Other digital projects represent the text in manuscript
facsimiles, a format that is inaccessible to non-experts, cannot easily be used
for language learning, and privileges the colonial-era act of writing rather
than the original oral tradition. In contrast, this project’s five-item digital
collection of historical and modern texts, videos, and translations, developed
by Indigenous scholars in collaboration with non-Native faculty and student
researchers, uses encoding tools to reveal colonial interventions and highlight
Indigenous scholars’ corrections to orthography, morphosyntax, and vocabulary.
These tools include referencing string analytical attributes &lt;rs ana&gt; to
tag characters, places, and objects in the text, the &lt;space&gt; element to
preserve poetic orality and align concepts according to morphological
parallelism and phrase-final markers, and annotations, managed through a
relational database of 880 cultural topics, to present competing scholarly
interpretations of textual passages, phonetics, and syntax. The collection is
housed on a platform that uses an open-source Static Site Generator framework to
avoid the long loading time of server-based websites, paired with a Progressive
Web Application framework to provide mobile readers with an app-like experience
that does not sacrifice phone storage. This digital humanities approach to
historical textual analytics allows a variety of users, including researchers,
teachers, students, and interested members of the public, to represent the
corpus and code in ways that cannot be disseminated through print. In so doing
it creates a new tool for language learning, textual analysis, and linguistic
study by native speakers, heritage learners, and non-Native researchers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.