* 2109074
* Determining the Buffering Capacity and PH of Aerosols and Their Control of the Multiphase Chemical Evolution and Kinetics of Optically Levitated Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ryan Sullivan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 482,661.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program in the
Chemistry Division, Ryan Sullivan at Carnegie Mellon University will study
atmospheric aerosols utilizing optical tweezers. Aerosols are micron-sized
liquid or solid particles suspended in the air. They have unique chemical
properties and reactivity because of their high surface area-to-volume ratio.
Atmospheric aerosols can act as chemical catalysts, accelerating chemical
reactions and facilitating aqueous-phase chemistry that cannot occur in the gas-
phase alone. The properties of the aerosol surfaces play an important role in
controlling the chemical reactivity of aerosols and their many effects on
atmospheric chemistry, air quality, health, cloud microphysics and climate. A
tool called aerosol optical tweezers (AOT) will be used in this project to carry
out experiments on levitated droplets to determine the evolution of various key
chemical properties. Aerosol acidity is a critical chemical property that
strongly influences the chemistry of the interface and chemical kinetics. The
experiments are expected to produce new chemical understanding of variations in
particle composition, acidity, and morphology, that change the reactivity of
these complex particles. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate
students, Dr. Sullivan will create and deploy hands-on experiments and
curricular materials on environmental chemistry for grade 6-12 students in local
public schools which serve significant numbers of members of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in acidity, water content, polarity, and
composition can cause liquid–liquid phase separations that alter the properties
at the interface of the particle. Thus, changes in aerosol composition can alter
particle morphology which in turn can change the kinetics and reaction
mechanisms of further gas–particle reactions. The evolution of a suite of key
chemical properties including droplet pH will be determined as a particle
undergoes aqueous reactions such as with two important trace gases: N2O5 and the
epoxydiol IEPOX produced from isoprene oxidation. Physicochemical properties to
be determined include phase separations and morphology, acidity, and
diffusivity, as a function of relative humidity (RH), temperature, and droplet
size. This research sets out to address outstanding questions regarding how the
chemical evolution of atmospheric particles affects the extensive impacts of
particulate matter on air quality, human health, ecosystems, acid deposition,
radiative forcing, cloud microphysics, and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.