* 2109654
* Collaborative Research: Prosodic Analysis and Visualization of Phonetic Samples for Improved Understanding of Stress and Intonation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Min Chen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2025
* USD 140,351.00

Rhythm and intonation are important part of pronunciation. While there are some
basic similarities in rhythm and intonation patterns across languages, there are
also interesting differences. Some of these differences are linked to the way
words are structured in languages, for example, are the words short or are they
composed of many sub-parts. This project investigates and documents the rhythm
and intonation, or prosodic system, of under-documented languages to better
understand how humans modulate pitch movement (i.e. intonation) and segmental
duration (i.e. the length of vowels and consonants). The project uses archived
and new recordings to arrive at acoustic measurements and visualizations of
pitch and duration, creating a database that can be mined for the study of the
interplay of prosody and other domains such as the syllable, word, foot,
prosodic word, prosodic phrase, and intonation unit. The project includes
training for graduate students and undergraduate students from Aaniiih Nakoda
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators mine archived recordings or new
recordings of words, phrases and connected speech produced by native speakers to
improve and understand the prosodic system of the morphologically complex
languages for analysis. They represent their findings through the software in
development by the team for this purpose. A major product of this project is a
database with phonetic analyses across different prosodic domains, e.g, the
syllable or word. These materials will be made available through an online
webservice and will be useful for researchers working to analyze and represent
other languages with significant modulations of pitch and duration. The software
includes a self-pronunciation check feature allowing the user to listen, repeat,
and check accuracy in reproducing the pitch and duration values of native
speakers. This feature will be used to understand how well such overt input
impacts second language pronunciation acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.