* 2109828
* A framework for reconciling competing effects of competitors on disease transmission
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Karoun Bagamian, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,979,823.00

Biodiversity is disappearing at an alarming rate, and at the same time,
infectious diseases increasingly spill over from wildlife to humans. Therefore,
it is urgent to understand how species diversity affects infectious diseases in
wildlife. In some ecosystems, increasing diversity of competitor species
decreases disease risk, termed the 'dilution' effect because diversity dilutes
out infection. However, in other systems, a more diverse community increases
disease risk, termed the ‘amplification’ effect. When to expect dilution or
amplification is a topic of debate among disease ecologists. This project aims
to reconcile the competing effects of biodiversity using Sin Nombre hantavirus
(SNV) in deer mice as a model. This system displays aspects of both dilution and
amplification at the same time. This project lays out a framework for examining
potential mechanisms of dilution and amplification and how they can interact to
potentially be synergistic or antagonistic. This will facilitate moving beyond
the long-standing debate of which pattern (dilution or amplification) is more
prevalent, clarifying when different mechanisms may be dominant and help explain
the different patterns seen in various studies. It will also benefit society by
advancing prevention efforts for hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS). This human
illness caused by SNV, has affected more than 700 people (killing more than 250)
since its discovery in 1993. Other broader Impacts of this research include
outreach and work with Native Americans, with particular focus on K-12 outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three mechanisms determine if increasing competitor
diversity will lead to dilution or amplification of a directly transmitted
pathogen. Dilution will occur if increased species diversity leads to 1)
decreased host density, 2) decreased contact rates, or 3) decreased probability
of transmission given contact (transmissibility). Conversely, amplification
could occur if increased diversity does the opposite. This project develops a
framework to disentangle these component dilution and amplification effects,
centered around a mathematical model that combines SIR (Susceptible-Infected-
Recovered) dynamics with a Lotka-Volterra competition coefficient. Aim 1 is to
determine how increased small mammal diversity / composition affects mouse
population demography and subsequent SNV prevalence, by performing Bayesian
population analyses on longitudinal data. Aim 2 is to determine how increased
small mammal diversity affects the transmission rate, through changes in
transmissibility (via stress, co-infections, immunity, and viral shedding)
and/or contact rates between deer mice, using a combination of long-term
monitoring of physiology in natural populations, and experimental manipulation
in the field. Aim 3 is to synthesize the findings from Aims 1 and 2 into a
general model of how competitors can differentially affect all three components
of transmission and scale up to determine the variety of observed patterns in
disease prevalence within and across systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.