* 2109578
* Collaborative Research: Language Documentation with an Artificial Intelligence (AI) Helper
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Géraldine Walther, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2025
* USD 239,720.00

Documentation of languages, especially endangered languages, is crucial for
conserving humanity’s knowledge and cultural heritage, as well as for advancing
an understanding of human language. Traditional documentation methods produce
invaluable materials such as grammars, dictionaries, and annotated texts, but
require more time than can be afforded to keep up with current language
extinction rates. The most constructive response to this crisis is to complement
documentation efforts by collecting data for as many languages as possible now
and to make them accessible and interpretable so that they can be studied later
by both linguists and members of the language communities. Digital technologies
make it practical to obtain many hours of recordings in an endangered language
along with translations. This project advances technologies for analyzing the
recordings at the sub-word, word, and clause level so that they become
accessible for a wide variety of documentary purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project makes the information in digital recordings more interpretable for
further linguistic analysis in three ways. First, the team is devising
computational methods to automatically derive a basic phonological understanding
and produce phonetic representations for languages, even if they do not have an
established writing system. Second, the team is developing methods to
automatically analyze the internal structure of words in languages where this
structure is highly complex. Third, the team uses knowledge of more widely
spoken languages to analyze related endangered languages. The resulting tool,
the AI-helper toolbox, will be packaged with software that is currently widely
in use by linguists and language communities in the language documentation
process. All tools will be accessible through a web-based interface and the
source code will be publicly available through GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.