* 2109295
* CNS Core: Small: Network Wide Sensing by Leveraging Cellular Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Aly Fathy, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 459,695.00

5G communication networks are densely deployed to provide a higher data rate and
wider coverage. The high-frequency bands used in 5G systems are more susceptible
to the environment, such as rain fade, blockage, reflections, and transceiver
displacement due to wind. The sensitivity of communication signals to the
environment could benefit the task of sensing: the impact of the environment on
the communication signal is also delivered to the communication receiver, from
which the information of the environment can be inferred. When all the
environmental information carried by the communication signal can be gleaned by
base stations or user equipment, the communication network can infer the
information and thus monitor the environment. The 5G networks further enhance
the capability of sensing that cannot be achieved by 4G cellular networks, due
to the features of large bandwidth, wide-area coverage, ultra-dense deployment,
massive antennas, and network slicing. The proposed research serves as a
platform for wide-area sensing, with a marginal cost added to existing
communication infrastructure, which benefits various applications, such as
traffic surveillance, weather monitoring, civil engineering, et
al.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communication signals illuminate various targets and
regions, besides conveying information to receivers. It saves frequency
bandwidth and transmit power to leverage the communication signal for sensing.
To this end, the information-theoretic trade-off between communications and
sensing is identified, which provides performance bounds. Then, sensing
algorithms are designed, including environment imaging and weather monitoring
(including wind gauge and precipitation monitoring), based on the characteristic
of communication signals. By incorporating various practical concerns, sensing
protocols are devised. They mainly consist of the mechanism of signaling and the
software-defined sensing using the network function virtualization, network
slicing, and multiaccess edge computing in 5G (or beyond) networks. Finally, the
proposed algorithms of sensing, signaling, and computing are evaluated in both
hardware and software testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.