* 2109475
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Mechanisms and consequences of thermal stress effects on cognitive performance
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Melissa Proffitt, Proffitt, Melissa R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The project
will address the need to understand how organisms respond to rising temperatures
by measuring the organism’s behavior and physiology in response to temperature
in two closely related songbirds. These songbirds vary in their ability to
tolerate hot temperatures, which will allow the fellow to directly test this
question. This research will advance scientific knowledge by providing insight
into how and why different populations of birds vary in their response to heat
in a changing climate. The project benefits society by taking a 4-tiered
approach to address the need to develop a sense of community to support the
recruitment and retention of underrepresented groups at the postdoctoral level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many species are shifting their range in response to
changes in climatic conditions that are altering selective pressures. Behavior
can buffer these effects and facilitate survival. Cognitive traits, such as
learning, can be particularly vital to survival when facing new challenges and
could mean the difference between a species persisting and going extinct in an
area. However, not much is known about how variation in thermal tolerance
affects behavioral performance, particularly of cognitive traits. The project
includes a set of integrative, experimental studies to fill this gap in
knowledge by experimentally manipulating air temperature to quantify effects of
learning on a spatial foraging task. Critically, the approach uses individuals
from multiple populations across a latitudinal gradient spanning the shifting
range limit of two species of songbird who vary in thermal tolerance, to ask how
variation in thermal tolerance affects variation in cognitive performance under
thermal stress. Overall, the research aims to use thermal stress as a
biologically relevant tool to understand connections between behavioral
responses to an organisms' environment and underlying physiological mechanisms
over different scales from neurons to individuals to populations and species.
The project will expand the evolutionary framework of the fellow’s research
program and her training in designing and analyzing behavioral assays.
Broadening participation activities focus on building community for postdocs
from under-represented groups by organizing career development workshops, a
lightning talk series, formalization of postdoctoral committees, and a postdoc
run outreach event to provide an opportunity for the younger generation to see
diversity in scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.