* 2109913
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The buried solution for agricultural resilience: arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Aidee Guzman, Guzman, Aidee
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Longer and
more extreme drought periods pose a substantial challenge for agriculture
globally. At the same time, the dominant farming model has dramatically reduced
crop diversity leading to a decline in soil biodiversity, especially in an
important group of fungi called arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF). These
organisms are known for alleviating plant drought stress. Therefore, the goal of
the proposed research is to (1) determine the mechanisms by which crop diversity
and soil fungi are connected, and in turn, (2) understand the functional
mechanisms by which plant-fungi interactions buffer crops against drought
stress. This research will engage underrepresented students in the local rural
communities and at the sponsoring institution. Specifically, the Fellow will
develop a novel and integrative approach to simultaneously support future STEM
educators in rural high schools and develop an experiential learning program for
high school students in minority-majority rural communities in California’s San
Joaquin Valley. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crop diversification has emerged as a
strategy to harness the potential benefits of soil biodiversity, especially AMF,
to buffer crops against drought, a current and growing threat to agricultural
productivity. However, while greater crop diversity can enrich AMF communities,
linking soil biodiversity to ecosystem functions in the contexts of agricultural
systems remains a fundamental challenge. Therefore, more studies are needed to
understand how agricultural management may alter fungal community composition
and select for fungal traits may or may not alleviate drought stress. This
research seeks to fill this knowledge gap by using a novel approach that
integrates soil fungal ecology, functional genomics, and plant ecophysiology to
test whether crop diversification can positively alter the functional
composition of fungi and plant-fungal interactions to alleviate drought stress.
By comparing fields with varying levels of crop diversity (monoculture versus
polyculture) and manipulating water availability, this research will examine the
contribution of mycorrhizal fungi (versus non-mycorrhizal fungi) to crop
productivity under drought directly in the field. The Fellow will also develop
an experiential learning program for rural minority-majority high schools to
empower underrepresented high school students to pursue STEM careers and support
future STEM educators in rural high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.