* 2109325
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: How does trait regulation evolve  from greater environmental control to greater genetic control?
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Nicholas Levis, Levis, Nicholas A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Both environmental and genetic inputs during
development influence the form and function of an organism’s traits.
Importantly, the extent to which each factor—the environment and
genetics—contributes to any given trait can change during evolution. General
principles underlying the molecular basis of such a transition from
environmental to genetic control are poorly understood. Filling this gap is not
only critical for understanding the origins of new traits and adaptation in
organisms, but doing so is also relevant to such applied fields as medicine,
agriculture, and conservation. This research seeks to identify a signature of
the shift in a trait’s regulation from primarily environmental to primarily
genetic, that can be applied to other traits and organisms, and that will begin
to explain rules governing the interactions between genomes, the environment,
and phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the evolutionary
loss of environmentally sensitive development, a process termed genetic
assimilation. Genetic assimilation has a long history of intrigue and
controversy, due in no small part to the fact that its molecular bases are
poorly understood. The research component of this fellowship combines an
emerging model nematode system with diverse approaches including experimental
evolution, comparative genomics, and functional genetics to clarify genetic
assimilation’s molecular bases and the extent to which they are idiosyncratic or
conserved at microevolutionary and macroevolutionary scales. Specifically, the
research will investigate the evolutionary changes that occur both within and
between species when nematodes transition from possessing two alternative,
environmentally induced, resource-use phenotypes to only possessing one of these
phenotypes. This training includes collaboration with and mentorship of
undergraduate and of high-school students from underrepresented groups in all
aspects of the research. In sum, this project addresses a key unresolved issue
in ecological evolutionary developmental biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.