* 2109124
* SIGNALS: Unveiling Star-Forming Regions in Nearby Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 01/15/2022,09/30/2024
* Laurie Rousseau-Nepton, Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2024
* USD 284,900.00

The investigators seek to understand how stars form in galaxies, how their
birthplace affects their properties, and how multiple generations of stars
transform galaxies. Stars affect their environment by returning new elements to
the interstellar gas. These new elements are then recycled to form new stars.
Stars form in a wide variety of environments. These can be different galaxy to
galaxy, location to location. The result is that each star has its own story. By
studying 50,000 regions where stars actively form, scientists will understand
what triggers their formation, how efficiently stars form, and how each
generation transforms the gas around them. This will also help researchers to
understand the star-formation history of the whole Universe since the Big-Bang.
This project is led by a woman from the First Nations of Canada based in Hawaii
and is composed of a group of 70 researchers including more than 40% of woman.
Positive impacts are expected on the local community in Hawaii. The team will
collaborate with a statewide STEM program, Mauna Kea Scholars, to develop a
workshop for their students. Mauna Kea Scholars provides telescope time on the
Mauna Kea Observatories for Hawaii public high schools students. Most of the
students are underrepresented minorities, including girls, Native Hawaiians, and
traditionally underserved students. The workshop will teach the students new
skills applicable within their research, encouraging confidence in their
abilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using data from the SIGNALS survey conducted at
the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope with a Fourier Transform Spectrograph, the
investigators will study the spectra of 50,000 spatially resolved star-forming
regions, and the stars within, at a mean spatial resolution of 20 pc. Secondary
data from UV, IR, HI and CO will allow the team to properly measure the local
environmental properties such as the density of stars and gas around each
region. The team will analyze the data using a custom-tailored modeling
technique and a global study stellar populations in different environments.
Their goals are to first measure the impact of the environment on the star
formation process. Second, link the stellar recycling processes to the local
chemical enrichment and dynamics within the surrounding star-forming regions.
Their third goal is measuring the star formation rate as a function of the
measured indicators, so these indicators can be accurately applied to studies of
more distant galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Astronomy Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.