* 2109979
* Controlling exciton dynamics at interfaces using moiré potentials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Hui Zhao, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2024
* USD 310,309.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) layered
crystals, such as transition metal dichalcogenides, have received much attention
recently. Notably, their properties can be tailored by stacking different
crystals together without the requirement of lattice matching found in
traditional inorganic semiconductors. One promising way to control material
properties is to vary the relative orientation and the lattice size of the two
atomically thin crystals to create a nanoscale moiré pattern. This project will
combine 2D-layered crystals with molecular crystals to produce a wide range of
moiré patterns. The research team will then investigate the dependence of
optical and electronic properties on the different types of moiré patterns. The
fundamental knowledge gained by this project allows researchers to create
tailor-made interfaces useful in devices such as solar cells, LEDs, and
photodetectors, as well as quantum emitters. The project will train
undergraduate and graduate students on cutting-edge research capabilities in
nanoscale material design, fabrication, and characterization in a collaborative
environment. There will be a particular emphasis on recruiting students from
underrepresented groups. Outreach activities to the public include a summer camp
for K-12 students, outreach seminars, and science outreach
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide
range of moiré patterns can be created by interfacing 2D transition metal
dichalcogenide crystals with organic molecular crystals through weak van der
Waals forces. The moiré pattern produces a nanoscale-periodic potential, which
in turn provides a unique way to control the electron dynamics at the interface.
The research team combines theoretical and experimental efforts to understand
how the moiré potential affects the properties of the interlayer exciton (IX)
formed at the interface. The goal is to search for interfaces with two distinct
classes of moiré potential that favor either photo-to-electrical conversion or
light emission, and to demonstrate the moiré potential as an effective way to
control the competition between the free carrier generation and the radiative
recombination of the IX. A combination of time-resolved and/or angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy, and spatiotemporal optical pump-probe spectroscopy
are used to probe the IX dynamics and the band structure at the interface. The
experimentally measured IX dynamics are correlated with band alignments,
interface interactions, and the moiré potential determined by theoretical
methods based on density functional theory, including meta-GGAs for rapid
screening and hybrid functionals for more accurate calculations. van der Waals
interactions are explicitly included. Wannier functions are used to simulate
moiré potentials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.