* 2109607
* Transmission Pathways of Seagrass Wasting Disease in Coastal Meadows
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Maya Groner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,479,900.00

Warming in the oceans caused by climate change increases the risk of disease
outbreaks in valuable marine organisms and habitats. Seagrass meadows in
temperate waters are vital habitats, affected globally by Eelgrass Wasting
Disease. This is a devastating disease, known to increase with warming, and is
already outbreaking locally along the US west coast. The team’s work over the
last decade documents significant declines in eelgrass meadows and outbreaks of
wasting disease in the Salish Sea, WA. A combined laboratory, field, and
modeling program will transform our understanding of how eelgrass wasting
disease epidemics are initiated and transmitted in nature. To communicate the
combined risk of disease with climate change and the ways disease spreads in the
ocean, the team runs hands-on K-12 programs with Padilla Bay National Estuarine
Research Reserve, the Friday Harbor Laboratories K-12 program and the Spring
Street School Salish Sea School. The team will continue a 5-week graduate course
at Friday Harbor Laboratories to train the next generation of disease ecologists
and develop a documentary film, Epidemics Rising in the
Seagrass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transmission mode used by a pathogen to move
between hosts is poorly understood for most marine diseases. Outbreaks of
eelgrass wasting disease, caused by the marine protozoan Labyrinthula zosterae,
occurs on Pacific shores from California to Alaska, with intermittent outbreaks.
Quantitative estimates of the rates and extent of waterborne and multiple modes
of transmission are knowledge gaps limiting understanding of marine disease
processes. Experimental studies reveal a circulating portfolio of L. zosterae
strains varying in virulence and genetics from non-pathogenic to extremely
pathogenic and transmitted by both contact and through the water. Experiments
show that disease is transmitted by dual transmission modes of contact and
waterborne, as is common, but poorly documented, for many marine pathogens. To
understand the transmission pathways that underlie the spread of the disease,
the team will first measure the role of factors including warming and pathogen
strain in starting new infections. Secondly, the team is investigating how both
resident microbiomes and biota such as grazing snails and filtering oysters can
affect the rate of new infections. Thirdly, the results from lab experiments are
applied to a whole meadow setting to help the team model the way the disease
spreads in nature. This study system allows direct, experimentally verified
incorporation of species interactions into the disease transmission model,
including the role of microbiome, invertebrate vectors and filter
feeders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.