* 2109472
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The social brain: behavioral, neural, and transcriptomic modulation of the brain
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Levi Storks, Storks, Levi
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Animals interact with their world through
cognitive mechanisms, the substrates of which are found in the neural tissues of
the central nervous system. A fundamental mechanism of cognition is associative
learning where an individual associates a stimulus with a specific experience.
Animals form many associations about events in their world, including negative
events such as the avoidance of predators or extreme conditions and positive
events such as the location of food or mates. Depending on how an individual
reacts to stress, positive and negative learning contexts likely affect
individuals in different ways. Using zebrafish as a model, this research aims to
understand how fish with differing stress reactivity react to different learning
contexts, and how this differentially affects their brain. The project will
create public outreach opportunities to diverse audiences in association with
this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will utilize cutting edge
behavioral analysis and neuromolecular techniques to probe the behavioral,
neural, and transcriptomic outcomes of different learning contexts. Using
zebrafish from lines selected for high (reactive) and low (proactive) stress
reactivity, the Fellow will train fish in a conditioned place preference
paradigm using appetitive or aversive stimuli. Following the experiment, neural
activation will be evaluated using the immediate early gene egr-1 and expression
of the plasticity-related gene npas4a across a network of brain regions involved
in learning and memory. The Fellow will then evaluate the neural transcriptome
in the hippocampus and basolateral amygdala. The Fellow will compare learning
and memory, neural activation, and gene expression between learning contexts
(appetitive or aversive) and stress coping styles (reactive or proactive) to
determine how intrinsic and extrinsic factors interact in individual fish to
affect cognition at the behavioral, neural, and transcriptomic level. This
fellowship will provide opportunities for the Fellow to develop research,
teaching, and public engagement skills that will prepare them to begin an
independent career at a research-intensive institution. The Fellow will engage
diverse communities with STEM through public outreach and cultivate valuable
research opportunities for students from local community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.