* 2109842
* High performance solar photoelectrodes based on thin-film reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Edward Yu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2024
* USD 371,112.00

This project aims to develop new devices that use power from sunlight to perform
chemical reactions necessary to convert water to hydrogen and oxygen.
Traditional devices for this application, referred to as photoelectrodes, suffer
from fundamental tradeoffs between efficiency and longevity in operation,
because materials that absorb sunlight efficiently are generally degraded under
the required operating conditions. Also, manufacturing costs combined with
limited performance have, to date, rendered the production of hydrogen from
solar power with such devices uneconomic. A highly scalable, low-cost materials
processing approach based on crystalline silicon (the same material used in the
very large majority of commercial solar cells) has shown promise to yield high-
performance, low-cost photoelectrodes. This project will advance fundamental
science and engineering of generating chemical fuels from solar power with such
materials, seeking to reduce the cost of “green” hydrogen to make it competitive
with fossil fuels. Concurrently, the research team will develop projects and
materials that will enable elementary and secondary school students to learn
about renewable energy and fundamental properties of light, topics of increasing
importance for citizens in our modern society, using a low-cost visible-light
optical spectrometer, made from inexpensive everyday items and attached to a
smartphone camera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to design and develop
metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) photoanodes and photocathodes for solar-
driven water splitting that offer high performance, outstanding stability, and
highly scalable manufacturability at low cost. Key efforts will include
realization of improved catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER),
fabrication and exploration of MIS photocathode structures using scalable, low-
cost, manufacturable approaches and earth-abundant catalyst materials, and an
initial adaptation of this approach to MIS structures incorporating III-V
semiconductors. Fundamental issues pertaining to the design, fabrication,
operation, and properties of MIS photoanodes and photocathodes for solar-driven
water-splitting will be elucidated. The materials science and nanoscale
properties of thin-film reactions involving metallization layers, insulating
oxides, and an underlying semiconductor substrate will be explored, in a context
very different from their traditional application in semiconductor micro- and
nanoelectronics. New approaches for fabrication of localized nanoscale catalyst
structures integrated with thick protective oxides and an underlying
semiconductor will be developed. The interplay among buried junction design and
structure within the semiconductor, transport of photo-generated minority
carriers, and spatial distribution of catalyst islands and conductive paths
through a protective oxide layer will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.