* 2109064
* Ligand Exchange Equilibrium at Quantum Dot Surfaces in Polar and Aqueous Solvent Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Andrew Greytak, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 443,292.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Andrew Greytak of the University of
South Carolina will investigate the chemistry at the surface of quantum dots
(QDs) in polar solvents such as water to increase their utility in biological
applications. QDs are nanometer-scale particles composed of semiconducting
compounds, that are typically stabilized in solution by layers of organic
molecules attached to their surfaces. QDs often exhibit bright and size-tunable
fluorescence that has led to their use in imaging applications, but their
utility is limited by unknown governing principles. Dr. Greytak and his group
are connecting emerging analytical methods and physical models to chemical
reactions that yield water-soluble QDs to better understand these limitations.
Broader impacts involve mentorship of graduate and undergraduate students;
introduction of new experimental modules into a physical chemistry lab course;
coordination of a research and practice showcase with the University of South
Carolina Office of Sustainability that provides an opportunity to discuss the
role of QDs and other advanced materials in lighting, display, and solar energy
applications; and outreach through a local science and engineering fair for
junior and senior high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
employs isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) in combination with NMR
techniques to investigate the relative importance of surface coordination and
inter-ligand interactions in governing the binding strength and exchange rate of
ligands on quantum dots (QDs) in polar solvent environments. In the last few
years, the Greytak group has demonstrated that isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) can be an important technique for characterizing QD-ligand interactions,
with success in measuring ligand association, ligand exchange, and sequential
exchange and binding processes at chalcogenide QD surfaces. This proposal will
extend and go beyond these achievements by applying ITC to new classes of
nanocrystal reactions in polar solvents, especially those that probe the
formation and behavior of water-soluble QDs suitable for bio-imaging
applications. Because ITC can distinguish sequential binding to various sites
based on differences in their enthalpy of binding, this approach is expected to
lead to improved understanding of colloidal QD surface chemistry. Comparisons
are to be made among representative small molecule anionic ligands in aqueous
buffers. Additional investigations seek to clarify the nature of binding in
emerging block copolymer ligands based on imidazoles and analogous
heterocyclic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.