* 2109987
* Collective Atom Interaction with Photons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Francis Robicheaux, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

Small, cold objects behave in ways that are incredibly bizarre compared to
larger, familiar objects of our normal experience. This strange behavior can
become more emphatic when many objects interact with each other. Recent advances
in our control of small objects have led to prospects of quantum computers and
quantum simulators, which could lead to astounding advances in our computational
abilities. Studies of this type in Europe, Asia, and the Americas are leading to
rapid advances in the complexity of systems under our control. This project will
use theoretical and computational methods to study the interaction between many
atoms using light, which has been proposed as a platform for quantum computation
and quantum simulation. In particular, this group will focus on cases where the
atoms are position into a regular array. There are many groups around the world
that have demonstrated the ability to hold the atoms, for example, on the
corners of a repeating square and this group will investigate realistic
situations to predict and understand their collective evolution. These systems
are hard to understand because changes to one atom affect those on a second
atom, which affect those on a third atom â€¦, but their study is eminently
worthwhile because it leads to a richness in outcome which is intrinsically
interesting and might also serve as the basis of quantum sensors, computers, or
simulators. A key feature of these studies will be the development of
theoretical and computational techniques to include all aspects of light-atom
interactions, including the recoil of atoms, the polarization of the photon, and
many-body coherences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is the
collective interaction of atoms with light where the presence of many atoms
changes how they individually interact with the photons. The group will mainly
treat atom arrays where the lattice spacing is smaller than the wavelength. For
this condition, the retarded dipole-dipole interaction between atoms leads to
collective photon-atom interaction: the interaction is qualitatively different
from that of a photon with a single atom. In one group of projects, the group
will explore the effect where single photons interacting with an array of atoms
leads to momentum and energy transferred to the atoms' center-of-mass motion.
This will be investigated at two levels: the approximation where a sudden
interaction is assumed and a more accurate treatment including the center of
mass quantized motion. The group will investigate several cases, including how
specific collective states lead to kicks for particular atoms in the array and
how array pairs could be used to entangle distant qubits and to study
fundamental optomechanical studies. The cavity configuration could lead to
especially large center-of-mass recoil, which would affect their applications
and could lead to interesting fundamental physics as well. The other group of
projects will study how several photons interact with the atom array. New
phenomena are expected because when one photon is incident on the array, any
atom in the array can be excited, but, with more photons, already excited atoms
cannot absorb a second photon. This constraint leads to different correlations
and entanglement in the atom array compared to the one photon cases. One
possibility for entanglement is in the spatial wave function of the different
atoms because the photon recoil will depend on the presence of excitations of
atoms in the array. The group will also study correlation in the photons;
correlation can occur when photons are emitted through correlated spontaneous
decay during superradiance or could occur when the array transmits photons in
pairs or more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.