* 2109877
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The evolution and characterization of C4 and C3-C4 phenotypes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Richard Abrahams, Abrahams, Richard S
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Richard S. Abrahams is "The evolution and characterization of C4 and C3-C4
phenotypes". The host institutions for the fellowship are Yale University and
Purdue University and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Erika Edwards and Dr.
Jennifer Wisecaver.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The order Brassicales contains several
crop species important to global human nutrition. Species like Gynandropsis
gynandra are considered potential superfoods because of their C4 photosynthetic
ability to more efficiently capture carbon in the atmosphere and convert that to
sugars for growth. While being closely related, plants of the mustard family
(Brassicaceae) have not evolved this efficient form of photosynthesis despite
occurring in areas where such a trait is advantageous. This research will
leverage plant genomic datasets to explore plants' evolutionary limitations in
the Brassicales for acquiring this useful trait. By elucidating the underlying
mechanisms that prevent C4 or intermediate phenotypes, breeding efforts for key
crop species may develop C4 varieties and improve global food production. This
research's broader impacts initiative focuses on photosynthesis as a common K-12
subject and the impact of representation in the classroom. This initiative is
designed to inspire an interest in STEM careers for underrepresented groups
through authentic storytelling and effective science
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With over 66 known independent evolutions of
C4 photosynthesis, many instances have yet to be characterized by science due to
complex phenotyping. Although the Brassicales has diversified within hot and
arid environments, prime context for the evolution C4, only three origins of C4
are known in the order, in the family Cleomaceae, and one origin of C3-C4
intermediates in the Brassicaceae. This lack of trait convergence may be due to
certain metabolic evolutionary constraints. This project will develop a
bioinformatic tool for identifying potential C3-C4 intermediacy in candidate
species from transcriptome data to characterize these constraints in an
evolutionary context. This tool will then be used to assess candidate species
across the order Brassicales to identify novel origins of C4 or C3-C4 traits.
Finally, coexpression network methods designed to detect specialized metabolic
modules will be adapted to address fundamental questions around the evolution of
C4 and C3-C4 mechanisms. The programs developed to run these analyses, and all
genomic data generated from this research will be freely available for the
broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.