* 2109560
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Uncovering the regulatory mechanisms for a genetic switch between anthocyanin and carotenoid pigmentation in monkeyflowers
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Lauren Stanley, Stanley, Lauren Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Lauren Stanley is “Uncovering the regulatory mechanisms for a genetic switch
between anthocyanin and carotenoid pigmentation in monkeyflowers.” The host
institution for the fellowship is Michigan State University and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. David Lowry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of plant biology
is to understand the genetic mechanisms regulating the production of important
pigments, including anthocyanins (red, purple, or blue) and carotenoids (yellow,
orange, or red). This work will use the monkeyflower species Mimulus whitneyi,
which has co-occurring plants with either purple or yellow flowers, to identify
the regulatory gene responsible for this color difference. The research will
also uncover the genetic network controlled by this regulator and assess whether
it has repeated use in the evolution of flower color transitions across multiple
species. This integrative approach will advance our understanding of plant
pigmentation, which is crucial to photosynthesis, stress tolerance, defense
against herbivores and pathogens, and reproduction. Anthocyanins and carotenoids
also play a key role in human health, and thus understanding the genetic
mechanisms underlying their regulation has a direct application for the
nutritional improvement of crop plants via genetic engineering. This research
will provide the Fellow with training in bioinformatics, population genomics,
and epigenomics methods to build a comprehensive research program. To broaden
the impact of this work, the Fellow will contribute to STEM education for
students in Flint and Detroit, Michigan through the development of a Mimulus-
based education module for underserved middle and high school classrooms. The
module will focus on floral pigmentation, pollinator vision, and plant fitness.
Materials generated for this module will made publicly available on the CREATE
Open Science webpage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to identify the
regulatory mechanisms underlying the coordinated evolution of two key plant
pigmentation pathways. Specifically, the project will focus on the genetic basis
for a floral purple-to-yellow (anthocyanin-to-carotenoid) color transition using
the polymorphic monkeyflower species Mimulus whitneyi. Aim 1 of the research
will identify and validate a master regulatory gene underlying the purple/yellow
flower color polymorphism in M. whitneyi by generating a high-quality reference
genome, performing whole-genome pooled sequencing of purple and yellow morphs,
and genotyping across eleven natural populations. Aim 2 will generate a model
for the regulation and co-regulation of the anthocyanin and carotenoid
biosynthesis pathways by characterizing gene networks and regulatory elements in
purple and yellow morphs using RNA-seq, gene network analysis, and ATAC-seq. Aim
3 will illuminate the evolutionary history of color transitions in the Mimulus
genus by investigating the genetic basis for convergent purple/yellow flower
color polymorphisms in natural populations of three additional monkeyflower
species. All sequencing data will be made publicly available through NCBI and
Phytozome, with bioinformatics pipelines and custom scripts available through
GitHub. Voucher specimens will be deposited at the Michigan State University
Herbarium, where they will be digitized and documented in the iDigBio and
Symbiota databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.