* 2109663
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021:  Determining the functional and physiological tradeoffs of thermal plasticity on ectotherm hosts combatting a novel pathogen
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Natalie Claunch, Claunch, Natalie M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The United States is home to the highest
diversity of salamanders in the world, but these amphibians are at risk of
contracting an invasive fungal pathogen (called Batrachochytrium
salamandrivorans, or Bsal for short) that is responsible for local extinctions
of salamanders in Europe. This research investigates how environmental
temperature affect different salamander species’ ability to manipulate body
temperature and metabolism to influence immune function and combat Bsal. In
addition to providing information about management of an emerging disease in
salamanders, this project supports the development of salamander-focused
education and outreach materials. The fellow will create and disseminate early
education lesson plans, host draw-to-learn events, and create informational
posters and brochures on the diversity and ecology of salamanders, which will
all be made free and available for public use. The fellow will gain training in
mentorship of students underrepresented in STEM fields and in laboratory and
analytical techniques for application in disease ecology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bsal infects salamanders’ major respiratory organ
(skin), presenting a clear trade-off between upregulating immune processes at
high temperatures while simultaneously increasing demands for oxygen. Through
experimental infection trials of Desmognathus salamanders with and without
thermal gradients and integrated assessment of functional genomics, behavior,
and physiology, this project will 1) reveal if interspecific differences in
disease susceptibility and functional responses are exacerbated by thermal
environments; 2) quantify the trade-offs and influence of thermal environment on
physiological responses during infection; and 3) provide predictions of the
adaptive value of thermal plasticity in limiting disease risk. In addition to
training in functional genomics and infection trials, the fellow will gain
training in niche modeling to project Bsal susceptibility risk across the
landscape using information about Plethodontid salamander species’ thermal
preferences. The data generated by this project can later be applied to answer
ecological and evolutionary questions in ectotherms such as how phylogeny and
local environment influence thermal preferences and tolerance, or how within-
species variation may influence the capacity to respond to thermal constraints
imposed by climate change. The project supports the fellow’s training in
development and subsequent evaluation of educational materials for broad
segments of the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.