* 2109286
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Batteries Based on Functionalized Hexagonal Boron Nitride with High Energy, High Power, Long Cycle Life, and Thermal Stability
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Karoly Nemeth, BORON NITRIDE POWER LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the development of lightweight, thermally
safe batteries with high energy densities that can be charged fast, last a long
time, are composed of environmentally benign materials, and can store energy at
a low cost. Such batteries would enable the large-scale penetration of long-
range electric cars and other electric vehicles, including airplanes and drones
in transportation. This process reduces environmental pollution and leads to
greater energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to use boron nitride based layered ceramic materials as a means of
storing electrochemical energy in solid state batteries. This project enhances
scientific and technological understanding on the design of advanced functional
materials for energy storage at the atomic level. To achieve the targeted high
performance energy storage at the macroscopic level, the underlying material
structures must be carefully selected on the atomic and molecular levels. Two-
dimensional materials, such as graphene or hexagonal boron nitride, may contain
functional groups that can be reversibly reduced and oxidized and can be
utilized as electroactive species in cathodes of rechargeable batteries. The
great advantage of these materials is that they can realize simultaneously high
energy and power density for thousands of charging/discharging cycles as
demonstrated in graphene oxide batteries with lithium and sodium anodes.
Graphene oxide is, however, thermally unstable. The project proposes to
substitute graphene oxide with functionalized boron nitride in order to achieve
thermal stability while preserving performance. Furthermore, the functionalized
boron nitride is also capable to play the role of a solid electrolyte in
addition to being an electroactive species. Particular focus will be made on
synthesizing -OBF3 functionalized boron nitride. This functional group occurs as
a Lewis adduct of surface oxides (such as graphene oxide or boron nitride oxide)
with BF3 (an electrolyte component) and is particularly promising as a compact
electroactive species and electrolyte.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.