* 2109806
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: How does arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi impact pollination and plant fitness in an anthropogenically disturbed environment?
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Andrea Fetters, Fetters, Andrea Marie
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The research will focus on mutualistic
interactions between plants, pollinators, and soil-dwelling arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi. The plant-pollinator mutualism may be altered decades after
anthropogenic disturbances, like surface mining. Plants growing in soils
contaminated by mining may lack the resources needed to invest in floral traits
attractive to pollinators. However, the presence of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
could lessen the negative effects of soil contamination on attractive traits.
Interactions between the plant-arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and plant-pollinator
mutualisms in reclaimed surface mines remain largely unexplored. This research
will illuminate how arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi promote attractive floral
traits and pollinator visitation, which in turn contribute to plant persistence.
The Fellow will disseminate the outcomes in many venues, from national meetings
to student-led science clubs at The Ohio State University. Additionally, the
outcomes will be used to design guest lectures and a lab module with
quantitative and active learning components for undergraduate biology courses;
through the research, the Fellow will mentor undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups. Given the extensive impacts of anthropogenic
disturbances on natural environments, understanding the role that mutualists
play in alleviating the negative effects of these disturbances is a key lesson
for researchers and students of ecology alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
has two aims. The first is to characterize the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal
mutualists of ten plant species reflective of the plant diversity at The Wilds,
a conservation park with a history of surface mining in Cumberland, Ohio. The
second aim is to determine: 1) whether arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi promote
attractive floral traits of one of the focal plant species and subsequently
increase pollinator visitation and plant fitness and 2) whether the fungi
mitigate the negative effect of anthropogenic disturbance on the plant-
pollinator mutualism via the promotion of floral traits like phenology, color,
scent, and nectar quantity. It is hypothesized that plants growing with
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi will have more attractive floral traits, higher
pollinator visitation, and higher fitness such that the effect will be greatest
when soil contamination is also present. In addition, the guest lectures and lab
module will be planned with the best pedagogical practices for increasing equity
and inclusion in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.