* 2109473
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021:  Investigating the potential role of coral-associated microbes in regulating calcifying fluid chemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Andrea Unzueta Martinez, Unzueta Martinez, Andrea
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Marine
calcifying organisms, such as corals, are threatened by ocean acidification
(OA), caused by changes in seawater chemistry that result from increasing levels
of carbon dioxide. It is important to understand, in order to predict, how
marine organisms respond to environmental changes (such as increasing
temperatures) in this era of climate change. A critical factor in the response
of corals and other marine calcifying organism to OA is their ability to
regulate the chemistry at the site where calcification happens. Symbiotic coral
microbes provide numerous services to their host. For example, some coral
symbiotic bacteria can protect the coral host from pathogens. Some non-symbiotic
microbes can help the formation of calcium carbonate minerals. However, it is
unknown whether symbiotic microbes can play a similar role. The objective of
this research project is to investigate whether symbiotic microbes of coral help
these coral with calcification. Throughout the duration of the fellowship, the
fellow will also work towards broadening participation of groups
underrepresented in biology at the postdoctoral level by leading a book club for
the WHOI post-doc community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
project, which integrates carbonate chemistry and microbial metagenomic
analysis, aims to contribute significantly to our understanding of (1) how
marine calcifying organisms (specifically Astrangia poculata) regulate the
chemistry at their site of calcification and (2) how host-associated microbial
communities may contribute to the health and resilience of their host. This
project will also (3) shed new light on the debated topic of whether or not
coral endosymbiotic algae play a role in calcification. In addition to working
on this project, the fellow will lead a book club with the aim of helping
participants learn about and discus the experiences of traditionally
underrepresented groups of scientists and assess what we can do as individuals
to make underrepresented minorities feel included within our community. The book
club has potential to improve retention of underrepresented groups at the post-
doctoral level by training allies that will assist in creating an inclusive
environment, thereby improving the experiences of post-docs from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.