* 2109482
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Integrating phenology and species interactions into future predictions of spring ephemeral distributions
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Chelsea Miller, Miller, Chelsea N
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project will use living collections of
spring ephemeral plants at botanical gardens across the eastern US to determine
whether changes in the timing of interaction with different species can help the
plants adapt to climate change. Understanding the factors that help determine
how species are distributed can help us understand ecology in general, and can
also help inform conservation efforts. Much of the data for this project will be
collected by citizen scientists, and the Fellow will engage with students by
participating in outreach events at the host institution, establishing novel
partnerships with local youth organizations, and mentoring local high school and
college students, focusing on underrepresented groups in STEM.

The Holden Arboretum in Kirtland, Ohio, is the host institution. Four additional
institutions in the Midwest and southeast comprise the network of common
gardens. Institutional volunteers will be trained to collect data on the timing
of leaf-out, flowering, fruiting, pollination, seed dispersal, and herbivory for
three spring ephemeral species in 2023-2024. These data will be used to
parameterize trait species distribution models (TraitSDMs), a new statistical
method that estimates the capacity of species to adapt to climate change (CC) by
incorporating trait plasticity into projections of spatial distributions.
Climate data will be obtained from the source of plant accessions and common
gardens to predict spatial-temporal distributions of phenology traits.
Traditional SDMs—which use the statistical relationship between species
occurrences and climate variables to predict distributions—will also be built.
It is anticipated that CC-induced poleward range shifts will be reflected in
both trait- and traditional SDMs. However, because phenotypic plasticity has
been shown to mitigate the effects of CC, range shifts predicted by TraitSDMs
are expected to be smaller. Student interns will be recruited to support this
project via data collection; interns will be further advised to develop related
independent projects. The Fellow will partner with the Cleveland Footpath
Foundation to develop a spring wildflower hike in an urban park, which will
teach field botany skills to underserved youth while conveying the effects of CC
on local habitats.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.