* 2109592
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Determining the mechanism that drive assembly in belowground microbial decomposer systems
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Angela Oliverio, Oliverio                Angela         M
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Belowground soil microbes are key contributors
to soil health and the global cycling of nutrients. Despite their importance to
ecosystems, how belowground microbial communities that mediate biogeochemical
processes will respond to environmental change or changes in land management
practices remains poorly understood. This topic is of practical relevance, from
improving models of climate-carbon cycle feedbacks globally to improving local,
farm-level efforts to restore soils to improve health and agricultural
productivity. For example, decomposition, or the microbial processes involved in
the conversion of organic carbon to CO2, has direct consequences for C cycling,
however predicting microbial controls on decomposition rates remains difficult.
This research will use highly replicated soil microbial decomposition systems
across diverse ecological sites to understand what predicts decomposition rates.
As a part of this project, the Fellow will mentor undergraduate researchers
through programs that support underrepresented undergraduate students in the
sciences, and also develop outreach and training resources for training science
teachers as subject matter experts on soil-carbon climate feedbacks and the
microbial role in global environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will address questions
including: 1) Can particular genomic functional processes predict rates of
decomposition and to what extent these processes are consistent or varying with
climatic and geographic signatures and 2) do mean-site versus local-scale
observations generate different conclusions about the microbial functional
traits associated with rates of decomposition? To address these objectives, this
project will leverage a series of highly replicated in situ litterbag
experiments from spatially explicit field plots across diverse ecological sites
within the U.S. National Ecological Observatory Network and corresponding lab
microcosm experiments. The Fellow will survey decomposer communities with
functional ‘omics approaches and use hierarchical modeling to link rates of
decomposition via litter loss and soil C respiration within and across sites to
estimate the importance of particular groups of taxa and their functional
attributes. Results from this project will help advance the quantitative
understanding of microbial controls on decomposition rates – information that is
currently difficult to leverage in terrestrial carbon models. The Fellow will
gain training opportunities in mathematical modeling as well as developing
communication skills in mentoring, outreach, and grant
writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.