* 2109042
* Development of High-performing Nanoplasmonic Biosensors with Novel Thin Films and Metasurfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Quan Cheng, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 456,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Quan Cheng and his group at the University of
California-Riverside are working to develop new optical biosensors to improve
molecular sensing of proteins and small molecules via methods that do not
require chemical changes to the targets being sensed. These new approaches are
based on use of metals structured in a way at the nanometer scale so that light
of a given energy generates waves of electrons on the surface of the metals,
with the energy being impacted by the presence of molecules near the surface of
the sensor. These nanoplasmonic sensors are anticipated to offer new avenues for
detection of small molecules that could not be achieved previously, potentially
leading to significantly improved detection of biological molecules in the
longer term. Such sensing methods are needed for a wide range of applications,
including for medical diagnostics, for food/water safety monitoring, and for
drug discovery. The Cheng group will focus their research efforts on generating
plasmonic substrates with aluminum instead of traditional metals such as gold or
silver. This approach has a number of potential advantages, including better
performance, lower cost, high sustainability, and long-term environmental
benefit. The highly interdisciplinary nature of the project offers opportunities
for students to gain broad experience in surface chemistry, materials science,
biology, and bioanalytical chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work,
Professor Cheng and his group are working with emerging plasmonic materials in
thin film and nanostructured, meta-surface formats. Methodologies are designed
to achieve high detection sensitivity with aluminum films in the Kretschmann
configuration and build new surface chemistry allowing convenient
functionalization of the interface. The core technical innovation of this
project is in developing aluminum plasmonic applications, with the intrinsic
plasmonic properties leveraged into improvements in the capacity of several
analytical techniques including surface plasmon resonance (SPR), SPR imaging
(SPRi), and terahertz (THz) sensing. New strategies will be developed to
eliminate technical barriers that have limited application of aluminum, and THz
sensing with aluminum metasurfaces will be demonstrated for the characterization
of inter- and intra-molecular, weak bonding networks. Finally, a novel biosensor
with indium plasmonic arrays and SPR imaging is being developed. The exploration
of indium thin films could offer new substrates for label-free detection and
provide a tactic to mitigate against limitations associated with oxide
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.