* 2109790
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Establishing parametric variability as a driver of plasticity across genotypes with diverse life histories ...
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Renee Dale, Dale, Renee
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Renee Dale is "Establishing parametric variability as a driver of plasticity
across genotypes with diverse life histories through a novel mathematical
modeling framework". The host institution for the fellowship is the Donald
Danforth Plant Science Center and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Ivan Baxter
and Dr. Shankar Mukherji.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in climate increase the
frequency and severity of extreme environmental conditions. Organisms with the
ability to be flexible (“plasticity”) can rapidly adapt to these changes. Plants
need to be especially flexible since they cannot move if their environment
suddenly changes. Identifying the mechanisms that allow flexibility is
increasingly important. Due to the amount of information needed to understand
plasticity throughout the plant life cycle, models and computational approaches
are needed. A new method is proposed to identify ways that plants are flexible
using hundreds of plants coming from diverse environments. It is hypothesized
that plants from extreme environments will be more flexible, with more modes of
growth. Modeling will be used to identify different modes of growth and
understand the underlying mechanisms. The results could be used in plant
breeding programs to improve crop resilience and the approach can be used to
understand the growth of other species. The proposed research will provide the
PI with training and development opportunities in mathematics (biological
stochasticity), biology (quantitative genetics, ecology, and plant physiology),
and computation (Python coding and high-performance computing). The impact of
this work will be broadened through the development and dissemination of an
educational video game, intended to improve diversity and inclusion of under-
represented individuals. The video game will introduce these concepts to high
school students in a low-stress way, circumventing the negative social
perceptions of math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel mathematical modeling
framework will be developed to identify processes driving plasticity across
hundreds of plant genotypes with diverse eco-evolutionary backgrounds. A family
of mathematical models of plant physiology and growth processes will be applied.
Model parameters will be estimated using Bayesian parameter estimation,
providing parametric distributions within and between genotypes. This will
provide a conceptual framework to understand plasticity by integrating
mathematical, computational, and biological theory. Processes driving plasticity
have agricultural significance, as the ability of crops to adapt and respond to
increasing environmental stress is paramount. Model parameters will be mapped to
genomic loci, which could be used in breeding programs to test model predictions
that such loci will confer plasticity, and to improve crop
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.