* 2109778
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The invasive tradeoffs hypothesis: how does wetland plant removal affect microbial and nutrient linkages
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Rachel Wood, Buck, Rachel L
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project addresses the problem of invasive
wetland plants. These destructive, non-native plants have caused significant
harm to wetlands by replacing native species and degrading habitat for birds,
fish, insects, and people. However, invasive plants can also provide benefits,
such as reducing erosion, taking up carbon, and removing pollutants. The goal of
this project is to improve management of wetlands by comparing the costs and
benefits of invasive plant removal. The work focuses on the Great Salt Lake
wetlands of Utah, where the invasive reed Phragmites australis has invaded over
26,000 acres. Costly and disruptive techniques are used for its control,
including herbicides, grazing, bulldozing, and burning. This research will use
advanced biogeochemical, hydrological, and microbial techniques to provide a
holistic assessment of the pros and cons of Phragmites removal. It will broaden
participation for students underrepresented in science with hands-on research
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the effect of
environmental perturbations associated with Phragmites invasion and control
measures on microbial gene expression and community function. The proposed work
will identify how gene expression is related to environmental factors, including
invasive species and human management. While the project focuses on Phragmites
in wetlands, the invasive tradeoff hypothesis and the multi-scale methodology
used to test it will provide a scalable framework for characterizing ecosystem
interactions among the microbial community, plants, human management, and
ecosystem function. Leveraging partnerships with Utah state agencies, a large-
scale ecosystem manipulation will measure nutrient cycling, microbial gene
expression, and hydrological function in unmitigated sites and sites with
Phragmites removal; these data will allow predictive modeling of how these
interactions influence or are overridden by local context and site history. The
project will partner with the Fellowâ€™s existing relationship with Native
American university students, providing opportunities to conduct fieldwork and
participate in data analysis, statistics, and writing. The Fellow will receive
transformative training for a future career as a scientist and professor by
expanding knowledge and skills in molecular techniques and analyses,
translational ecology, and predictive modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.