* 2109448
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The role of genotype by social environment interactions on evolutionary trap susceptibility in groups of fruit flies
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Lea Pollack, Pollack, Lea J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Environmental change is happening faster than
most species can adapt. Since behavioral responses are one of the most immediate
reactions an animal can have toward changes in their environment, behavioral
missteps can be especially harmful for the survival of many species.
Evolutionary traps are a common type of behavioral pitfall, which happens when
animals make decisions based on outdated or misleading information. However, the
study of evolutionary traps is missing a critical aspect of most animalsâ€™ lives
by ignoring the social setting in which species experience potential traps. This
research will address this knowledge gap by studying how differences in both
individual social behavior and social group composition influences whether
animals fall for traps, and how this could lead to the rapid evolution of social
traits. While the use of fruit flies in the lab enables rigorous examination of
behavior and genetics, this research will have widespread implications because
the dynamics studied are common across the animal kingdom. In addition, this
project will support activities intended to increase the participation and
retention of students and researchers from diverse backgrounds in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use a population of Drosophila
melanogaster, the common fruit fly, with known genetic variation in social
behaviors. Fruit flies encounter a common evolutionary trap in human-dominated
landscapes: the apple cider vinegar trap. The first aim of the project is to
quantify genetic variation in individual attraction to social cues associated
with traps. The second aim is to measure the role of indirect genetic effects
and emergent group traits on attraction to traps using group behavioral assays
and social network analysis. Lastly, the third aim is to identify how traps
could cause the evolution of social behaviors and other correlated traits using
an artificial evolution experiment paired with RNA-sequencing to identify
changes in gene expression. This project has great potential to add to the
fields of evolutionary traps and social behavior by integrating the latest
advances in behavioral research tools (i.e., state-of-the-art tracking software,
social network theory) with quantitative genetics and genomics (i.e., next-
generation sequencing), and providing training in these practices to the fellow.
In addition, the fellow will establish a postdoctoral peer mentorship group,
develop outreach materials with the Society for Conservation Biology and the
Rice University Office of STEM Engagement, and mentor undergraduate researchers
developing their own independent projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.