* 2109429
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Integrating microbial dynamics  into methane models for northern peatland and post-glacial lakes
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* McKenzie Kuhn, Kuhn, McKenzie Ann
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Northern lakes are important sources of the
greenhouse gas, methane (CH4) into the atmosphere. Methane emissions from lakes
are expected to increase as the Arctic warms, leading to the thaw of ground that
has been frozen for hundreds to thousands of years (permafrost) and releasing
organic material into lakes, where it can be consumed by microbes and
transformed into methane. Microbes are the key drivers of methane emissions from
lakes. Different microbes leave distinct “fingerprints,” (isotopic signatures)
on methane. These fingerprints are crucial components of global methane models
and are used to trace methane in the atmosphere back to its source. However,
little is known about which microbes live in northern lake sediments or how
microbial activity (methane production) and related methane emissions and
fingerprints will change with warming and permafrost thaw. This project will
identify microbes present in lake sediments in northern Sweden and measure how
actively microbes produce methane under different thaw and temperature
conditions. This research represents a crucial step towards improving global
methane models, which predict annual emissions and help inform policy decisions.
The fellow will also strive to increase diversity in STEM by mentoring
undergraduate students in the field and engaging in K-12 educational activities
in New Hampshire and northern Sweden. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will
measure CH4 emissions/signatures, abiotic conditions, and sample sediment from
two lakes in northern Sweden with contrasting permafrost conditions and
potentially different CH4-producing microbes (methanogens). The fellow will
analyze sediments for microbial composition (genes) and abundance using 16S rRNA
gene amplicon sequencing. With sediment incubations, the fellow will assess the
metabolic activity (phenotype expression) of methanogens under warming
conditions using metatranscriptome sequencing. The fellow will leverage a
library of metagenome-assembled genomes from environments in northern Sweden to
map metabolic pathway activity and target specific metabolic genes in
methanogens. Ultimately, the fellow will build a statistical CH4 model that
links microbial dynamics to CH4 emissions and associated isotopic signatures.
The fellow will develop mentoring, professional, and research skills through the
NSF BII EMERGE project summer institute for early career researchers and will
mentor students in the EMERGE Research Experience for Undergraduates
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.