* 2109460
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Microbial mediation of genotype-phenotype relationships and ecological function of toxic nectar.
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Jacob Francis, Francis, Jacob S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Plants produce complex arrays of chemicals in
their vegetation and flowers that impact the ecology at many levels. Many plant-
produced chemicals are important to human society; they can be poisonous to
livestock, cause crop disease, and offer natural chemical libraries for drug
discovery. While the consequences of these compounds in vegetative tissues has
been extensively studied, much less is known about how specialized chemicals in
pollen and nectar impact plants’ interactions with pollinators and the microbes
that live in flowers. Many flowers harbor communities of beneficial and/or
pathogenic fungi and bacteria that can impact pollinator behavior and health.
Through a combination of genomic studies, experiments, and simulation modeling,
this project will test the link between plant genomes, plant chemistry, and
pollinator behavior. During their tenure the fellow will develop a standards-
aligned educational unit on nectar microbes for middle-school students. They
will build on previous collaborations with non-profit education partners to
deliver this unit to students in Reno and Sacramento, raising public recognition
of microbe’s role in pollination. Given the important role of plant-microbe-
pollinator interactions in natural and agricultural systems, a basic
understanding of how plant chemistry shapes these interactions is particularly
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will focus on a highly bioactive
class of nectar compounds, pyrrolizidine alkaloids, produced by the naturalized
non-native plant purple viper’s bugloss, Echium plantagineum. The fellow will
characterize the alkaloid content of the nectar and vegetation of 150 plants
across three populations. Combining the metabolite profiling with de novo
genomic analysis of these plants, they will identify genetic polymorphisms that
influence the alkaloids in the nectar and leaves. In the same populations the
fellow will collect and isolate nectar microbes from Echium and co-flowering
species. They will test whether Echium-collected microbes are better able to
grow in the presence of toxic alkaloids than other nectar microbes. Finally the
fellow will test how microbial growth and nectar alkaloid content interactively
impact nectar consumption by bumblebees. Throughout this process the fellow will
receive extensive training in microbiological and genetic techniques from the
sponsoring scientists that will add to a growing skillset in pollination and
behavioral ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.