* 2109271
* Biosynthesis of Triplet States via Luciferase
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Pirrung, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 474,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Michael C Pirrung, Christopher J Bardeen both of the
Department of Chemistry and Jiayu Liao of the Department of Bioengineering at
the University of California-Riverside are studying the use of a bioluminescent
system of the firefly to generate high energy states. Such states have unique
chemical reactivity in biological systems and can convert ordinary oxygen into a
species that kills cells. Because the system depends on a protein that can be
genetically engineered, cell killing can be controlled as a dynamic response to
conditions. This tool could, in principle, be exploited in synthetic biology and
genetic logic circuits. Fundamental science will be advanced because no
controlled means to generate such high energy states biologically is currently
available. This project will benefit society via the provision of
interdisciplinary training for students and the broadening of participation by
groups underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus
on using bioluminescence to efficiently generate triplet excited states, a
process usually achieved for biological chromophores by photoexcitation. This
research will fulfill a need for the controlled biological creation of singlet
oxygen, a reactive oxygen species (ROS) involved in oxidative stress and the
immune response. The investigators will achieve this goal by developing pairs of
luciferase mutant proteins and synthetic luciferin analogs that can generate
triplet states and, via sensitization, singlet oxygen, a species otherwise
difficult to produce with biological / genetic control. Unnatural luciferin-
luciferase pairs will be useful to modify biology by ablation of specific cells
in vitro or in vivo based on gene expression of luciferase mutants. These goals
will involve generation of non-native luciferase substrates, whose acceptance by
wt firefly luciferase is typically much lower than luciferin. To maximize
utility of these analogues, modification of the enzyme using protein engineering
techniques will be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.