* 2109407
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Leveraging rapid evolution to study the dynamics of polygenic adaptation
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Mark Bitter, Bitter, Mark Christopher
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021,&lt;br/&gt;Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes,&lt;br/&gt;Environment and Phenotypes. The
fellowship supports research and training of the fellow that&lt;br/&gt;will
contribute to the area of Rules of Life in innovative ways. The fellow will
conduct research&lt;br/&gt;focusing on polygenic traits, which are defined as
the physical characteristics, or phenotypes, of&lt;br/&gt;an organism that are
influenced by many genes located throughout an individual’s
genome.&lt;br/&gt;Examples of polygenic traits include numerous human diseases
and the resilience of coral reefs&lt;br/&gt;to global climate change. The fellow
will conduct experiments to understand: (1) how genetic&lt;br/&gt;differences
between individuals give rise to differences in the physical expression of
polygenic&lt;br/&gt;traits and (2) how polygenic traits evolve in natural
populations. Through this, the fellow largely&lt;br/&gt;aims to lend insight
into the extent to which genetic information can be used to accurately
predict&lt;br/&gt;an individual’s phenotype. Throughout the duration of this
fellowship, the fellow will engage in&lt;br/&gt;outreach efforts that
specifically aim to increase the participation of underrepresented groups
in&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To resolve the genetic
basis and evolutionary dynamics of polygenic traits, the fellow&lt;br/&gt;will
study populations of Drosophila melanogaster as they rapidly evolve in response
to seasonal&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations in the environment. This system provides a
lens to directly observe evolution and&lt;br/&gt;selection, both on individual
genes and specific polygenic traits throughout the course
of&lt;br/&gt;adaptation. This work will focus on three polygenic traits in D.
melanogaster with demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;ecological relevance in natural
populations. The first aim of the fellow’s research will
involve&lt;br/&gt;mapping the genetic basis of each trait as it rapidly evolves
between seasons. Through this, the&lt;br/&gt;fellow aims to determine whether
the genotype-to-phenotype map is stable during evolution, or&lt;br/&gt;whether
the genetic basis of polygenic traits is altered by the evolutionary process.
The second&lt;br/&gt;aim will leverage these results, in combination with 7
years of existing data, to explore the extent to&lt;br/&gt;which those genetic
polymorphisms that underpin the phenotypic variation of a polygenic
trait&lt;br/&gt;are the same as those that respond to natural selection and
drive the evolution of the trait through&lt;br/&gt;time. The fellow will further
gain extensive formal and informal training in preparation for
a&lt;br/&gt;career of academic research and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.