* 2109780
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The role of vegetative development on plant response to environmental stress from genomic and physiological perspectives
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Erica Lawrence-Paul, Lawrence                Erica          H
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Erica H Lawrence is "The role of vegetative development on plant response to
environmental stress from genomic and physiological perspectives" The host
institution for the fellowship is the Pennsylvania State University and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jesse R Lasky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant form and
function is altered as plants transition through different developmental phases.
The changes in morphology and physiology that accompany developmental phase
transitions influence plant environmental response and performance. While the
impact of the vegetative-to-reproductive transition has garnered most of the
attention of biologists, there is still much to learn about the more visually
subtle transition between juvenile and adult vegetative phases, known as
vegetative phase change. This project investigates how vegetative phase change
alters plant tolerance of environmental stressors in the important crop species
sorghum (Sorghum bicolor (L) Moench), and how variation in the timing of this
transition may benefit plants in their native climates. This examination of
developmental effects on plant performance will generate new resources to
enhance crop breeding, restoration and conservation efforts. The research funded
here will provide training in developmental biology, genomics, evolutionary and
ecological genetics, RNA sequencing and gene expression. Broader impacts include
broadening participation of historically excluded groups in STEM fields through
partnerships with established programs serving the Philadelphia and Centre
county, PA communities, the development of K12 curriculum related to plant
biology, and training opportunities for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
understand what role vegetative phase change has on plant performance, we must
gain a better understanding of the natural variation, adaptive selection and
altered physiology associated with it. Using the genetically diverse and stress
tolerant crop species sorghum (Sorghum bicolor (L) Moench), the project will
identify 1) The natural variation surrounding the timing of vegetative phase
change among genotypes locally adapted to diverse climates, genetic regulators
of this variation, and evidence of environmental selection on these regulators,
and 2) Transcriptomic and physiological differences of drought response between
juvenile and adult vegetative phases. To do so, variation in the timing of
vegetative phase change will be scored across a diverse mapping panel. This data
set will be used to identify the genetic regulators of natural variation and to
investigate associations between the timing of vegetative phase change and
important plant performance traits. Approaches in population and quantitative
genetic statistics will be used to test for evidence that these regulators are
under selection and play a role in local adaptation. In the field, genotypes
will be subjected to drought stress during either juvenile or adult phases to
discern transcriptomic and physiological variation in drought stress response
between these phases. Further, an understanding of how the timing of drought
exposure and vegetative phase change interact to effect whole plant performance
will be gained. Together these aims will provide a depiction of how vegetative
phase change may contribute to adaptation and future breeding efforts for both
natural and agricultural ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.