* 2109505
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Elucidating the mechanism by which Taf14 links metabolic flux to gene transcription
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Taylor Lundy, Lundy, Taylor A
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Every living organism must respond
appropriately to the environment around them. This is a fundamental rule in
biology whether you are a yeast or complex organism such as a human. An
inappropriate response to environmental conditions can be fatal, thus, the
regulation of these responses is critical. Regulation is controlled at the
genetic level turning the right genes “ON” or “OFF” as needed. One key
environmental factor that organisms must continually respond to is nutrient
availability. The Fellow will seek to understand the delicate relationship
between nutrient availability and the “ON” and “OFF” genes that specify cellular
growth. In addition to the scientific advancements gained during this award, the
Fellow has a long track record of participating in community outreach events,
especially youth-centered events, and will continue with outreach events to
diverse audiences throughout the tenure of this award.

Using budding yeast as a model organism, this research will address a
fundamental question in biology: how nutrient availability in the environment is
translated into changes in gene expression that signal whether cells should
continue to grow and divide. Specifically, this research will look at epigenetic
markers in the form of histone modifications across the genome. It has been
shown that byproducts of differential metabolism are deposited on histones,
which are then bound by histone readers that subsequently influence gene
transcription. The histone reader, Taf14, has recently been connected to
regulation of pro-growth genes. However, the exact mechanism through which this
occurs is masked by Taf14’s association with six different gene regulatory
complexes. This research will genetically engineer strains of yeast to
selectively disrupt Taf14’s interaction with each complex so that individual
contributions can be evaluated. The research will advance scientific knowledge
by demonstrating how the different byproducts of metabolism direct downstream
gene regulation. It will provide valuable training and insights into how
epigenetic modifications are translated into gene expression or repression, thus
influencing cell proliferation. Under this award, the Fellow will also actively
engage in the many mentoring, teaching, and outreach programs available at the
University of North Carolina, especially those directly involved with the North
Carolina public school system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.