* 2109983
* FET: Small: Accurate and Scalable Methods for Analysis of Complex Genomic Populations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Haris Vikalo, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Genetic material in living cells and viruses experiences mutations which lead to
emergence of diverse genomic populations. In humans, whether inherited or
acquired over a lifetime of an individual, genetic mutations impact the
individual’s health by causing genetic disorders and rendering the individual
predisposed to complex diseases. The onset and progression of cancer, for
example, is in part driven by somatic mutations that accumulate over time,
creating one or more populations of tumor cells. Genetic variations also occur
in viruses where they lead to emergence of rich populations whose spectrum is
reflective of the proliferative advantage that particular mutations provide to
strains present in the population. Therefore, inferring the composition and
studying evolution of genomic populations reveal valuable information about
genetic signatures of diseases and generally suggest directions for medical and
pharmaceutical research. This research effort will benefit the field and society
more broadly through coordinated efforts in innovating in education, enhancing
diversity, engaging the community, and disseminating results to a wider
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project lie along three integrated
research directions: First, one direction is enabling accurate and scalable
analysis of diverse mixtures of genomic sequences characterized by accumulated
point mutations and insertions/deletions. As part of this research thrust,
investigators will introduce deep learning and community detection paradigms to
the problems of haplotype assembly and reconstructing viral populations, relying
on domain knowledge to inform the design of novel algorithms in those settings.
Second, another direction is designing algorithmic frameworks for the
reconstruction of the mixtures of sequences characterized by structural
variations, such as the variations of copy numbers. Drawing upon ideas from
stochastic geometry and mixed integer optimization, investigators will provide
novel methods for accurate discovery of the composition of such mixtures, with a
focus on mapping intra-tumor heterogeneous genomic landscapes in cancer cells.
Third, the final direction involves development of methods for studying dynamics
of genomic mixtures that the first two thrusts explore in static settings. In
particular, the last research thrust aims to enable tracking the evolution of
viral populations in infection networks and the discovery of ancestral
relationships between somatic mutations in clonal components of tumor
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.