* 2109761
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Parallel genome and phenome evolution within and across fish species
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Daniel MacGuigan, MacGuigan, Daniel J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 11/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. A fundamental principle in biology is that
under similar conditions, parallel evolution may lead to similar outcomes.
Parallel evolution can occur among closely related populations within a single
species and across distantly related species separated by millions of years of
divergence. This research will focus on parallel evolution in the fish fauna of
the Carolina bays, an understudied series of freshwater lakes along the Atlantic
coastal plain. These lakes harbor several unique species plus replicate
populations of the same species, providing a natural experiment to compare
parallel evolution among versus within species. This research seeks to
understand how species and populations have repeatedly evolved elongated bodies
compared to their stream-dwelling closest relatives. Many previous studies of
parallel evolution focus on detailed investigation of a single species or broad
comparative approaches across many different species. This interdisciplinary
project will compare parallel evolution within and among species across multiple
levels of biological organization. In addition to advancing understanding of
parallel evolution, this research will provide crucial information about genetic
population structure for conservation of these species. The Fellow will develop
a community outreach program to expand public awareness of freshwater ecosystem
conservation as well as involving students of diverse backgrounds in the study.

This proposal will test the hypothesis that parallel genomic changes drive
parallel morphological divergence both within and across species. The Fellow
will (1) investigate the phylogenetic and population genetic context for each
replicate lake species/population, (2) determine the degree and magnitude of
parallel phenotypic lake-stream divergence, and (3) examine parallel genomic
evolution linked to phenotypic divergence. This research will generate a
uniquely rich dataset to study parallel evolution by combining de novo reference
genome sequences, population and species low-coverage genome resequencing,
traditional 2D morphometrics, 3D osteological morphometrics using ÂµCT imaging,
and experimental gene-editing in Danio. Training in these diverse research
techniques will allow the Fellow to build on their current skill set and expand
into new areas of scientific inquiry. The Fellow will mentor undergraduate
students in collaboration with the UB Women in STEM Cooperative and the SUNY
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.