* 2109996
* Collaborative Research: Improving the representation of the Quasi-biennial Oscillation and its surface impacts in NCAR climate models
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Chuntao Liu, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2024
* USD 59,932.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The winds of the equatorial
stratosphere (say 20 to 50 kilometers above the surface) blow steadily and
consistently around the equator, but their direction somehow reverses from
easterly to westerly every 28 months or so. This wind reversal, called the
Quasi-biennial Oscillation (QBO), is thought to have a number of consequences
including influences on the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), a large-scale
pattern of winds and rainfall in the tropics; the North Atlantic Oscillation
(NAO), a circulation pattern that influences weather in the eastern US and
western Europe; and the paths of storms that move along the jet stream in the
North Pacific. The slow progression of the QBO could thus impart some long-range
predictability to worldwide weather. But weather and climate models are not good
at simulating the QBO and their inability to reproduce it may be standing in the
way of better forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QBO is largely driven by
atmospheric gravity waves, waves similar to ocean waves except that they can
propagate vertically as well as horizontally and thus can transport momentum
upward to drive the QBO. The gravity waves are generated by deep convective
clouds, commonly pictured as pistons that make waves by pumping the ambient air
up and down with their rising and sinking motions. Such wave generation does
occur but it tends to make waves which have relatively fast propagation speeds,
while observations suggest that much of the momentum flux that matters for the
QBO comes from slowly propagating waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work performed
here explores an alternative wave generation mechanism in which deep convective
clouds generate waves by blocking the horizontal wind near the cloud tops. Winds
aloft are commonly stronger than winds at the surface, so air rising in a cloud
is likely to be moving more slowly than ambient air when it reaches the top of
the cloud. The rising air can thus present an obstacle to the upper-level wind,
which flows over or around it generating waves in the same way as water flowing
over rocks in a stream. Such waves will be stationary relative to the convective
clouds that generate them, which move slowly relative to the ground. This
mechanism could therefore explain the discrepancy in phase speed between waves
generated by piston-like vertical motion and observations that find momentum
flux from waves with slower phase speeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
activity in the project is adding a representation of the cloud-as-obstacle
generation mechanism to the Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM). A
number of comparisons are performed between the properties of simulated waves
(momentum flux in particular) and observations from satellites and stratospheric
balloons, and further work examines QBO simulations driven by the waves. WACCM
is currently able to simulate the QBO using only the piston mechanism but it
does so by artificially reducing the phase speed of the waves by a factor of
four. Further work examines the impact of the QBO on the MJO and other
circulation patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance due
to the potential value of better QBO simulation for long-range weather
forecasting, as noted above. The work also has relevance for space weather since
convectively-generated gravity waves can propagate into the ionosphere and cause
disruptions in communications and navigation. An extended version of WACCM known
as WACCM-X is used to study such effects, thus there is a direct pathway for the
work to benefit the space weather research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.