* 2109312
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Uncovering the Molecular Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Proteostasis
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Lisa Eshun-Wilson, Eshun-Wilson, Lisa
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of
the research and training plan for this fellowship to Lisa Eshun-Wilson is
“Uncovering the molecular mechanisms of inner membrane mitochondrial
proteostasis.” The host institution for the fellowship is the Scripps Research
Institute and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Gabriel Lander. Proteostasis,
which is how the cell controls proteins within it, is essential for cell
survival and life. Mitochondria, which are specialized parts of the cell that
are responsible for the creation of cellular energy, require specialized
machinery to help them with proteostasis. One part of this machinery is a
protein called YME1L, which is required in multiple animals for the mitochondria
to function. This proposal will determine how YME1L performs its functions in
the mitochondria. To broaden participation, the Fellow will create a program
called InclusiveScripps, a program at Scripps that will provide mentoring and
support to underrepresented postdoctoral
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purified recombinant versions of the human
YME1L protease will be subjected to cryo-electron microscopy to capture and
visualize it preserved in its native state. To characterize the mechanistic
details that govern the decision-making process of YME1L, the complex will be
studied in a variety of contexts, including the ATP-bound and target-engaged
active states, as well as ADP-saturated resting states. Using this microscopy
technique, 2D electron scattering images of frozen protein samples can
mathematically be translated into 3D models yielding high-resolution molecular
details. Given that the energy-driven motor YME1L contains mechanistic
components that are conserved throughout all kingdoms of life and viruses, the
molecular details uncovered by this study will have far-reaching implications
across many fields. The proposed research will provide the PI with training and
development opportunities in structural biology (cryo-electron microscopy and
tomography), biochemistry (membrane purification techniques; functional assay
development) and biophysics (microscope optics; statistical mechanics). This
work will provide a platform to engage scientists like her who are under-
represented in the sciences through mentoring and training
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.