* 2109745
* US-China Collab: Comparative evolution and ecology of swine influenza viruses in China and the United States
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Xiu-Feng Wan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,999,992.00

Influenza A viruses are responsible for substantial human morbidity and
mortality and continue to present an overwhelming public health challenge. It
has been proposed that pigs are intermediate host “mixing vessels” that generate
pandemic influenza strains through genetic reassortment among avian, swine,
and/or human influenza viruses. Although evolutionary events (i.e., reassortment
and mutations) have been routinely detected in swine population, it is not yet
clear which are typical, which are atypical, which evolutionary events for these
influenza viruses increase threats to human and animal health, and which
ecological and evolutionary principals are driving such events. The overall goal
of this study is to develop and apply interdisciplinary approaches to study and
compare the evolution and ecology of swine influenza A viruses through
synergistic studies in China and the US, the two largest pork producing
countries on the planet, by assembling an international and multi-disciplinary
team. Specifically, this project will 1) identify and determine the evolutionary
dynamics of novel swine influenza viruses in swine populations in the two
countries through influenza surveillance and advanced evolutionary analyses, 2)
determine unique, common, and synergistic ecological drivers through geospatial
modeling and machine learning, and 3) develop an influenza risk assessment tool
using Big Data and Artificial Intelligence. This project will train graduate,
undergraduate, veterinary, and medical students in interdisciplinary research
skills for studying evolutionary biology, disease ecology, epidemiology,
geospatial modeling, Big Data, and AI. Through internship and outreach
activities, this project will also educate the public and non-academic
stakeholders on ecology and evolution and transmission of infectious diseases,
which may lead to the optimization of swine industry management and changes in
human behaviors that could reduce the influenza evolutionary events in pigs,
disease transmission among pig populations, and spillover of swine influenza
virus to humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will illustrate the
evolutionary dynamics of swine influenza viruses leading to enhanced zoonotic
and pandemic risk and identify atypical evolutionary events by defining a
baseline for influenza prevalence and evolution. It is expected that ecological
drivers associated with emergence and spread of novel swine influenza viruses
within swine populations and at the animal-human interface will be identified.
In addition, data from two unique but linked ecological settings will be
integrated using an interdisciplinary approach to facilitate the comprehensive
understanding of the evolution and ecology of influenza A viruses within swine
populations and at the animal-human interface. Furthermore, Big Data and AI-
based computational tools will be developed and shared to advance computational
methods linking medical, veterinary, social, and environmental sciences,
enhancing our ability to respond to emerging and reemerging infectious diseases.
This study aims to facilitate our understanding of the natural history of
influenza viruses and advance ecological theories for influenza viruses. The
knowledge from this study will help inform and optimize policies and
countermeasures for influenza pandemic preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.