* 2109620
* A comparative study of the impact of displacement on multilingualism and language endangerment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Jeffrey Good, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2025
* USD 424,540.00

Communities all over the world are frequently impacted by displacement due to
events such as natural disasters or political conflict, and displaced people
often experience significant changes to their linguistic environment when the
areas that they move to are dominated by different languages than those spoken
in the regions that they come from. For instance, members of a rural community
speaking an endangered language who move to an urban area after a natural
disaster may shift from an environment where most people they meet during the
course of a day speak their first language to one where only their close friends
and family members do. Similarly, refugees fleeing their homes may find
themselves in camps occupied by people from many different areas who do not, at
least initially, share a common language. Moreover, displacement may change more
than just the primary language that an individual uses in their day-to-day
lives. In many parts of the world, users of languages associated with small
communities are multilingual and actively use three or more languages. When they
move, they may learn a new language but also stop using other languages that
they know, including endangered languages. The impact of displacement on
multilingualism and endangerment has yet to be systematically investigated, even
though increased knowledge in this domain would help refine policies intended to
support minority language maintenance and to improve the conditions of displaced
people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies three communities with
demonstrated linguistic diversity that have experienced recent displacement in
different ways. One community is currently experiencing displacement due to
active political conflict, and another experienced displacement due to conflict
that was resolved decades ago. The third community is a refugee camp housing
displaced individuals from a linguistically diverse neighboring region. By
studying language use across these three communities, the investigators are able
to conduct a comparative analysis of how displacement impacts language vitality
in multilingual contexts. The investigators use a range of qualitative and
quantitative methods to collect data, including ethnographic observation,
sociolinguistic interviews, and language proficiency assessment tasks.
Documentary records of language use among displaced people will also be created.
The project is innovative in that it emphasizes understanding the social
dynamics that promote language vitality rather than focusing on endangerment
primarily as an outcome of global trends. This project also strengthens
connections between linguistics, political science, and other disciplines
studying peace and conflict. The project's outcomes can inform the study of
societal resilience in the face of adversity. Its results also have the
potential to inform government policies seeking to promote the use of minority
languages by giving policy makers a clearer perspective of the factors that
contribute to speakers continuing to use those languages. Results also have the
potential to lead to actionable recommendations for organizations that work with
displaced people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.