* 2109934
* Fundamental Investigations into the Metal-Organic Framework Redox-Hopping Charge Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Amanda Morris, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,528.00

Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in Division of Materials Research,
Professor Amanda Morris of the Department of Chemistry at Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University is exploring the electronic properties of metal
organic frameworks. The goal of the project is to learn how to control these
properties and aid in the development of next generation smart windows,
batteries, sensors, and catalysts. The project addresses critical, present-day
environmental and energy technology challenges and thus, holds the potential for
truly transformative environmental and economic benefits. The proposed work
serves as the inspiration for outreach demonstrations to be conducted at a local
children's museum for K-5 students and educational enrichment opportunities at
Virginia Tech. The principal investigator has a demonstrated commitment to the
recruitment and mentoring of diverse undergraduate and graduate students through
activities with the Womenâ€™s Mentorship Network, oSTEM, and the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute Inclusive Pedagogy Program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Metal organic frameworks
(MOFs) have emerged as a promising platform for electrocatalysis,
electrochemical energy storage, and electrochemical sensing. Fundamental to
these applications is the process of charge transport, i.e., the motion of
electrons through molecular orbitals coupled to the motion of counter-balancing
ions. The Morris group aims to establish MOF structure-function relationships
and identify key design parameters for electroactive MOF synthesis along the
following specific objectives: (1) Measure the rate of charge transport as a
function of carrier identity (electron or hole). (2) Uncover the properties
and/or processes that limit electrochemical redox-hopping ion transport in MOFs,
including structured solvent and ion pairing investigations. (3) Elucidate the
role of defects (in-MOF and grain boundaries) in dictating the rate of
redoxhopping charge transport. Finally, in an iterative feedback loop outcomes
of these fundamental studies and their application to electrochromics and
biomass catalysis will be connected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.