* 2109622
* A multi-scale approach to predicting infectious multi-host disease spread in marine benthic communities
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Laura Mydlarz, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,499,926.00

Marine diseases have devastating impacts on ocean ecosystems and this work will
directly examine the framework for understanding disease transmission in the
ocean. A team of ecologists, ocean connectivity and disease modelers,
microbiologists, and coral immunologists (from the University of Virgin Islands
(UVI), Louisiana State University (LSU), Rice University, University of Texas-
Arlington and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution) will develop a model
that predicts transmission of a devastating Caribbean coral disease that has the
potential to impact the economic value of coral reefs, including those located
in the U.S. This project will support multidisciplinary field and laboratory
research experiences of graduate students at multiple minority-serving
institutions, and will provide undergraduate students with hands-on training in
modeling, ecological and molecular analysis techniques. UVI and LSU are in
EPSCoR jurisdictions and have diverse student bodies, including numerous under-
represented minority (URM) students. The research team will collaboratively
provide URM students with research experiences in STEM fields. Project findings
will be broadly communicated through virtual public programming, and through the
Virgin Islands Coral Disease Advisory Committee with updates on the
vicoraldisease.org website. A coral disease response workshop for the U.S.
Virgin Islands will also be held, in which project results will be presented and
used to support disease response planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last
four decades, marine diseases have decimated ecosystem engineers in marine
coastal ecosystems, including the rocky intertidal, seagrasses and coral reefs.
The pathogens driving these diseases have frequently been challenging to
isolate, characterize and confirm, in part because they affect multiple host
species and can spread by ocean currents, as well as through individual contact.
Here, we propose a multi-scale epidemic model for studying marine disease that
addresses both within-host and within-patch disease dynamics, and explicitly
acknowledges the dispersal of pathogens between populations. Our
interdisciplinary research team of ecologists, connectivity and disease
modelers, microbiologists, and coral immunologists will integrate the largest
set of predictors of marine disease spread to date: individual host species
traits that allow for disease resistance or susceptibility, local transmission
within communities that may have unique community structure, and hydrodynamic
connectivity among susceptible communities. Modeling will be supported with rich
data sets of within- and among-patch population characteristics and disease
dynamics as well as molecular data on species-level disease responses. This
project will advance knowledge of infectious diseases by integrating
multidimensional scales and differential host susceptibilities into existing
epidemiological models. This model will particularly advance the framework for
studying marine diseases and has the potential to elucidate the transmission
properties of a devastating Caribbean coral disease (stony coral tissue loss
disease) that fits the most confounding and notorious hallmarks of marine
diseases: infection of multiple hosts by an elusive
pathogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.