* 2109435
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Linking Parasite Genomes, Environmental Ques, and Host Phenomes Through Characterization of Behavioral Manipulation
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* William Beckerson, Beckerson, William Christopher
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research project examines Ophiocordyceps,
a fungus which is a parasite known to secrete compounds that affect the nervous
system of carpenter ants. Ophiocordyceps species can change the behavior of
these ants, leading them to produce characteristics including tremors,
hyperactivity, and diminished social behaviors. Which fungal compounds are
involved and how they modify the behavior of these ants is unknown. This
research will test the targets and functions of Ophiocordyceps proteins. Doing
so will increase our understanding of parasite evolution to manipulate animal
hosts, and could potentially discover new pharmaceutical compounds. Further this
work will generally teach us more about the insect nervous system and behavior,
which may have significant agricultural implications. The fellowship will also
introduce young students to science through a community science project using
the iNaturalist app to encourage exploration of wilderness areas in Florida to
search for ants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the mechanism of host
manipulation, this project integrates four molecular genetics techniques with
behavioral assays to characterize the function of previously identified,
putative secreted manipulation proteins. First, the fellow will identify the
host targets for secreted candidate proteins using a Yeast-Two-Hybrid method.
Next, the contribution of each gene in behavioral manipulation will be tested
via CRISPR Cas9 technology to induce knockouts in Ophiocordyceps followed by
infection and behavioral assays. The fellow will also test potential behavioral
effects of the proteins through production in yeast and isolation for use in
behavioral assays. Finally, the transferability of these biomolecules to affect
general nervous system processes will be tested in C. elegans through the
heterologous expression of candidate genes in E. coli strains used for feeding.
To increase participation of underrepresented groups in science, this project
will utilize accessibility programs from the University of Central Florida, a
nationally accredited Hispanic-Serving Institution, to involve undergraduate
researchers. To promote this project, the fellow will connect with K-12
classrooms through schools and museums, and through initiatives such as
stemCONNECT Florida and Skype-A-Scientist. And to train the fellow for a future
in academia, the fellow will participate in pedagogical academies and teaching
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.