* 2109031
* Molecular Probes for Vibrational Imaging of Cellular Targets: Ions and Reactive Species
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Daniela Buccella, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) and Chemical
Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B) programs in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Daniela Buccella and her research group at New York
University are working to develop responsive molecular probes to investigate
intracellular targets based on a technique called Raman spectroscopy. Microscopy
techniques are ubiquitous tools in the study of biological analytes, allowing
the detection of metal ions and reactive species in cells and tissues with high
spatial and temporal resolution. The ability to track these species in real time
is key to gaining insight on their roles in physiological and pathological
processes. Raman-based microscopy has become increasingly valuable in this
context, providing numerous advantages over conventional fluorescence microscopy
techniques. An important drawback, however, is the low sensitivity and
specificity of vibrational-based detection, for which many small and low
abundance cellular targets still remain out of reach. To address this gap, this
project seeks to develop novel indicators that are responsive to metal ions and
reactive species, with the goal of imaging these species using a Raman technique
to which they are currently invisible. This award also supports a partnership
with faculty at Spelman College for the development of new laboratory and
lecture modules that integrate chemistry and biology into a new capstone
research course at Spelman.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
establishing basic molecular platforms with Raman scattering properties that can
be modulated in an analyte-dependent fashion. The work enables new vibrational
imaging probes for stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) microscopy. The designed
scaffolds take advantage of charge redistribution and modulation of electronic
excited states to enable SRS- and electronic pre-resonance-SRS-based imaging of
low abundance and transient cellular species that have small scattering cross
sections of their own. Specific objectives include the development of
recognition-based synthetic indicators for detecting biologically relevant metal
ions and sensing pH, as well as reaction-based probes for sensing reactive
oxygen species. The indicators are being applied toward turn-on and ratiometric
detection modalities in cellulo, which have been particularly difficult to
achieve for species that quench fluorescence, and therefore continue to pose a
major challenge in bioimaging. In addition to the broader scientific impacts of
the work, the project includes educational outreach activities targeting high
school girls and college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.