* 2109959
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering the synergistic interaction between hemodynamics and genetics that form the heart
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Arash Kheradvar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2024
* USD 345,000.00

During early cardiac development, blood flow and genetic processes influence
each other to ensure formation of an efficient heart. However, how exactly genes
and blood flow interact with one another during formation and growth of the
heart remains largely unknown. This collaborative research between the
University of California at Irvine (UCI) and the Oregon Health &amp; Science
University (OHSU) will use advanced imaging methods together with computational
simulations to unravel how altered blood flow affects programmed genetic
processes, and conversely how altering genetic processes changes blood flow,
leading to hearts with defects. Results from this project will ultimately guide
approaches to treat heart defects before a baby is born. To further broaden the
impact of this project to the society, outreach activities involving rising high
school sophomores, juniors, and seniors in California and Oregon, will engage
the students in scientific activities with the goal of learning about heart
development and cultivate team science skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although
both blood flow and genetic processes contribute to heart development, how
exactly they interact and affect each other, and the synergistic roles that
blood flow and genetics play to predispose the heart to malformations are yet
undetermined. The projectâ€™s intellectual merit is to elucidate interlinked
connections between blood flow and genetic processes during heart development.
More specifically, the project will study early changes in gene expression in
response to altered blood flow, and early changes in blood flow in response to
altered signaling, using two complementary avian models of heart development.
The project will focus on three main objectives: (1) Determine blood flow and
flow-induced stresses during normal and aberrant cardiac formation through
advanced engineering methods; (2) Identify and quantify cellular responses to
normal and perturbed heart development by generating spatiotemporal maps of
cardiac adaptation; and (3) Determine the genetic and epigenetic adaptations in
cardiac tissues due to early perturbations by DNA methylation and RNA
sequencing. As the broader impact, results from this project will ultimately
guide fundamental knowledge on embryonic heart development and help devise
strategies to improve diagnosis of heart defects, prevent heart malformations,
and eventually guide early fetal interventions to ameliorate the adverse effects
of cardiac defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.