* 2109394
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Exploring host-parasite co-evolution under diverse selection pressures
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jessica Hernandez, Hernandez, Jessica
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The project will investigate the causes and
consequences of the modes of parasite transmission, for both the parasite and
the host. Parasites are an integral part of the natural world and have evolved
multiple ways to use host resources, evade host immune defenses, and achieve
transmission to new hosts. Previous research has primarily explored either
vertical (e.g., parent to offspring) or horizontal (e.g., between adults of the
same generation) parasite transmission. However, many parasites are transmitted
both vertically and horizontally, and the role of these different transmission
modes in host and parasite evolution are not well understood. Discovering the
causes and consequences of diverse parasite transmission modes help us
understand how parasites infect hosts, and could help inform disease control
strategies. The Fellow will explore these questions using a stored grain pest,
the Red Flour Beetle, and its naturally occurring protozoan parasite. In
addition, the Fellow will: (1) increase the participation and retention of
individuals from underrepresented groups in STEM through mentorship spanning
multiple educational stages and (2) build relationships between researchers and
stakeholders in agriculture.

The Fellow will use an experimental evolution approach to coevolve beetle and
parasite lines over multiple generations under horizontal, vertical, or mixed
parasite transmission regimes. This project will assay host and parasite fitness
trajectories as a function of transmission mode, and employ transcriptomic
methods to identify the evolutionary consequences of parasite transmission mode
for host immune system evolution. The fellow will develop a mathematical model
using an adaptive dynamics framework to assess how epidemiological feedbacks
associated with complex host-parasite interactions influence evolution of both
the host immune phenotype and parasite virulence. The Fellow will work with
Vanderbiltâ€™s Collaborative for STEM Education and Outreach to develop a
mentoring program focused on matching high school women of color interested in
STEM with undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral women of color at
Vanderbilt. In addition, the Fellow will collaborate with grain mill operators
and the local integrated pest management office to discuss how the knowledge
generated from this project can inform pest management strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.