* 2109334
* Persistent photoconductivity in titanate semiconductor crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Matthew McCluskey, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2024
* USD 416,721.00

Nontechnical description:&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates a novel phenomenon,
persistent photoconductivity, which was recently observed at room temperature.
Samples with this unique property experience a dramatic increase in electrical
conductivity when exposed to light, which persists long after the light is
turned off. Strontium titanate, a transparent crystal, exhibits large persistent
photoconductivity at room temperature, opening possibilities for industrial
applications ranging from optical memory devices to electroplating of metals on
surfaces. The research team is attempting to characterize the defects that are
responsible for this unusual behavior, maximize the size of the effect, and
discover it in new materials. They use state-of-the-art facilities to grow novel
crystals and study their physical properties. Students involved in this research
perform hands-on experiments, present results at international conferences, and
meet with startup companies to discuss potential applications. In conjunction
with the optical theme of the research, lessons are developed for a required
course for elementary education students seeking the middle science credential.
These lessons on waves and light target the K–12 learning goals defined by the
Next Generation Science Standards and Washington State Professional Educator
Standards Board, Middle Level Science Endorsement
Competencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to achieve large, room-temperature persistent photoconductivity in oxide
semiconductors and exploit the phenomenon to advance knowledge about fundamental
processes such as electronic transport. Kinetics, energy-barrier heights, and
fundamental defect properties are investigated. These studies also elucidate the
structure of hydrogen-related complexes in oxides. The research team is
attempting to achieve large, room temperature persistent photoconductivity in
barium titanate, a ferroelectric material that could exhibit larger conductivity
changes than those previously discovered in strontium titanate. This unique
phenomenon is exploited to investigate electrical properties, over a well-
defined range of carrier concentrations, to provide insight into scattering
mechanisms and small-polaron versus free-electron transport. Using unique
facilities at Washington State University, crystals are grown with high purity
and controlled defect populations. These crystals include solid solutions
(alloys) that are designed to have optimal properties. A variety of experimental
methods, including Hall effect, infrared spectroscopy, and photoluminescence,
are used to study the persistent photoconductivity and the defects responsible
for it. Besides providing fundamental insight, establishing defect and transport
properties is important because it will allow researchers to control (i.e.,
induce and erase) and optimize the effect. The fundamental knowledge gained in
this study could provide the basis for holographic storage, optically defined
electronics, and selective electroplating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.