* 2109202
* Probing the Vibrational States of Surface Sites on Catalytic Nanoparticles with  Atomic Resolution Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Peter Crozier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Catalysis Program in the
Division of Chemistry and the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics Program in
the Division of Physics, Professor Peter Crozier of Arizona State University is
studying development of a new imaging tool to measure the vibrations of atoms on
the surface of small particles, with the latter being targeted as catalysts for
important chemical conversion processes. The atoms on the surface of a material
are constantly vibrating in a variety of different ways, with those different
types of vibrations corresponding to different vibrational pathways, referred to
as modes. These vibrational modes of the atoms on the surface of a material can
help transfer energy to molecules bound to the surface of the material, which
may drive catalytic chemical changes in the molecular structure of the surface-
bound molecules. However, there are limited methods for gaining information
about vibrational modes across the surface of small particles. Professor Crozier
will develop and apply novel microscopy techniques that use electrons for the
imaging process so as to detect and study the characteristics of surface
vibrational modes on very small particles. The fundamental principles
anticipated from this study have the potential for long-term impact not only in
catalysis but also in other areas of materials and life science. To engage
students, teachers, and the public in this research, an educational module
entitled “Good Vibrations” will be developed, which will link the area of
atomic-level vibrations to vibrational sound waves found in music. A web-based
application will be developed that allows students and the public to decompose
music passages into fundamental vibrational (harmonic) modes. By incorporating
music from contemporary artists, the team hopes to engage high school students
in the excitement of vibrational science and generate enthusiasm for careers in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to probe and develop a fundamental understanding of
vibrational states at distinct surface sites on catalytic nanoparticles with
atomic resolution. To improve our understanding of the vibrational energy
exchange process, it is necessary to have information on the local vibrational
modes that exist at surface sites. Vibrational dynamics on nanoparticle surfaces
are not well understood, in part because there have been no methods to perform
atomic resolution probing of surface vibrational modes. The Krozier team will
address this deficiency by developing novel approaches to vibrational electron
energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) in the scanning transmission electron microscope
(STEM) using the impact component of inelastic electron scattering. Electron
scattering in STEM carries information about vibrational states in a manner
similar to inelastic neutron scattering, but it can provide atomic resolution.
Moreover, the signal may be associated with short wavelength modes that are most
sensitive to atomic defects. Overall, this research has the potential to provide
a useful new vibrational description of the surfaces of
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.