* 2109065
* Design, Synthesis and Supramolecular Assembly of Furan-Based Macrocycles: Understanding Intra- and Intermolecular Conjugation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Tomasz Kowalewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 448,235.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the NSF Division of Chemistry, Drs. Kevin Noonan and Tomasz Kowalewski of
Carnegie Mellon University aim to develop and explore a new class of cyclic (or
ring-like) organic molecules comprised of smaller rings (“rings of rings”).
Generally, the path to making cyclic molecules involves bending linear molecules
to join the ends together. As the size of the ring increases, it can be
difficult to make the “ends meet” resulting in lower yield of the desired
structure. Noonan and Kowalewski recently discovered that short linear chains of
small furan rings can be modified in such a way that they spontaneously bend
into macrocyclic ring-like shapes. They will be exploring the extension of this
method to different variants of small rings to tune the properties for different
potential applications. In these cyclic structures, a portion of the electrons
reside in so-called pi-bonds, which under certain conditions enables them to
flow freely such that the material behaves as a metal or semiconductor rather
than an insulator. As such, they belong to the family of “green” organic
electronic materials that can be derived from biomass, with high promise for
sustainable energy applications such as solar cells, displays, and catalysts for
generation of fuels and chemicals. The interdisciplinary character of this work
will lead to training of chemists with a unique skill set encompassing chemical
synthesis, novel methods, and advanced computational tools facilitating precise,
efficient, and environmentally friendly chemical synthesis. The PIs will also
use social media and podcasts to raise public awareness on key scientific
concepts of essential societal importance such as energy, sustainability, and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Noonan and Kowalewski and their research teams
will use a combination of synthesis, computation, and characterization to build
a library of furan macrocycles and map the interplay between their structure and
properties. The key synthetic strategy will involve using structure-directing
ester side groups to promote efficient cyclization and extend it to achieve
precise control of supramolecular assembly of these molecules. Computation will
play a particularly important role in the studies of self-assembly by allowing
exploration of a wide range of candidate structures and scenarios. It will help
in determining the nature of intra- and intermolecular organization of the
resulting nanostructures. Mapping the molecular and supramolecular properties of
these materials will be paralleled, and correlated, with the investigation of
their behavior in redox, charge transport and ion-binding processes. In
addition, work on conjugated macrocycles will advance fundamental understanding
of aromaticity by addressing key questions about the impact of molecular
structure and conjugation on aromatic stabilization
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.