* 2109468
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Investigating the genetic and eco-evolutionary mechanisms underlying life history polymorphisms
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Lisa Treidel, Treidel, Lisa A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Life history strategies are defined as the
pattern of survival and reproduction for a species, and are informed by
important factors such as growth, reproduction, and maintenance. Life history
strategies can be fast (early reproduction and short lifespan) to slow (late
reproduction and long lifespan), and everything in between. The costs and
benefits of fast or slow life histories depend on environmental conditions.
Constant and resource rich environments favor fast life histories. In contrast,
in environments where resource availability fluctuates, slow life histories are
favored. Since environmental variability is increasing with global climate
change, life history could help protect species and ecosystems from negative
consequences or population declines. To enable predictions about the potential
for species to adapt and persist in new environments, this research will advance
our understanding of the mechanisms that underpin life history evolution. To
broaden participation of underrepresented groups in academia the fellow will
develop and facilitate workshops on inclusive mentorship and
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will leverage a model system with
a life history polymorphism, the wing-dimorphic variable field cricket, Gryllus
lineaticeps. A bulk segregant analysis will identify genetic variants underlying
wing-morphology and timing of reproduction in long- and short-wing cricket
morphs that trade-off between flight-capability and reproduction. This will test
the hypothesis that genes regulating developmental switches and rates of
physiological processes control the timing of major life history events and set
the pace of life. The fellow will also develop a Gillespie eco-evolutionary
model (GEM) for the evolution of wing dimorphism. The model will determine how
genetic-and-environmental interactions alter the fitness costs and benefits of
alternative life history strategies, enabling predictions about the evolutionary
trajectory of life history polymorphisms. To broaden participation, the fellow
will prepare graduate students to mentor undergraduate students from low-income,
first generation, and minority backgrounds by facilitating inclusive mentorship
training workshops. Additionally, leadership workshops will provide the fellow
and other postdocs training in leadership strategies that can be applied to
foster more collaborative, inclusive, and equitable laboratory and research
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.