* 2109905
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Linking soil microbiome to pulsed trace gas emissions in rewetted drylands
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Holly Andrews, Andrews                 Holly          M
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. A major pathway of carbon and nitrogen loss
from soils is via gaseous emission to the atmosphere that occurs as a result of
microbial metabolism in the soil; many are notorious greenhouse gases (e.g.,
carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide) and gases that affect air quality (e.g.,
volatile organic compounds and nitric oxide). However, it is still unclear what
regulates gaseous emissions from soils: are they the result of specific traits
and activities of organisms in the soil or are they the result of the
environment in which the organisms are living? In hot, dry ecosystems, soil
emissions are generally low, but “pulses” of large emissions usually occur after
rain or irrigation events when soils are wet enough for plant and microbial
metabolism to thrive. This gas pulse phenomenon provides a unique opportunity to
link simultaneous changes in soil biology, movement of nutrients in the soil,
and the gaseous (by)products of metabolism that are released. The research
project will use a combination of experimental approaches to connect soil
processes to gaseous emissions in an agricultural context, where results can be
used to engineer healthier farming systems and impact climate and air quality at
a large scale; this will benefit workforce development partnerships and students
from diverse backgrounds participating in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities integrate molecular and isotopic tools
with biogeochemical assays to quantify microbial and nutrient responses to
rewetting of dry soils and relate these responses to trace gas pulses. Two
experiments will be conducted in an agricultural study system to compare
different aspects of soil conditioning that are known to affect trace gas pulses
and presumably extend to microbe-environment interactions: (1) incremental
nitrogen addition, and (2) crop genotype. Training activities include building
skillsets in genomic, molecular, and isotopic tools and analyses, all of which
are new frontiers of soil ecology and have rarely been used in combination to
explain processes associated with nutrient cycling; mentoring graduate and
undergraduate students with interest in interdisciplinary questions and
approaches; and communicating the importance of soil health to the public and to
policymaking and agricultural entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.