* 2109347
* Transformation Groups in Conformal and Projective Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Karin Melnick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 321,898.00

The Principal Investigator will study differential-geometric aspects of
rigidity: what can be the symmetries of a geometric structure on a compact
space? Assuming a high degree of symmetry, what can be the geometric and
topological properties of the space? The PI's work focuses on these questions in
the setting of pseudo-Riemannian, conformal, and projective geometry. Pseudo-
Riemannian and, in particular, Lorentzian metrics, arise in General Relativity;
here compact spacetimes are not realistic, but conformal or projective
compactifications of noncompact spacetimes are quite important. In physics,
symmetries correspond to conservation laws. In geometry, they provide a
framework for classification. The PI is mentoring two graduate students in
research on aspects of this program, who are expected to be supported by the
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on her recent advance, the proof
of the Lorentzian Lichnerowicz Conjecture for real-analytic manifolds with
finite fundamental group, the PI will investigate the conjecture for manifolds
with infinite fundamental group but low dimension, and deformation rigidity of
flat conformal structures with essential conformal group. The PI will work to
apply her techniques in the projective setting, where an analogous conjecture
for projective structures arising from pseudo-Riemannian metrics remains
unsolved in higher signature. The PI will continue her investigation of
relations between transformation groups and tractor solutions. In the context of
smooth hyperbolic dynamics, the PI will build on the construction of invariant
differential-geometric structures for nonuniformly contracting cocycles, to find
more refined invariant structures under suitable hypotheses, and applications of
these to rigidity results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.