* 2109718
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Determining behavioral, neuroendocrine, and genetic predictors of dispersal in colonial tuco-tucos
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Nicole Lee, Lee, Nicole
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The proposed
research investigates what changes in the brain when young adults leave their
families to begin their lives as independent adults (dispersal). Not all
individuals disperse, and variation in dispersal decisions affects how social
individuals are, as well as survival rate, reproductive success, and more.
Understanding the reasons why some individuals, but not others, disperse is
critical to many facets of mammalian—including human—biology. Yet, not much is
known about the neurological underpinnings of dispersal. This research will be
the first to combine studies in the laboratory and in field enclosures that
simulate natural environments to explore the neuroscience of dispersal. The
Fellow will gain technical training in cutting-edge neuroscientific tools while
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology by developing
a support network and planning a symposium for underrepresented minority
postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates dispersal in colonial
tuco-tucos (Ctenomys sociabilis), which exhibit within-species differences in
dispersal. Variation in dispersal decisions, even within females from the same
litter, creates an unusual and important opportunity to examine the neural
mechanisms that contribute to dispersal decisions in mammals. Oxytocin and
dopamine have been shown to be associated with differences in social behavior in
other rodent species, and both endocrine systems exhibit plasticity as
individuals transition from juveniles to adults. Predictors of dispersal will be
determined in captive animals by quantifying morphological and behavioral
features linked to dispersal (e.g. body size, decreased sociality),
characterization of oxytocin and dopamine receptor density and distribution
(receptor autoradiography), transcriptomic analyses of oxytocin and dopamine
gene expression (RNAseq), and monitoring of in vivo dopamine neural activity
(fiber photometry). Having characterized neuroendocrine pathways associated with
dispersal in captive individuals, the Fellow will attempt to predict the
dispersal behavior of semi-captive females, housed in semi-natural enclosures
and therefore subject to species-typical selective pressures. The Fellow will
master techniques including RNAseq and fiber photometry. The Fellow will also
develop a support network for underrepresented minority postdocs, by
facilitating biweekly peer mentoring circles to provide a safe space to discuss
challenges and hive-mind solutions, and organizing an annual symposium for
postdocs with panels and workshops by underrepresented minority faculty on
navigating academia and alternative careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.