* 2109743
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Constraints as a bridge between phenotypic micro- and macroevolution
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Thomas Linscott, Linscott, Thomas Mason
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. A major goal of evolutionary biology is to
connect microevolutionary studies of selection and adaptation to
macroevolutionary patterns of evolution. While we now understand many of the
different types and effects of microevolutionary influences on trait expression,
we still do not understand how microevolution can inform us about the rates of
evolution observed at macroevolutionary scales. The Fellow therefore seeks to
model constraints on trait evolution by measuring the fossil traits associated
with measurable environmental nutrients as a means to link microevolutionary and
macroevolutionary perspectives. The project represents a new way to link
disparate evolutionary perspectives and data in a biologically realistic manner
and will substantially broaden our understanding of how the ‘Rules of Life’ act
across temporal scales to shape morphological evolution. The Fellow will also
broaden participation in STEM activities through outreach and training programs
at the host institution, an affiliated state college, and with local
tribes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridging the divergent perspectives of trait
microevolution and macroevolution in a single framework requires linking
phenotypic landscapes of microevolutionary studies (where peaks in the landscape
correspond to higher fitness values) to the movements of adaptive peaks over
macroevolutionary time scales. One way this can be accomplished is by
incorporating environmental constraints on trait expression which can be
measured in present day populations and in the fossil record. The Fellow will
create a new model of trait evolution that incorporates microevolutionary
parameters during periods of constraint change to bridge the gap between
phenotypic micro- and macroevolution. This will be done by using a uniquely
constrained system (calcifying molluscs) for which environmental constraints on
phenotype are well-understood at the physiological level and are easily measured
throughout the fossil record. The Fellow will be trained in developing and
applying a new Bayesian time-slice model of trait evolution that incorporates
microevolutionary information during periods of constraint release and
enforcement. The Fellow will also create outreach opportunities at multiple
levels that include trainee participation and software-focused academic
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.