* 2109787
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Empirical and theoretical approaches to understanding the evolution of gene regulatory networks
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Eden McQueen, McQueen, Eden Wellesley
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 10/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The project investigates the interactions
between genes in the genome, which give rise to the physical traits of
organisms. The specific “structures” of these interactions, that is, which genes
interact to produce a trait, are often referred to as “gene regulatory networks”
(GRNs). Variation in GRN structure is responsible for many differences in
organismal traits, but how these structural changes to GRNs occur is not well
understood. Understanding how changes to the genome alter the structure of GRNs
and change traits is an important and challenging problem with broad
applications. The project will tackle this problem by using sensitive techniques
to investigate subtle variations of a GRN over different time scales and
environments, under the mentorship of Dr. Patricia Wittkopp at the University of
Michigan, and the co-mentorship a philosopher of science, Dr. Aaron Novick, to
clarify practical ways to discuss and define GRNs. The Fellow will engage in
teaching and outreach activities that will reach diverse audiences.

The proposed work will use the genetic model system Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(brewer’s yeast) to investigate GRN variation. This will be done by assessing
the effects of introduced mutations on the expression levels of downstream
targets of the focal GRN, specifically the TDH3 gene and its paralogs TDH1 and
TDH2, using a highly sensitive high-throughput flow cytometry technique. The
Fellow will examine the changes to GRN structure that have occurred within-
species by quantifying the differing mutational effects on TDH3 and its
paralogs. The project will also measure the effects of changing environment on
the structure of these GRNs. Finally, the work will look at the focal GRN
structure in a related species (S. paradoxus) to examine across-species GRN
divergence. Dr. Novick’s co-sponsorship on this project adds an
interdisciplinary element that will be incorporated into teaching objectives in
both STEM and philosophy. The Fellow will also build a community space for early
career caregivers in academia. The proposed fellowship represents an exceptional
match for the career development goals of the Fellow who will receive training
in a new model system, master cutting edge high-throughput data collection
techniques, and receive mentoring in philosophy of science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.