* 2109067
* Light-Directed Synthesis of Metal Nanocrystal Dimers for Scalable Precision Plasmonics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Matthew Law, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Matthew Law at the University of
California, Irvine is developing methods to link pairs of metal nanoparticles
together to form dimers. The small gap between the nanoparticles can concentrate
light, which could provide significant technological impact. However, scientists
still lack good syntheses for making them. Working with his students, Dr. Law is
using light to protect the nanoparticle pairs as they form in a solution. This
method aims to produce dimers with higher purity, better control over structure
and in larger quantities than is possible using existing methods. These
fundamental studies could lead to better catalysts and chemical sensors, and new
biomedical applications of these nanoparticles in the long term. The project
also promotes STEM education and provides academic opportunities and enrichment
to low-income students from backgrounds with historically low levels of
participation in higher education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Colloidal plasmonic
metal nanocrystals (NCs) that possess strong and tunable localized surface
plasmon resonances (LSPRs) in the visible and near-infrared regions of the
spectrum (e.g., gold and silver NCs) are of great interest for fundamental
studies of light-matter interactions. This project is developing a novel light-
directed method for the one-pot, scalable synthesis of mono-disperse, tunable,
and functional metal NC dimers that promises to overcome the limitations of
previous approaches. The synthesis is monitored by in situ and ex situ
absorption spectroscopy and ex situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The
resulting NC dimers are expected to have excellent structural mono-dispersity
and stability, tunable and accessible hot spots, and other characteristics that
make them well-suited for accelerating progress in plasmonic chemistry and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.