* 2109691
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Defining the role of ZEB2 in the development of convergent neural circuitry for vocal imitation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Gregory Gedman, Gedman, Gregory Louis
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Vocal imitation is thought to have evolved
convergently in songbirds, parrots, and humans because, despite not sharing a
common ancestor with this trait, these three groups exhibit similar brain
pathways for the production of learned song and speech. The genetic drivers that
shape these shared brain pathways and behaviors are not known. Recent cross-
species comparisons implicate ZEB2 as a gene important for forming these brain
pathways, including that ZEB2 mutations result in impaired speech production in
humans. This project aims to understand the role of ZEB2 in the development and
function of vocal imitation brain pathways in songbirds and parrots and to
relate these findings to humans. Broader impacts include enhancing participation
of underrepresented minority students in STEM through a workshop on
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to test the necessity of ZEB2 for
the formation of convergent vocal imitation neural circuitry in songbirds and
parrots, the project aims to 1) assess behavioral outcomes following expression
manipulation in specific brain regions and 2) define the transcriptomic and
chromatin modifications associated with expression manipulation in both species.
The Fellow will use RNAi-mediated viral expression vectors to knockdown ZEB2 in
songbird HVC (high vocal center) and parrot NLC (central nucleus of the lateral
nidopallium), two important premotor analogs shown to control the timing of
learned vocalizations in birds. This manipulation will be introduced early in
development prior to the formation of the specialized vocal imitation
connectivity to test ZEB2â€™s role in this process. Transcriptomic profiling will
be performed to determine the downstream target genes impacted in both species.
The Fellow will also profile the regulatory landscape of the ZEB2 transcription
factor in both species using ChIP-Seq analysis for chromatin accessibility in
these brain regions and adjacent non-vocal imitation regions, highlighting
important molecular pathways for vocal imitation. In sum, this project will
offer important insights into the constraints on the genome for the convergent
evolution of complex behaviors across taxa while offering dozens of new
candidate genes for future study. The Fellow will develop expertise in
neuroscience, in vivo gene manipulation, and genomic sequencing and will teach a
R-based bioinformatics workshop through the RISE program at
NMSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.