* 2109178
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Environmental influence and mechanisms underlying subgenome dominance in Camelina sativa
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jordan Brock, Brock, Jordan
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Jordan Brock is "Environmental influence and mechanisms underlying subgenome
dominance in Camelina sativa". The host institutions for the fellowship are
Michigan State University and Boyce Thompson Institute and the sponsoring
scientists are Dr. Patrick Edger and Dr. Andrew
Nelson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many agriculturally important plants are the
product of hybridization events in which the genomes of two or more parental
species come together to form a new species (e.g., canola, cotton, or wheat).
These plants, known as polyploids, are often more resistant to environmental
stress because they have multiple copies of each gene (from their parental
subgenomes) providing a larger toolkit for overcoming challenges. However,
little is known about the degree to which polyploids preferentially utilize
genes of different parental origin to overcome environmental challenges. This
project will address the role parental subgenomes play in overcoming
environmental stresses in the polyploid biofuel crop, camelina. Specifically,
this work will address the role of temperature in determining subgenome bias in
seed oil production. Through interrogation of the mechanisms behind
environmentally determined responses by the underlying genetics encoded by each
subgenome, this work will provide the genomic understanding and resources for
the development of more resilient crops. The fellow will receive technical
training in genomics, epigenomics, and bioinformatics. Outreach in plant biology
and genomics will be conducted in K-12 schools through a biofuel education
module, in addition to the mentoring and training of undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use genomic techniques to
understand the relative contribution of each subgenome in the regulation of
abiotic stress (temperature) with regard to seed oil production in Camelina
sativa. Camelina, an emerging aviation biofuel crop, is the product of a
hybridization and whole-genome duplication between two parental species, C.
hispida and C. neglecta. The quality and composition of camelina oil is known to
be influenced greatly by environmental conditions such as temperature. This
project will employ transcriptome and bisulfite sequencing to understand how
expression-levels among subgenomes change relative to each other as a
consequence of temperature stress. Camelina sativa and its two diploid parental
species will be grown together in varying environmental conditions and
developing seeds will be extracted at multiple timepoints. Transcriptome and DNA
methylation libraries will be sequenced across distinct developmental stages of
the seed, and in varying environments, to examine subgenome-specific
contributions. One hypothesis is that polyploid plants have the ability to
regulate subgenome expression such that the subgenome most adapted to the
current environment will be more dominantly expressed. Additionally, DNA
methylation patterns across C. sativa subgenomes will be examined to understand
the mechanisms behind subgenome expression level dominance. Data generated in
this project will be presented in peer-reviewed publications, and transcriptomic
and epigenomic data generated will be made publicly available in National Center
for Biotechnology Information databases. All other data, including phenotypic
data, will be made publicly available in Dryad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.