* 2109456
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Identifying the mechanisms that link social environment to physiological plasticity in an incipiently social orchid bee
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Nicholas Saleh, Saleh, Nicholas William
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research examines how fundamental aspects
of social behavior evolved in eusocial insects (such as honey bees and ants
where there is only a few reproductive adults within a large colony), leading to
their success across diverse ecosystems. This research will use orchid bees,
close relatives of honey bees that form social groups of only two or three
individuals, to perform experiments, varying social conditions to understand how
basic social interaction influences physiology. This work fills a gap in our
understanding of social evolution by exploring how physiology first becomes
sensitive to social environment, an important step in the evolution of the
specialized queens and workers of eusocial species. This research will involve
outreach in collaboration with Florida public nature centers as well as
community science projects documenting orchid bee nesting across
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eusocial insects exhibit remarkable phenotypic
plasticity, with individuals capable of altering behavior and physiology in
response to changes in their social environment. This is demonstrated by worker
individuals that inactivate their ovaries in response to the presence of a
reproductive queen. Although this socially regulated physiology is found across
eusocial species, little is known about the mechanisms that link social
environment to physiology in the early stages of social evolution. This
understanding is hindered by the lack of model systems that are closely related
to eusocial species while still retaining a simple social structure. In this
study, using the orchid bee Euglossa dilemma, a close relative of honey bees
that forms small social groups of two or three, the fellow will 1) identify the
social stimuli that regulate physiological plasticity and 2) uncover the links
between this plasticity and social environment. First, an experiment will be
conducted, varying the age of brood and the timing of adult social interaction
to examine how social environment mediates physiological plasticity. Second,
gene expression and hormone levels will be assessed to test the hypothesis that
social cues are detected by the antennae, integrated in the brain, and then
communicated across tissues via specific hormone pathways. This work will allow
the fellow to develop Euglossa dilemma as a model for social evolution and
involve training of undergraduate and graduate students in molecular
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.