* 2109469
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: NAVIGATING THE DARK: EXTREMOPHILE SENSORY CONVERGENCE IN CAVES
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Pamela Hart, Hart, Pamela Beth
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Extremophiles are a fascinating group of
organisms that live in harsh and unforgiving environments; they thrive in the
darkest depths and the hottest habitats. One of these extreme habitats includes
the subsurface habitat of caves. Harsh conditions including no light, frequent
flooding, and scarce resources have led to extreme adaptations that nonetheless
are very similar in different animals (e.g. salamanders and fishes); this is
known as convergent evolution. Research on convergent evolution in caves has
focused on traits that have been lost (e.g., eyes), but characteristics
considered constructive, or additive, have received little attention.
Constructive traits include enhanced non-visual sensory perception, thought to
be a crucial adaptive trait allowing these organisms to move about efficiently
in their environment. Studies of constructive adaptive traits in cavefishes have
led to breakthroughs in under-water radar technology, human biotechnology, and
human medicine including an intravenous flow sensor. Understanding both the
genetic basis and the physical attributes of these constructive traits will
provide a greater variety of bioinspiration for technology. The future of
biology is in biocomputing, and underrepresented groups are traditionally not
provided opportunities by our systems to learn these skills. The fellow is
dedicated to training the next generation of women and underrepresented
scientists through workshops, class offerings, and active recruitment.

The goal of the project is to better understand the molecular basis and
morphology of the convergent hypertrophied (enhanced) mechanosensory (or
tactile) lateral line system in cave-adapted fishes. The lateral line allows
aquatic organisms to feel the movement of the water around them to navigate
their environment. The first objective of the project is to examine the
molecular (genomic and transcriptomic) basis for lateral line hypertrophy. The
second object is to assess lateral sensitivity (i.e., degree of hypertrophy)
through behavioral experimentation. The fellow will examine how the molecular
basis of lateral line hypertrophy could impact the morphology and sensitivity of
the lateral line through mechanosensory sensitivity experiments. This will be
the first project to examine convergent evolution of a constructive cave-
adaptive trait using both molecular and morphological means, opening the door to
understanding the multiple levels of extremophile convergence in the dark.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.