* 2109196
* Crowdsourcing the Sky with the NOIRLab Source Catalog
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Nidever, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 351,385.00

The all-sky NOIRLab Source Catalog (NSC) is a catalog of nearly all the data,
taken by astronomers over many years that is resident in NOIRLab’s image
archive. This data includes information on three quarters of the sky and is
available for exploration with innovative big data techniques that will also be
useful for other large surveys such as that to be obtained with the Rubin
Observatory. This project will use the database to address two important science
questions regarding asteroids and pulsating stars. There are many asteroids in
our solar system, some of which are nearby and could potentially impact the
earth. Astronomers have been trying to catalog most of them over the last couple
of decades. The NSC can help with this effort as it is able to detect fainter
asteroids than most current searches and covers parts of the sky not previously
explored. Large scale structures in our Milky Way galaxy can be mapped and
explored by finding certain types of pulsating stars for which distances can be
accurately determined from previous studies. The project includes a plan to
involve tens of thousands of citizen scientists to assist in various aspects of
the project notably to find stars that have change position on the
sky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New techniques are needed to extract important
scientific information and insights from both existing data sets and future
large data such as the Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) at the Rubin
Observatory. The all-sky NOIRLab Source Catalog (NSC) is a catalog of nearly all
public data in NOIRLab’s image archive. The NSC covers three quarters of the sky
going substantially deeper than previous projects and includes data in areas
never before cataloged. The project looks to explore the NSC to develop big data
techniques focused on two science cases. The first of these is to search for
high proper motion objects, especially Near-Earth Objects that could potentially
impact the earth. Modern clustering algorithms such as Spectral Clustering and
DBSCAN will be utilized to process the 68 billion measurements and provide a
census of nearby objects. The second science investigation will be on searching
for stellar variability. The time-series nature of the NSC will permit a search
for objects that vary in brightness over time. This includes variable stars that
are good tracers of the structure of the Milky Way. Non-parametric period
estimation techniques and new variable star templates will be utilized to enable
automatic and robust identification and classification of all variables in the
NSC. An extensive citizen scientist program is planned for assistance in the
detection of proper motions of stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.