* 2109008
* Backbone N-Heteroatom Protein Orthotics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Juan Del Valle, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 460,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Juan Del Valle at the University of Notre Dame to
investigate a new strategy to stabilize proteins, the workhorses of the cell.
Proteins consist of strings of amino acids that fold into specific shapes that
are important for biological function. This new design strategy will replace
individual atoms along the backbone that hold these amino acids together,
allowing the design of protein variants that are resistant to unfolding and
degradation. These stabilized protein variants have the potential to be employed
in wide-ranging applications in the development of biomaterials and hybrid
molecules that can survive physiological conditions and potentially pass through
biological membranes. In addition, these engineered biomolecules may be used to
catalyze challenging chemical reactions in ways that are similar to those found
in natural enzymes. As a result, a chemical toolkit will be created for
stabilizing an array of folded shapes that are typically found in the three-
dimensional structures of proteins. The fundamental scientific knowledge
resulting from these studies will have important implications for human diseases
that are affected by unstable or misfolded proteins. This project will provide
graduate and undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented
minority groups, with rigorous training in laboratory research and scientific
communication through presentations at meeting and conferences. In addition,
local high school students will receive research experience through the
“Molecular Inventors” two-week summer internship program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will integrate biomolecular design,
chemical synthesis, conformational analysis, and functional assays to fully
characterize the structure, stability, and activity of N-heteroatom-substituted
miniature proteins. The Del Valle laboratory recently established methodologies
to prepare C(alpha)-substituted N-amino, N-alkoxy, and N-hydroxy peptides
through conventional solid-phase peptide synthesis. This project will involve
the synthesis of multi-domain proteins featuring amide-to-hydrazide and amide-
to-hydroxamate bond replacements. Several biophysical methods will be used to
determine the impact of these backbone substitutions on thermal stability. The
effects of hydrazino acid and N-hydroxy amino acid incorporation will be
examined in the context of alpha-helix, beta-sheet, and polyproline II helix
domains. Data gleaned from these studies will then be used to design a hybrid
mini-protein and examine whether this approach leads to enhanced catalytic
activity. This project is expected to provide new insight into the design of
stable proteins that can engage in important biomolecular interactions and
exhibit native-like enzymatic function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.