* 2109477
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Evolution of genome architecture in the algal-ciliate endosymbiosis
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Joseph Kelly, Kelly, Joseph Barrack
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The research performed by the Fellow focuses
on answering the question of how two distantly related organisms can evolve to
participate in endosymbiosis. The study will use ciliates and their algal
endosymbionts as a study system to investigate models that describe how the
genomes of the ciliates and algae co-evolve to reduce the likelihood of non-
cooperative cells evolving. This study will help close gaps in understanding how
endosymbiosis evolves to the point of permanence. The actions undertaken by the
Fellow will foster international scientific collaborations, advance science
literacy in the public, and train members from groups underrepresented in
scientific fields in laboratory and bioinformatic techniques. To promote the
involvement of underrepresented groups, the Fellow will use the recruitment
mechanisms of the Equal Opportunity Office at the University of Konstanz.
Multiple outreach activities are also planned that are designed to make genome
biology more accessible to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
performed by the Fellow will investigate how stability evolves in endosymbiosis
combining genomic and phenotypic data of ciliates and their algal symbionts. The
Fellow will first conduct a comparative genomic analysis to identify patterns of
evolutionary convergence in the genome architectures of ciliates and algae by
comparing genome assemblies of symbiotic ciliates and algae to those of their
next-closest relatives that do not engage in endosymbiosis. Subsequently, the
relevance of the convergently evolved genomic features to endosymbiosis will be
assessed using experimental cross-inoculations of the same ciliate and algal
species for which the genome assemblies were constructed. Transcriptomic data
will be generated from these experiments to annotate which genes are relevant to
endosymbiosis, and isotopic data will be generated to assess evidence for
mutualistic interactions. By reconciling the genomic coordinates of genes that
are differentially regulated during endosymbiosis with the fitness impacts of
the cross-inoculations, the Fellow will test the hypothesis that reciprocally
evolved genomic islands of symbiosis have evolved independently in ciliates and
algae. The Fellow will receive training in experimental biology, high-throughput
phenotyping, and career development and will dispense training in genetic wetlab
and bioinformatic pipelines to members of the host
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.