* 2109600
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Assessing the effects of complex developmental environments on fitness across lifespans
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jenna Pruett, Pruett, Jenna E
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This fellowship will support work in
integrative organismal biology as well as discipline-based education research in
undergraduate courses. The biological research conducted through this fellowship
will examine the role of the environment in shaping the development of
organisms. By examining the nurture half of nature versus nurture, this research
will illuminate how complex, ever-changing aspects of the environment shape an
organism’s evolutionary fitness. The educational aspect of this research will be
directed at improving equity and efficacy in undergraduate STEM courses at
University of Colorado Boulder. Both of these research aims will produce
scholarly works that will represent novel contributions to the respective
fields.

The two overarching goals of the organismal biology research are: (1) to assess
the long-term effects of moisture and temperature individually on fitness using
a modeling approach to analyze existing empirical data and (2) conduct further
empirical studies on the interactive effects of moisture and temperature on
phenotypes, behaviors, and fitness. The brown anole lizard (Anolis sagrei) will
serve as an excellent system for this research, and this work will fill a
significant gap in the understanding of this important model organism.
Additionally, this fellowship will allow the fellow to build on their existing
skill set as a field ecologist by incorporating new techniques that will make
the research truly integrative in nature. The fellow will also improve their
skills as an educator by examining teaching practices in higher education. This
research will provide data that can shape future instructional techniques that
will close performance gaps for marginalized student groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.