* 2109636
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Effects of individual experience  on population social structure: integrating development, gene expression and social  ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Matthew Zipple, Zipple, Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. All societies are made up of individuals and
their complex set of characteristics and interactions. At the same time,
individuals’ health and behavior in adulthood are shaped by the social and
physical experiences of early life. Yet, it remains unclear how these early life
experiences shape higher level social structure. The fellow will use semi-
natural populations of mice to fill this gap by studying how variation in
individuals’ previous experiences and resulting behavior in adulthood
collectively shape the structure of the larger society in which they live. In
addition to the research outcomes from this work, the fellow will continue to
develop two projects that improve and expand the dissemination of research in
the areas of animal behavior, life history, and evolution. The first project is
the Long-Term Animal Research seminar series, an innovative virtual seminar
series with a global audience (&gt;10000 views on YouTube in the last 12
months). The second project is the Animal Behavior Podcast, which the fellow is
currently developing with the support of the Animal Behavior Society (coming
June 21, 2021). Each episode features conversations with leading researchers in
the field of animal behavior, combining discussions of research with
professional development, personal experiences, and history of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will leverage a populations of semi-wild
mice to understand the links between individuals’ experience and phenotype, how
that phenotype shapes social structure, and ultimately how society influences
the individual. First, the fellow will measure the impacts of early life social
isolation on individuals’ growth, social behavior, and transcriptome. Second,
the fellow will generate populations of semi-wild mice, made up of individuals
that experienced social isolation or social connection in early life. The fellow
will then use social network analyses to understand the ways in which
population-level social structures differ, depending on the early experiences of
individuals in the population. Finally, the fellow will use molecular approaches
to understand the extent to which the epigenetic consequences of early social
experience are transmitted across generations. This research will provide
insight into the complex relationships between individual experience, phenotype,
and larger social structures in a single study system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.