* 2109912
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Are variants under selection for disease resistance predictive of disease susceptibility across taxa?
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Andrew Sharo, Sharo, Andrew George
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Since the 1970â€™s, 3 billion birds have
disappeared from North America. Infectious disease is an important cause of bird
mortality. Beginning in 1999, West Nile Virus rapidly spread across North
America, primarily infecting birds and sometimes leading to their death. Over
the past two decades, house sparrows have evolved resistance to West Nile Virus,
but the mechanism is unknown. This project will identify the genetic mechanisms
through which house sparrows have evolved resistance to West Nile Virus. Birds
are important vectors for many diseases, and this will be the first project to
characterize how birds adapt to West Nile Virus. The Fellow will use this
information to predict whether other species of birds are susceptible to West
Nile Virus. The Fellow will recruit and train underrepresented minority students
at UC Santa Cruz, a Hispanic Serving Institute, to work on this project. The
Fellow will also volunteer outreach and teach to diverse undergraduate and K-12
students, inspiring them to pursue STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will first generate RNA-seq from house sparrows previously infected by
West Nile virus. These data will be used to identify candidate genes where
expression or splicing is associated with West Nile viral load. Next, the Fellow
will identify genetic variants that are under selection in wild house sparrow
populations through DNA-seq of museum specimens. Specifically, the Fellow will
sequence samples from multiple house sparrow populations before and after the
introduction of West Nile Virus and determine whether adaptation is parallel in
response to West Nile Virus. By limiting our scope to the candidate genes
identified previously, this project will identify variants that are likely to
mediate West Nile resistance. Finally, the Fellow will develop a West Nile virus
susceptibility predictor based on these variants and assess its ability to
predict susceptibility across avian taxa. The Fellow will be trained in state-
of-the-art techniques to isolate DNA from museum samples and will develop a
strong understanding of disease ecology. The Fellow will also lead sampling
field trips of underrepresented minority students through CALeDNA, a community
science initiative to monitor ecological diversity through environmental
DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.