* 2109168
* DISES: Cultural resilience and shifting baselines of the North American fur trade
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Torben Rick, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,551,062.00

Today’s international markets connect supply and demand for, animal products
around the globe. The increasing interdependence of societies on global movement
of living things has impacted biodiversity, including extinctions and invasions.
This impacts ecosystem services that people rely on. Economic harvest practices
were established during the 16th-19th centuries by the North American fur trade.
They can provide an understanding of today’s complex coupled human-ecological
systems. European demand for mammal pelts altered life for indigenous North
Americans and shifted thousands of years of traditional harvest practices.
However, we know very little about the ecological effects of this massive
harvest that shaped the structure and function of the North American ecosystems.
This project integrates archaeological, historical, and modern data and
specimens to study populations of beaver, muskrat, and mink over the past
several thousand years. It will use that interdisciplinary data to understand
the consequences of mass harvesting, ecosystem change, and the effects of
different cultural practices on furbearers. The project’s broader impacts
include diversifying participation of individuals that contribute in terms of
research, management and policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study employs diverse
methods and perspectives. The research tools include ancient DNA sequencing,
stable isotope analysis, zooarchaeology, morphometrics, and wildlife ecology. By
comparing cultures and ecosystems in parallel from Oregon to Maine, the study
will assess how different cultural practices have shaped species and ecological
outcomes. It will also investigate how those environmental changes shape future
decisions, practices, and social dynamics, while characterizing coupled socio-
ecological landscapes through time. This will provide a powerful
multidimensional model that will facilitate conservation of biodiversity and
traditional livelihoods. This model will explore how and why species recover,
and what the signatures of recovery look like across different datasets that are
not typically aligned and jointly analyzed. This long-term dataset of resilience
and recovery will provide valuable and applicable lessons about local furbearer
management and the IUCN Green List. This project is jointly funded by the
Dynamics of Integrated Socio-Environmental Systems (DISES) program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.