* 2109291
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Convergent Evolution of Development and Feeding Biomechanics in Weakly Electric Fishes from South America and Africa
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Kassandra Ford, Ford, Kassandra
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2020, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The project
incorporates multiple scientific fields and examines the concept of “convergent
evolution,” or similar characteristics in unrelated organisms. This research
addresses the lack of clear terminology associated with the term “convergent
evolution” by investigating the question: at what point are organisms considered
convergent? The fellow will use integrative methods to study two groups of
diverse fishes and obtain training across scientific disciplines. This work is
important preparation for the fellow’s future research program that will be
focused on convergent evolution research. The sponsor will provide extensive
training on teaching and mentoring so the fellow will be a well-rounded academic
with experience with advising, lecturing, and leading students in research
projects. The fellow will interact with underrepresented students at all
educational levels during the broader impacts activities: K-12 students, STEM
undergraduates, and graduate students. These efforts address the lack of
representation in STEM at all levels, to increase the overall diversity at the
postdoctoral level and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will take an
integrative and interdisciplinary approach to examining convergence (and its
terminology) in two charismatic groups of freshwater fishes. Electric fishes,
Gymnotiformes (South America) and Mormyridae (Africa), are generally deemed
convergent in many ways, including genes, sensory systems, and ecology. Previous
work showed that while these two groups are indeed similar in these aspects,
they are not identical. The project will use methods to quantify head and skull
shape, characterize feeding modes, and measure feeding success for comparisons
across electric fish species. The results of this work will allow the fellow to
understand the degree to which species in these two groups are convergent in
developmental processes and/or functional behaviors. The fellow aims to
diversify the field of ichthyology through her research, collaborations, and
mentorship of underrepresented students. The fellow will mentor undergraduates
at a Historically Black College &amp; University, advise a student during a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates project, lead scientific lessons at K-12
schools, and host workshops for graduate students aimed at increasing diversity
at the postdoctoral level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.