* 2109869
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Invaders from the sea: unearthing the genomic basis of marine-to-terrestrial life-history transitions
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Victoria Morgan, Morgan                  Victoria       M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2025
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Since all life
on Earth began in the oceans, but most large species currently live on land, the
Fellow plans to study the genetic basis of sea-to-land transitions to better
understand how these transitions, which have profoundly shaped modern
biodiversity patterns on Earth, may have happened long ago. Using land crabs
that spend part of their lives in aquatic habitats and the other part on land,
the Fellow will explore gene expression patterns between their juvenile aquatic
and adult terrestrial life stages to identify which genes may be associated with
their terrestrial metamorphosis. By comparing these patterns across multiple
species, the Fellow hopes to identify larger evolutionary patterns that might
shed light on how life may have adapted to land millions of years ago. The
Fellow will also create a mentorship program that pairs postdoctoral students
from diverse groups with faculty from similar backgrounds to provide them with
successful role models and guidance during a critical career phase. The program
will also provide professional development opportunities that will prepare the
mentees for applying to and securing academic or industry jobs, which will help
increase the participation of these underrepresented groups in biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will characterize the larval stages of three
land crab species with different developmental modes, and then compare
intraspecies gene expression between developmental stages, and interspecies gene
expression across developmental strategies to determine which genetic shifts may
have been important changes that allowed for lineages with more direct
developmental modes to adopt highly terrestrialized lifestyles. The findings
from this project will provide insight into the nature of evolutionary
predictability and its genomic underpinnings, as well as the genetic basis of
major biological innovations and transitions. It will also generate novel
genomic, transcriptomic, and developmental resources, and lay the groundwork for
future studies that use transgenic tools and genome editing protocols to further
investigate the genomic basis of convergently evolved terrestriality in this
system. By undertaking this project, the Fellow will develop new skills in
embryology and comparative developmental transcriptomics. In addition to
designing and implementing her diverse mentorship program, the Fellow will also
directly increase diversity in biology since she is also from an
underrepresented group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.