* 2109567
* Collaborative Research: Testing for large scale Hawaiian arch volcanism and associated magma sources
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrea Balbas, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 136,983.00

When large volcanic structures such as the Hawaiian islands and seamounts are
constructed on the seafloor their mass can cause large flexural bulges in the
seafloor surrounding them. In some places, unique volcanic features have been
observed along the fractures that form in association with these flexural
bulges. The volcanic processes that form these features are not well studied or
well understood. In particular, the depth and underlying properties of the magma
that feed these submarine volcanic events are heavily debated. In the fall of
2018, a seagoing expedition sampled several volcanic seamounts that formed along
the flexural bulge associated with an ancient section of the Hawaiian seamount
chain. The flat tops of some of the seamounts that were sampled indicate they
were once large enough to breach the surface of the ocean. Through radiometric
dating and geochemical analyses of the lava flow samples, this project will
unravel the underlying forces that generated these enigmatic seamounts. The
project supports the training of an early career scientist and two graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arch volcanism is currently an
underappreciated and poorly understood magmatic process. Moreover, available
work on the ages and compositions of Hawaiian Arch volcanism has not yet led to
a consensus of the type of source material involved, the potential dynamics of
the process, or even the potential scale. A recent sampling expedition targeted
and sampled a set of enigmatic seamounts located exactly on (an older part of)
the Hawaiian Arch. Their size and location adjacent to one of the largest
Hawaiian volcanic complexes (Gardner Pinnacles) hints at the potential
relationship between flexural amplitude and arch melt productivity, with lavas
reaching unexpected volumes. This project will conduct 40Ar/39Ar age
determinations, major and trace element concentrations and Sr-Nd-Pb isotopic
analyses on basaltic rock samples recovered from two previously unexplored
seamounts chains. These chains are not part of the primary Hawaiian plume track
but reside on the flexural bulge, north of the massive Gardner Seamount within
the Papahanaumokuakea Marine National Monument. Recent mapping revealed two
guyots along the chains, indicating both features were large enough to breach
the sea surface. The overarching goal of this project is to determine the
volcanic processes that produced such large volcanic features so far from the
track of the main plume. The hypothesizes to be tested are 1) The enigmatic
seamount clusters north of Gardner Pinnacles were formed by processes associated
with arch volcanism, 2) Arch volcanism can produce massive seamounts, and 3) The
geochemical affinities of lavas from these seamounts are similar to rocks formed
by rejuvenated volcanism. This project will test these hypotheses with a new
suite of petrological, geochemical and geochronological constraints. If the
results show that arch volcanism produced these seamounts, the results would
imply that arch volcanism can produce features much larger than previously
thought. More broadly, this work will speak directly to the discussion of
shallow versus deep controls for hot spot volcanism and the types and locations
of source materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.