* 2109587
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Evolution of eastern gray squirrels in urban environments
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Elizabeth Carlen, Carlen, Elizabeth J
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research addresses how urbanization and
associated landscape changes alter the evolutionary patterns of urban wildlife.
Scientists have recently pointed to the need to incorporate socio-cultural
features beyond the physical landscape, such as mold complaints, access to
grocery stores, and illegal trash dumping. These features contribute to non-
adaptive urban wildlife patterns in ways that have yet to be uncovered and which
will provide vital information on how to transform our cities to better support
both wildlife and humans. Additionally, urban wildlife are expected to encounter
adaptive selection pressures that differ from the surrounding non-urban area.
Understanding how phenotypes change in response to the urban environment, and
which genes underlie those changes, can provide empirical evidence for rapid
evolution and urban eco-evolutionary dynamics, two fields which are in the
relatively early stages of development. By understanding the extent of these
changes and where in the genome they occur, scientists can build a better model
for how urbanization shapes the evolution of wildlife. The Fellow will conduct
outreach to K-12 students from diverse backgrounds to enhance their
understanding of the role of wildlife in urban
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess nonadaptive evolution, this project
will collect DNA from Eastern Gray Squirrels (Sciurus carolinensis) in the St.
Louis metropolitan area and use DNA sequencing to amplify thousands of single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs). These SNPs will be used for landscape genetics
modeling to detect barriers and corridors in the landscape. To assess adaptive
evolution, this project will collect morphological data from S. carolinensis in
the St. Louis metro area and in the surrounding non-urban forests. These
morphological trails will be combined with whole genome sequences to conduct a
Genome Wide Association Study and detect genes that may be under selection in
the urban population. This work will examine the impacts of environmental
management decisions on wildlife while teaching local students about
evolutionary biology, mammalogy, and field research. The results of this project
will influence city planning and provide greater equity of access to wildlife
for residents who are often overlooked by programs meant to connect people with
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.