* 2109907
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Deciphering grammatical rules of notochord enhancers and their role in notochord development in Ciona intestinalis
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Krissie Tellez, Tellez, Krissie
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Early developmental stage cells differentiate
into all of the cell types present in an organism’s adult body. These
transitions are the result of changes in gene expression and the subsequent
changes in RNA and protein products. Enhancers are genetic elements that encode
instructions for the location and timing of gene expression, which ensures that
tissues are created at the right time and place during development; variations
in enhancer sequences are associated with outcomes that impact organisms in many
ways. However, the millions of enhancer sequence variations have made it
difficult to determine causal links between enhancer genotype and its expression
(phenotype). The Fellow will investigate how control of gene expression is
encoded within enhancers and the links between enhancers and these organismal
traits. Research findings will be communicated by the Fellow to diverse
audiences through mentorship of undergraduate student researchers and public
science outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine
tissue-specific enhancers in the notochord, an embryonic tissue that provides
structural support and developmental patterning signals to adjacent tissues. To
study how notochord activity is encoded within notochord-specific enhancers, the
Fellow will create synthetic notochord enhancer variant reporter DNA constructs,
which will be introduced into fertilized eggs of the sea squirt, Ciona
intestinalis (Ciona). Ciona embryos will be screened for enhancer activity by
measuring fluorescent reporter activity with microscopy and unique DNA barcode
expression with RNA sequencing. The Fellow will use data generated from enhancer
activity screens to identify common features of notochord enhancers. These
notochord enhancer features will then be used to inform an existing
computational pipeline to identify potential notochord enhancers within the
Ciona genome. Additionally, the Fellow will use targeted gene editing in
fertilized Ciona eggs to examine how genetic variations within notochord-
specific enhancers impact gene expression (of genes controlled by selected
enhancers) and notochord development (phenotype). Data generated from this
research will be incorporated into interactive guest lectures for
undergraduates; the Fellow will also gain training and experience in university-
level teaching and mentorship, computational methods to analyze large data sets,
and scientific communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.