* 2109087
* Interaction of Ultra-Intense Laser Pulses with Structured Targets in the Multi-Petawatt Regime
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Gennady Shvets, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 477,295.00

This project will investigate a novel concept of particle acceleration by high
power lasers. Ultra-powerful lasers are revolutionizing the field of plasma
physics and leading to a number of exciting applications. One such application
involves accelerating ion beams to velocities approaching the speed of light.
Such relativistic beams can be used for applications as varied as treating
tumors without damaging the surrounding tissues or producing neutrons for
nuclear physics studies. While the basic idea of using radiative pressure of
ultra-intense laser pulse to accelerate solid density targets may appear to be
not much more challenging than using a blast of wind to move a sailboat across a
lake, the details of laser-target interactions at such enormous laser
intensities is quite complex. Many physical processes, including instabilities
and explosions of electrically-charged targets, conspire to reduce the energy
and directivity of the accelerated ions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will
overcome challenges to laser-driven ion acceleration by investigating a novel
concept – Laser-Ion Lens and Accelerator (LILA) – that utilizes an ultra-thin
solid target with non-uniform thickness propelled by a multi-petawatt (MPW)
laser pulse. By utilizing targets that are thinner near the edge, LILA
potentially enables simultaneous acceleration and focusing of the ion beam while
preserving its small angular divergence. Physical properties of such converging
plasma flows have not been previously investigated. Through the combination of
theoretical modeling, nanofabrication, and experimentation at some of the
premier laser facilities, this project will address a unique set of challenges,
including modeling collective laser-plasma instabilities, understanding the
behavior of quasi-neutral plasmas containing multiple ion species, optimization
and fabrication of the designer target profiles, and reducing the achievable
emittance of the beam. Proof-of principle experiments utilizing the existing and
upcoming laser facilities will be designed and carried out. Extensive
international collaborations at several MPW facilities in Europe and Asia will
be established to achieve the key objectives of this project. The intellectual
merit consists of developing novel computational tools for furthering our
understanding of MPW laser interactions with structured solid targets, their
stability, and suitability for a wide range of applications. The broader impacts
include development of future compact laser-based relativistic ion accelerators,
as well as training the next generation of scientists, including graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.