* 2109588
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Assessing potential parallel evolution of heterodonty via co-option of shared developmental modules
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Savannah Olroyd, Olroyd, Savannah L
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Parallel evolution is when organisms evolve
similar traits using the same ancestral genes. Detailed study of how parallel
evolution works is rare, but it is important for understanding how often
evolution repeats itself. One possible example of parallel evolution that would
be particularly useful is heterodonty, a difference in tooth size/shape along
the jaw. This feature can be observed in embryos and in fossils, providing
information on its underlying genetics and evolution through deep time.
Heterodonty is best known in mammals, but it has also evolved in many reptiles.
This research will determine whether heterodonty develops using the same genes
in mammals and reptiles. The Fellow will use µ-CT scans of reptile jaws to
identify their distinct tooth regions and then observe normal tooth development
in reptile embryos to see if it involves the same genes as in mammals. If this
is the case, these genes in reptile embryos will be blocked to assess their
necessity for developing heterodonty. This research will provide the Fellow with
training necessary to build a research program combining techniques from
embryonic development and paleontology. Additionally, this project will involve
outreach to diverse members of the public through the Yale Peabody Museum and an
online video series connecting pop culture with major concepts in
evolution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Mammalian heterodonty is generated via
regionalized expression of homeobox transcription factors in the developing
dental epithelium, and this expression pattern is also known in chicks. This
research will determine whether that same expression pattern was also co-opted
for the development of reptilian heterodonty. The Fellow will use segmented
linear regression to identify boundaries between toothrow regions in µ-CT scans
of heterodont reptile jaws. Then, in situ hybridization will assess whether
homeobox gene expression coincides with the identified tooth regions in reptile
embryos. The Fellow will also use bead implantation to evaluate the necessity of
homeobox genes in delineating regions of heterodont reptilian toothrows. This
project will train the Fellow in molecular developmental techniques to
complement her experience with functional morphology and paleontology. The
Fellow will use this wide range of expertise to educate the public about
functional morphology and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.