* 2109702
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Understanding gut microbiome variation in the context of an emerging wildlife pathogen
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bianca Brown, Brown, Bianca
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. As evidenced
by the COVID-19 pandemic, emerging infectious diseases are a major threat to
humans and animals. For wildlife, understanding how hosts respond to new
diseases as they emerge has significant implications for species conservation.
Given the role of the microbiome as an important factor that can protect and
exacerbate response to infection, the Fellow will investigate pathogen-induced
microbiome dynamics in the context of an emerging wildlife disease. The Fellow
is committed to training underrepresented groups at the undergraduate and
graduate levels from the US and South Africa to characterize pathogens and host
microbiome interactions with the goal of preparing the next generation of
scientists with the tools to understand and confront wildlife diseases.

This proposal investigates interactions between the pathogen Mycobacterium
bovis, the causative agent of bovine tuberculosis (bTB), and the gut microbiota
in wild African buffalo as a model for understanding the consequences of
pathogen-induced microbiome changes. bTB has a wasting effect that results in
the emaciation of infected hosts as the disease progress. Thus, the Fellow will
test the hypothesis that bTB affects the gut microbiome at both the individual
host and population levels, and these changes influence host metabolism in ways
that exacerbate the wasting effects of bTB. The Fellow will use a combination of
field studies and experiments to characterize gut microbiome and host
performance of wild buffalo before and during bTB infection under controlled and
natural conditions. Both 16s rRNA and shotgun metagenomics sequencing will be
used to characterize microbiome composition and function. Additionally, gas
chromatography and in vitro-fertilization of microbes will be used to measure
short-chain fatty acid and methane production, respectively. The proposal will
address three aims: (i) identify and characterize gut microbiome changes during
bTB infection, (ii) quantify host and gut microbiome metabolism in the context
of bTB infection, and (iii) investigate whether bTB shapes the gut microbiome at
the host population scale. Under the guidance of Drs. Vanessa Ezenwa and Todd
Callaway, the Fellow will advance and expand research training in molecular and
disease ecology and animal science; enhance communication skills through
manuscript writing and teaching; and develop strong mentorship skills by
training diverse cohorts of students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.