* 2109500
* Functional Porous Organic Polymers as Advanced Decontamination Materials for Water Purification
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Shengqian Ma, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2022
* USD 149,896.00

1706025 Ma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, 20 million gallons of untreated
wastewater were released into Florida's Tampa Bay during Hurricane Hermine, and
215 million gallons of slightly radioactive water entered the Floridian Aquifer
through a sinkhole opening. In Florida, these events have caused considerable
concern from local residents and state officials, as have similar events across
the country. With the advent of a multitude of new materials, it may be time to
examine the ways in which our water is treated and our ability to treat surge
conditions. This project seeks to develop and deploy a new class of porous
organic polymers which have high capacity and selectivity to rapidly remove
heavy metal contaminants well below parts per million level standards set by the
Environmental Protection Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engineer
porosity and surface chemistry of porous organic polymers to clean inorganic
heavy metal contaminants from both surface water and wastewater. Porous organic
polymers are robust, chemically and thermally stable, scalable, and modular,
with very high surface area. The modularity of these polymers allows for a
molecular-level tuning of the pore structure and surface chemistry that allows
for engineered site-specificity of binding sites that target the heavy metal
contaminants. Recent data shows these new materials offer a significant increase
in capacity relative to benchmark materials, with a rapid removal of mercury and
other heavy metal ions. This project will advance the concept by exploring
rational design of these porous polymers with different topologies by
customizing the monomer with various binding groups. The objectives of the
project include design, synthesis, and characterization, followed by assessment
of these materials to remove inorganic contaminants from water, and thirdly,
development of materials with multiple recognition sites for removal of complex
inorganic contaminants. The work will impact wastewater treatment, including
municipal water, as well as the nuclear, fracking, and mining industries. The
PIs will continue to mentor underrepresented groups in their laboratory and
present a summer workshop and a web page regarding materials, energy, and the
environment for first-generation college students.