* 2109120
* CAS: Fundamental Experimental-Theoretical Investigations of New Metal Alloy Nanocatalysts for Natural Gas Repurposing
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Graeme Henkelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 589,346.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Profs. Simon M. Humphrey and Graeme Henkelman at
the University of Texas at Austin are leading a highly collaborative research
program involving the synthesis and reactivity studies of nano-sized alloys
capable of converting methane into stable liquid fuels such as methanol, at the
location where the methane is released. Meanwhile, natural gas flaring is an
increasingly significant environmental issue worldwide and particularly in the
USA. Natural gas (i.e., methane) that is released at oil recovery sites or in
refineries is remediated by direct combustion to give carbon dioxide. While
methane is a much more powerful greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide, the act of
flaring still wastes the methane and adds millions of tones of extra carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere each year. This is because compression of methane
for transportation and eventual use is not cost-effective. This research project
is fundamental and aims to understand how certain compositions of alloys of non-
precious metals can perform the target reactions in a controlled and desirable
manner. The scientific project is also significantly enhanced through
integration with an innovative undergraduate educational program, called the
Austin-International Framework (AIF), which provides a fully immersive,
scholarship-supported international exchange experience to UT Austin
undergraduates. It provides students the unique opportunity to broaden their
horizons, while simultaneously earning course credit for their research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This a collaborative experimental-
computational research program between the groups of Profs. Simon M. Humphrey
and Graeme Henkelman at the University of Texas at Austin. The overarching aims
are to leverage expertise in the formation of novel metallic nanoalloys via
microwave-assisted heating techniques, and to use theory in silico to guide
synthetic studies and to elucidate the resulting reactivity of the nanoparticle
catalysts, as a function of surface structure and composition. The specific
goals of this project are to prepare new binary and ternary catalysts using
combinations of catalytically less valuable and abundant coinage metals along
with more highly oxophilic metals such as Ru and Re, to generate systems that
can mimic the reactivity of scarcer noble metals. In addition to model gas-phase
chemical reaction studies that mimic realistic reaction conditions, structure-
function relationships will be elucidated using a palette of spectroscopic
techniques (e.g., electron microscopy, total X-ray scattering, extended X-ray
fine structure, chemisorption, etc.), to provide realistic theoretical models at
the atomic scale. This structural information will then be used to build and
refine theoretical models that can identify then most important active site
ensembles. Ultimately this enables accurate predictions of reactivity and
selectivity, which can be leveraged to inform future synthetic targets, toward
the identification of eventual catalysts with desired reactivity: those that are
able to selectively activate CH4 to CH3 and H in the presence of atomic
oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.