* 2109598
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Oviposition-relevant gustatory receptor evolution as a missing link governing insect-host plant specialization
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Rebekah Godfrey, Godfrey, Rebekah Keating
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Identifying a cohesive theory of insect-host
plant associations has proved one of the most challenging biological questions.
While the ecological and evolutionary relationships between insects and their
host plants often hinge on variation in a few key genes, we know relatively
little about which genes drive host plant associations and how variation in
these genes affects host plant selection or use. Where an insect lays her eggs
has very real fitness consequences, making oviposition a strong candidate
behavior to connect genetic variation and host plant use. This research will
identify taste receptor genes involved specifically in oviposition and quantify
variation in these genes within and across species of closely related hawkmoths
that vary in host plant use. The Fellow will work within the McGuire Center for
Lepidoptera Diversity to directly mentor scientists at the undergraduate and
graduate level and to broaden knowledge of and interest in insect neuroscience
both in students underrepresented in STEM and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that selection on
oviposition-related sensory receptors acts as a primary driver in host breadth
in Lepidoptera. The project focuses on gustatory receptors (GRs) because they
are the primary sensory receptors used to sense plant surface compounds and
elicit or deter oviposition. The Fellow will (1) test whether variation in
gustatory receptor genes is associated with host use in species that vary in
host breadth, (2) identify gustatory receptor genes involved in host selection
by comparing sex-specific gene expression, and (3) test whether variation in
receptor gene sequences and gene expression across populations are associated
with population-specific host use. This fellowship will provide the Fellow with
training in collecting and analyzing molecular data from an evolutionary
perspective. Furthermore, the project will provide functionally relevant targets
for gene editing in future neuroethology experiments and will serve as a model
for studying natural selection on the nervous system; the Fellow’s museum
outreach activities and involvement of students in research ensures these ideas
and training will reach a diverse, public audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.