* 2109767
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Integrating genetic-morphologic concepts of diversity in ecological and environmental context
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Sarah Trubovitz, Trubovitz, Sarah
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Currently, we have a limited understanding of
how diversity is expressed in one of the largest and most critical ecosystems on
the planet: marine plankton. This makes it difficult to predict the impacts of
climate change and imminent diversity loss on key ecosystem functions that
society relies on such as primary production and food web interactions between
organisms. In order to understand plankton diversity and its importance, this
project will investigate how diversity is expressed in an abundant group of
marine protists, the polycystine radiolarians. Research will center on the
systematic integration of genetic, morphologic, and ecologic information to
improve our knowledge of different scales of radiolarian diversity and its
environmental context. To achieve broader participation, the Fellow will mentor
undergraduate students at the host institution, and engage the public in locally
relevant marine science through outreach programs at the Wrigley Marine Science
Center.

Recent surveys of molecular diversity have revealed over an order of magnitude
more radiolarian species than morphology-based studies. Poor harmonization
between molecular and morphological taxonomy has made it impossible to pinpoint
the reasons for this discrepancy, demanding a reevaluation of classic species
concepts and molecular methods. To address this, the Fellow will investigate
relationships and differences between genetic and morphological concepts of
diversity. Radiolarian samples will be collected from multiple depths at Station
ALOHA (Hawaii) and classified based on skeletal morphology as well as sequencing
analysis of the V4 region of the 18S rRNA gene. Patterns of genetic variation
paired with observations of physical specimens and their ecological niche
information will be used to determine how genetic diversity is expressed both
morphologically and ecologically. Environmental and biological metadata
available for Station ALOHA will be used to interpret the function of
hierarchical levels of radiolarian diversity in environmental context. Research
products will include new radiolarian genetic barcodes, which will improve the
accuracy of ongoing efforts to monitor global plankton diversity dynamics in a
changing climate. The Fellow will undergo training in live plankton sampling and
molecular analytical methods, as well as gain vital experience in academic
mentoring and outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.