* 2109582
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Characterizing the role of Wolbachia in an insect vector-virus pathosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Clesson Higashi, Higashi, Clesson
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Sap-feeding insects harbor an array of
heritable symbionts that provide important ecological benefits including
nutrient acquisition or defense against natural enemies. Sap-feeding insects can
also vector plant pathogens, which sometimes help their insect vector overcome
plant immune responses, and further depress plant fitness. A growing number of
studies indicate that insect symbionts influence transmission of insect-vectored
plant viruses. Using a tractable aphid model, the Fellow seeks to investigate
how the symbiont, Wolbachia, impacts the biology of the banana aphid, Pentalonia
nigronervosa, and its ability to vector the plant pathogen banana bunchy top
virus. The Fellow will use an interdisciplinary approach to determine how
Wolbachia impacts vector ecology and banana bunchy top virus transmission
dynamics. This work will broaden our understanding of the ubiquitous and
multifaceted Wolbachia, but it may also provide insights into disease
mitigation. The Fellow will receive training in fluorescent and electron
microscopy, next-generation sequencing, comparative genomics, transcriptomics,
and associated bioinformatic analyses; the project also creates opportunities to
increase STEM participation by individuals from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to understand the interface where
symbionts and vectored plant pathogens may overlap and where dynamic
interactions may develop with outcomes affecting multi-trophic communities. A
system that provides a unique opportunity to bridge this knowledge gap is the
entirely asexual banana aphid, Pentalonia, in which most individuals harbor the
HFS Wolbachia, and is the sole vector of an economically important plant
pathogen called banana bunchy top virus (BBTV). Despite being the most
widespread and best-studied symbiont, Wolbachia’s role in aphids has rarely been
investigated. The Fellow will conduct manipulative experiments using engineered
aphid lines to first understand the functional role of Wolbachia in banana
aphids, and to explicitly examine whether Wolbachia impacts vector competency
and BBTV transmission dynamics. To link pattern with process, microscopy
techniques will be used to localize Wolbachia and BBTV, and molecular assays to
quantify tissue-specific abundances vital to the within-aphid ecology of this
interaction. The Fellow will use ‘omics approaches to link Wolbachia’s diverse
phenotypes with potential governing mechanisms; outreach to high school and
elementary school students of diverse backgrounds (including from international
venues) will create pathways for future scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.