* 2109329
* PM: Precision Searches for Physics Beyond the Standard Model Using Optically Levitated Mcrospheres
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* David Moore, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 540,000.00

New tools developed in atomic, molecular, and optical physics are now enabling
extremely precise sensors for a variety of applications. In fundamental physics,
some of the most demanding applications come from testing the Standard Model
(SM) of particle physics. While the SM provides a highly successful description
of the known fundamental particles and interactions, astrophysical observations
and laboratory experiments indicate that it is incomplete. In particular, most
of the matter in the universe appears to be “dark,” and is not included in the
SM. The SM also fails to incorporate gravity and cannot explain why matter
(rather than antimatter) dominates the universe. This work will develop optical
trapping technology to search for tiny deviations from the predictions of the SM
that could provide evidence for new fundamental particles or interactions.
Previous work employing optically trapped particles has developed the most
precise micron scale force sensors to date. This work will further improve the
sensitivity of these systems and extend them to large arrays of particles. These
arrays will be used to search for interactions from dark matter or deviations
from the expected SM forces such as gravity at microscopic distances. Through
this development, graduate students and postdocs will be trained in the
development of high precision sensing technologies. The PI and graduate students
will also provide educational opportunities related to the scientific and
technical aspects of this research to students in the New Haven
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Levitated optomechanics has undergone
significant development in the past few decades, following the pioneering work
of Ashkin and Dziedzic. These technologies now permit objects as large as
several nanograms in mass to be trapped in vacuum and optically cooled to
effective temperatures as low as 100 microKelvin. Such sensors can reach sub-
attonewton scale sensitivities to forces acting at micron scales. These
techniques will be used to search for deviations from Newton’s and Coulomb’s
laws that may appear at weaker coupling or shorter distance than those at which
previous experiments have been sensitive. In addition, these sensors will be
used to search directly for recoils induced by relic dark matter particles, and
large arrays of such sensors will enable a new class of particle dark matter
detectors that are complementary to existing searches. In parallel to the work
to apply levitated optomechanical sensors to searches for beyond the SM physics,
the PI and graduate students will continue to teach a class on the “Physics of
Light” to local middle and high school students through the Pathways to Science
Summer Scholars program hosted at Yale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.