* 2109454
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Madeline Oravec, Oravec, Madeline W.
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 72,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Madeline Oravec is "Evaluation and Exploitation of Temporally-Regulated
Hormone Signaling for Enhanced Cold Tolerance in Brassica rapa." The host
institution for the fellowship is the University of Minnesota and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Kathleen Greenham.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cold temperatures limit
geographical range and seasonal yield of crop production. Development of cold
tolerant crops is therefore a consistent goal of plant breeding and genetic
engineering efforts. Plant productivity is dependent on a balance between stress
response and growth. One way that plants achieve this is through time-of-day
specific hormone signaling and gene expression. Brassica rapa is a diverse crop
species, encompassing a wide variety of crops, including sarson (mustard seed),
Chinese cabbage, bok choy, turnip, leafy vegetables, and oilseed. This project
uses multiple approaches to investigate how differences in cold tolerance across
B. rapa varieties are related to time-of-day specific gene expression, hormone
signaling, and physiological response to cold. This research aims to directly
enhance the cold tolerance of cold-sensitive B. rapa varieties. Findings from
this work will provide insights into time-of-day variation in hormone signaling
and stress response in plants, and the approach will be widely applicable to
improvement of other crops. Training objectives include obtaining skills in
transcriptomics, physiology, and synthetic biology, as well as in independent
research, science communication, and mentorship. The broader impacts of this
project include teaching plant biology modules in minority-serving K-12 schools,
direct mentorship of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, and
community outreach at local events through participation in the Market Science
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants coordinate and balance stress response and
productivity through circadian and diel regulation of gene expression and
hormone signaling. Brassinosteroids are phytohormones that regulate cold stress
response and exhibit diel fluctuations. Temporal modification of brassinosteroid
signaling could therefore improve cold tolerance without compensating growth and
yield. The specific research objectives of this project are to (1) evaluate
temporal gene expression patterns of cold responsive brassinosteroid-related
genes across diverse cold tolerant and sensitive B. rapa morphotypes, (2) assess
changes in cold response and tolerance in B. rapa with varied time-of-day
applications of exogenous brassinosteroid, and (3) alter temporal expression of
brassinosteroid-responsive transcription factors in B. rapa to enhance cold
tolerance. Through interdisciplinary approaches, including transcriptomic
analyses, physiological assays, and genetic engineering, this work will leverage
pan-genome data and within species variation to evaluate and exploit temporal
regulation of brassinosteroid signaling to enhance cold tolerance in B. rapa.
This research will advance scientific knowledge of temporal gene regulation and
diel hormone signaling in relation to cold stress response. The methods
developed will inform future research, breeding, and genetic engineering efforts
to manipulate temporal stress response to develop more resilient and stress
tolerant crops while maintaining growth and productivity. All scripts will be
curated on the Greenham lab Github site (https://github.com/GreenhamLab),
generated data will be provided in publications and/or through CyVerse
(https://www.cyverse.org/), and synthetic constructs and transgenic lines will
be submitted to and made available through the Arabidopsis Biological Resource
Center (ABRC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.