* 2109544
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Untangling the roles of genetic and regulatory mechanisms in adaptive evolutionary responses to climate change
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Gunnar Kramer, Kramer, Gunnar R
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Climate change represents a major threat to
many forms of life on Earth. This is especially true for species already adapted
to live in extreme environments like deserts. The pathways through which
different species will adapt to persist under future climate conditions remain
unknown. This research will investigate these pathways and their associated
fitness tradeoffs in three species of desert-adapted birds in the southwestern
United States. This project will provide insights into the mechanisms involved
in organisms’ adaptive evolutionary responses to a warming climate and improve
conservation efforts by quantifying the likelihood for species to persist under
future climate conditions. The Fellow will partner with local Tribal Colleges
and Universities to support student-directed research and implement mentoring
initiatives to increase success of students underrepresented in STEM
disciplines.

This research will use an array of advanced bioinformatic sequencing methods to
quantify variation in the genomic, regulatory, and epigenetic pathways involved
in the evolutionary responses of desert-adapted birds to climate change. The
Fellow will use a heated nest box experiment to compare the physiological
pathways and fitness tradeoffs involved in species’ responses to increased
temperature during development. By comparing gene expression, epigenetic
profiles, physical development, and fitness of juveniles from heated and
unheated nest boxes, the Fellow will test the hypothesis that species’
historical abundance trends are associated with the effectiveness of their
physiological responses to warmer temperatures. Understanding the associations
between life history traits, adaptive response pathways, and the associated
fitness consequences will fill critical knowledge gaps related to the
evolutionary capacity of organisms to respond to rapidly warming temperatures in
extreme environments. The Fellow will receive training in a variety of advanced
genomic sequencing techniques and statistical methods as well as mentoring
student-led research at area Tribal Colleges and Universities. Finally, the
Fellow will develop and implement peer-mentoring programs focused on
facilitating knowledge transfer and increasing the success of underrepresented
groups in the sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.