* 2109344
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021:  Uncovering the Mechanisms of Convergent Tooth Loss in Frogs
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Daniel Paluh, Paluh, Daniel J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Teeth are present in most living vertebrates.
However, complete tooth loss has evolved in a few groups of fishes, reptiles,
and mammals. Though the arrangement and condition of amphibian teeth has been
poorly studied, recent work shows that frogs have lost teeth more than 20 times.
The mechanisms underlying tooth loss in frogs are unknown, but examining
possible developmental, genetic, and environmental factors will provide insight
to how predictable and repeatable this process is from an evolutionary point of
view. The aim of this project is to determine if there is a core set of genes
required for tooth development, and to test if the environment (temperature) can
affect tooth development. The fellowship will facilitate mentorship training by
fostering research opportunities for undergraduate students. Digital anatomy
resources will be created for middle school teachers and students to provide
real examples of evolution through natural selection using museum specimens.

The proliferation of teeth in fishes and amniotes is mediated by at least four
major signaling pathways, and the loss of different signals arrests dental
development and underlies tooth loss in birds, turtles, and some mammals. With
phylogenetically widespread tooth loss and separate evolutionary losses on upper
and lower jaws, frogs offer an unparalleled opportunity for investigating the
mechanisms of repeated trait loss. The fellow will use immunohistochemistry, in
situ hybridization, and transcriptomics to characterize dental development in
amphibians and assess if different signals arrest tooth development among
species that have independently lost teeth. Within tetrapods, enamel and dentin
are found only in teeth, and these tissues are formed by proteins encoded by
tooth-specific, non-pleiotropic genes. Comparative genomics will be used to
identify if enamel and dentin genes have become non-functional in toothless
frogs via novel inactivating mutations. Environmental factors may impact dental
anatomy by altering developmental rate. An experimental approach will be used to
test if one such factor, temperature, impacts the anatomy and expression
patterns of frog dentition. Creation of digital resources for anatomy education
and PI participation in mentoring undergraduate students and outreach will
broaden the impact of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.