* 2109231
* Collaborative Research: Mastering the photonic lantern: The key to transformative diffraction-limited spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Dimitri Mawet, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 317,639.00

This project aims to advance a key technology known as a “photonic lantern.”
Photonic lanterns will allow for compact and stable spectrographs behind large
telescopes. These spectrographs will deliver extremely precise measurements of
various astronomical objects, most notably planets around other stars. The work
to advance photonic lanterns will proceed in several key ways. First, to
understand how to use lanterns to efficiently capture light from a large
telescope. Second, to demonstrate that lanterns can sense the shape of light
waves after they are affected by Earth’s atmosphere. This will enable correction
for those shape errors and maximize the amount of light captured. Finally, to
explore the potential of using a lantern for making images and measuring
positions of astronomical objects. This work will also be directly applicable to
telecommunications and free-space optical communications. Lanterns could play a
key role in increasing the data volume and fidelity of data transfer with
satellites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Operating at the diffraction-limit breaks
traditional seeing-limited instrument scaling laws and allows a spectrograph to
be the most compact for a given set of specifications. A compact instrument uses
optics that are more likely to be manufacturable and of higher quality, is more
robust to mechanical deflections, easier to thermally stabilize, and costs less.
A Photonic Lantern (PL) allows conversion of a multi-mode fiber input to
multiple single-mode fibers, thus enabling greater coupling at the input while
maintaining the diffraction-limit into the spectrograph thus maintaining an
ultra-stable spectral line-spread function (i.e. the shape does not vary with
time or input illumination conditions). The project seeks to understand how to
efficiently inject light into PLs from wavefronts partially corrected by
adaptive optics. Further it will investigate if PLs can be used as focal-plane
wavefront sensors, eliminating non-common path and chromatic errors, and
boosting system efficiency Finally, the ability to use lanterns to do imaging
and astrometry by separating the coherent and incoherent parts of the electric
field will be investigated. The outcomes from this project could have immediate
significant impact on existing and future spectrographs on large
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.