* 2109624
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Using metacommunity theory to assess the impact of multi-species interactions on gut microbial assembly
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Mauna Dasari, Dasari, Mauna
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project aims to understand the ways in
which animals are connected within a community and how connectivity may help
animals remain healthier even under stressful conditions. The community of
bacteria within an animal’s gut, or host-associated gut microbiome, provides a
unique system in which to test these ideas: the gut microbiome provides a number
of important functions (digests food, produces vitamins, and trains the immune
system) but also changes rapidly in response to an animal’s environment, social
interactions, and diet. In order to balance natural microbial sharing processes
and experimental manipulation, the Fellow will create a model aquatic system
consisting of three species of frogs that naturally overlap in their wild
habitat. By altering the frogs’ social and environmental conditions and
examining how their gut microbiomes change, the Fellow will be able to
disentangle one mechanism of community connectivity that could buffer animals
against environmental stress. In addition, the use of amphibians in this
research has important conservation implications: amphibians are often used as
an indicator of ecosystem health, but are declining globally due to habitat
degradation and increased disease prevalence. Understanding the mechanisms that
govern amphibian health provides important context for management decisions of
at-risk species. Throughout this project, the Fellow will mentor students from
historically underrepresented groups, as well as work with existing
institutional departments to create K-12 teaching module(s) for use in local
public schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests whether the transfer of
gut microbes, especially across host individuals and species, could be primarily
driven by metacommunity processes. Specifically, ecological processes such as
dispersal between hosts or environments have been shown to be important drivers
of microbiome assembly, and limiting dispersal can significantly alter community
composition. In a multi-species context, this project can extend the traditional
use of community ecological theory in microbiome research to a metacommunity
approach, treating individual hosts and host species as “patches” and tracking
ecological and evolutionary processes (dispersal, selection, priority effects)
within or between patches. By creating a tractable aquatic system in which to
compare the relative importance of these eco-evolutionary processes, the Fellow
will apply hypotheses proposed by metacommunity models to the microbiome and
thus identify causal drivers of gut microbial assembly. Through this project,
the Fellow will receive training in the fields of animal physiology,
experimental biology, ecology, and genomics, as well as STEM education through
the creation of K-12 teaching module(s) focused on beneficial microbes and
amphibian conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.