* 2109004
* Massive Black-hole X-ray binaries: Accretion-wind interaction and evolutionary context
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Silas Laycock, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 230,535.00

When both stars in a binary system are very massive (&gt;10 solar masses),
highly exotic systems comprised of black holes (BH), neutron stars (NS), and
Wolf-Rayet stars (WR) can result. This project seeks a global revision of the
masses in BH+WR systems, leading ultimately to more precise BH mass estimates
and a better understanding of BH formation, the complex interaction between the
BH's radiation field and the WR wind, and the evolution of BH+WR binaries in
general. A similar analysis of a recently discovered population of BH+WR binary
candidates in the dwarf galaxy IC 10 will also be undertaken. This work will
support a graduate student and the team's various outreach and educational
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will combine in-hand
photometry and spectroscopy of the BH-WR binaries IC 10 X-1 and NGC 300 X-1 to
carry out an orbital phase resolved analysis of emission lines to model the
ionization structure of the WR wind and determine BH masses with improved
accuracy. In a similar manner, observations and analysis of newly discovered
X-ray binary candidates in IC 10 that also show indications of mass loss plus
many of the same features of IC 10 X-1 will be carried out for comparison. The
possible connection between enhanced BH masses with low metallicity environments
and the formation channel(s) for the most massive stellar BHs are both of great
interest due to their implications for Gamma-ray burst progenitors,
gravitational wave sources, and the seeds of supermassive BHs. The research team
is currently conducting multi-wavelength observations of these systems (e.g.,
Chandra, XMM, NuStar, HST, Gemini, NOAO) to confront model predictions. The goal
of these studies is to explain the time resolved structure of the X-ray eclipse
light-curve, its energy dependence, and make predictions for the infrared and
optical light-curves and line profiles that will be tested in upcoming and
planned missions such as JWST, Athena, XIPE, and
STROBE-X.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.