* 2109655
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Biological Soil Crusts as a Model System in the Context of Climate Change
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Michala Phillips, Phillips, Michala L
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports the research and training of a post-doctoral fellow and contributes to
an improved understanding of the Rules of Life in innovative ways. Biological
soil crusts (biocrusts) are a living consortium of mosses, lichens, and
cyanobacteria that inhabit the surface of dryland soils worldwide. In addition
to regulating a large number of important ecosystem properties, such as soil
stability and fertility, biocrusts offer new ways to test long-standing
ecological theory. The project will examine important dryland biocrusts, and the
soil microbial communities and nitrogen cycling that occur together with
biocrusts. Specifically, the research will assess how the diversity of biocrusts
and soil microbes affect key nitrogen cycle functions and how these interactions
influence climate change. This research is particularly relevant to
understanding how biodiversity at multiple levels impacts how ecosystems
function. The fellow will also share this research with regional land managers,
including through a workshop in Arches National Park and mentor local high
school students through a local School to Science program.

This project integrates molecular biology, biogeochemistry, and ecology to span
multiple layers in the hierarchy of life (e.g., molecules, microbes, biocrusts,
and ecosystem function), creating a novel approach to test biodiversity
ecosystem-functioning theory. Biocrusts contain a large amount of diversity in a
small area and engage in unique competitive and facilitative interactions,
making them an ideal model system to test ecological theory. The fellow will
assess how biocrust and microbial diversity relate to each other and how they
interactively affect nitrogen cycling. The fellow will characterize biocrust
diversity using a visual assessment and assess diversity of microbial
communities using quantitative stable isotope probing and amplicon sequencing.
To understand the biocrust ecosystem more fully, the fellow will examine marker
genes for nitrogen cycling at the same time as assessing total and extractable
nitrogen pools under different biocrust successional states and with simulated
climate change using a one-of-a-kind in situ warming experiment. Taken together
this exploration of biocrusts, associated heterotrophs, and biogeochemistry will
offer a new look into the fundamental relationships between communities,
diversity, and function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.