* 2109662
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Predicting how climate change will impact insect adaptation to host plant resistance
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Margaret Lewis, Lewis, Margaret
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Insect herbivore evolution is tightly linked
to changes in their host plants. Many plants possess defensive traits (e.g.,
induced production of toxic secondary metabolites) that enable them to naturally
tolerate and/or deter insect herbivory. However, fluctuations in trait
expression may promote insect adaptations to overcome these defenses
(virulence). Climate factors associated with global climate change can disrupt
plant defense expression, subsequently altering plant susceptibility to insect
herbivores. Whether these changes also affect the development of virulence
remains unknown, an important knowledge gap that this project aims to fill.
Understanding these evolutionary interactions is critical for preserving global
food security. Within agricultural production systems, insect resistant crops
enhance plant productivity, but virulence threatens their longevity as a
sustainable pest management tool. Results from this project will be broadly
disseminated, with outreach efforts focused on increasing public awareness about
insect resistant crops. The Fellow will develop and disseminate learning modules
to high school students in traditionally underserved groups, and additional
outreach to agricultural stakeholders will help growers consider genetically
modified and naturally resistant crops when making planting decisions.

Using soybeans and soybean aphids as a model system, the project will
characterize how one abiotic factor, water stress, impacts aphid adaptation to
host plant resistance (HPR). Soybean phytohormone concentrations will be used as
a marker to determine how combined aphid and water stress interact to alter HPR
expression. The Fellow will then assess how these abiotic-induced changes to
soybeans impact aphids by comparing fitness in virulent and susceptible aphids
using life table analyses. Concurrent RNA sequencing will also characterize
aphid stress gene expression under the different climate scenarios. Finally,
experimental mesocosms will test whether water stress alters the frequency of
virulence within an aphid population. Collectively, these experiments are
expected to directly link host plant climate stress to population level
responses in aphids, improving our understanding of the mechanisms by which
climate change may facilitate virulence. Throughout this project, the Fellow
will expand technical skills through training in molecular biology and
bioinformatics. Additional professional skills will be developed through
participation in mentorship training programs and outreach to non-academic
audiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.