* 2109440
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Ecological and genetic structuring of a pathogen microbiome and its effect on virulence
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Matthew Kolp, Kolp, Matthew Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Infectious fungal pathogens are capable of
hosting their own microbes, and these microbes can affect the relationship
between the fungus and the plants and animals. The project goals are to develop
general rules to better understand the relationship between these microbes and
their pathogenic hosts, and how these relationships evolve. These goals are
relevant to threats that pathogens pose to humans, agriculture, and
biodiversity. The fellow will engage in a series of activities designed to
highlight how basic discovery informs applied research for a broad audience. The
fellow will hold a series of seminars for extension agents and agricultural
stakeholders, highlighting the impacts of crop pest and pathogen life cycle on
crop management strategies. Further, the fellow will implement interactive
lessons for elementary students in underserved schools in rural TN, using
aphids, fungal pathogens, and other microbes. These lessons will expose students
to beneficial impacts of microbes on human life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fungal
pathogen Pandora neoaphidis is an important natural microbial enemy of aphids.
The proposed work develops this pathogen as a tractable system for studying
microbiome effects on host-pathogen interactions. The pathogen’s microbiome of
endosymbiotic bacteria is hypothesized to explain pea aphid epidemics. The
project will test whether endosymbiont diversity in P. neoaphidis from infected
aphids collected from semi-natural areas recapitulates pathogen genetic
diversity or ecological factors. The fellow will use metagenomics to determine
the functional capacity of various endosymbiont taxa, with the goal of testing
if P. neoaphidis endosymbionts correlate with difference in virulence among
strains. This work will broaden understanding of how ecology and evolution shape
pathogen associations with microbes. Aphids are invasive agricultural pests, and
fungal pathogens are used as a biological control of aphid populations.
Developing an understanding of how agricultural pests resist biocontrol agents
is critical in integrated pest management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.