* 2109716
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Uncovering the Genomic Basis of Adaptation in Quercus alba, a Model for Forest Trees
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Drew Larson, Larson, Drew A
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Drew A. Larson is “Uncovering the genomic basis of adaptation in Quercus alba, a
model for forest trees”. The host institutions for the fellowship are Indiana
University, the Morton Arboretum, and the University of Kentucky, and the
sponsoring scientists are Dr. Matthew W. Hahn, Dr. Andrew L. Hipp, and Dr. C.
Dana Nelson.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Forest trees are valuable crop species and
are central to the functioning of many natural and managed ecosystems. Oaks in
particular are some of the most abundant and ecologically important trees in
North America. They provide food and habitat for wildlife and raw materials for
a variety of construction and cooperage industries. Understanding how
populations of oak trees adapt at local and regional scales will provide insight
into how these and other species will be affected by climate change and pest
pressure in the coming decades. Oak species are known to produce hybrids with
one another, allowing genes to move among species. However, much less is known
about how this sharing of genes impacts how oak populations adapt to their local
environments. This research will address how adaptation and hybridization
interact to affect the genomes of oaks in the Eastern United States. It will
also shed light on the evolution of genes that provide resistance to disease,
which may prove useful for genetic improvement efforts in these economically
valuable species. The Fellow will mentor undergraduates in research projects
related to the scientific goals of the project. He will also develop an annual
series of outreach events in collaboration with the Morton Arboretum in which
participants will learn about trees (and other plants), genomics, and how to
pursue a career in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Population genomic and comparative
genomic methods will be used to uncover the adaptive forces that shape the
genomes of oaks (Quercus spp.), and the white oak (Quercus alba) in particular.
The genomic regions and functional classes of genes involved in local and
regional adaptation to climate in Q. alba populations will be investigated, with
the goal of developing a fundamental understanding of the genomic basis of
adaptation in Q. alba. Sampling of natural populations to be sequenced will be
focused at the northern and southern extremes of the current range of Q. alba,
in order to provide the greatest contrast between environments and to maximize
power to detect adaptive differences. The project will investigate genomic
introgression into Q. alba across its range and examine whether congeneric
species have contributed alleles of adaptive significance. The project will also
investigate the evolution of disease resistance genes across Quercus in a
phylogenetic context. Data generated during the project will be highly reusable
and extendable for future research and will be available online to facilitate
its continued use by the scientific community. Research outcomes will be shared
broadly, both at academic conferences and public-facing seminars throughout the
Fellowship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: comparative genomics, forest trees,
gene family evolution, plant genomes, population genomics, natural selection, R
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.