* 2109838
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Hybridization on the adaptive landscape
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Austin Patton, Patton, Austin H
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. How do new species arise? Do they arise in
isolation? Or can hybridization, the exchange of genetic material between
species, instead facilitate adaptation, and speed up the speciation process?
Recently, there has been growing support for the latter hypothesis but, to date,
few studies have experimentally demonstrated that hybridization influences
aspects of evolutionary fitness, such as survival, in vertebrate species. This
project will address this by combining laboratory studies of feeding
performance, fitness experiments in the field, and genetic sequencing of three
species of Bahamian pupfish. This research will provide insight into the
capacity of hybridization to facilitate adaptation to climate-change associated
environmental shifts. The Fellow will expand participation by involving the
Bahamian community both in educational and collaborative opportunities, as well
as by conducting outreach involving local public schools and community colleges
within the Bay Area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Can gene flow promote adaptive
radiation? To address this question, the Fellow will conduct a comprehensive
field fitness experiment, integrating genomic, morphological, environmental, and
feeding performance data. The Fellow will also quantify the extent to which the
visual environment modulates the phenotype-performance-fitness map. Using 4,000
experimental hybrids and purebred species, the Fellow will measure fitness in
high- and low-turbidity lakes and feeding performance of hundreds of these fish
will be assessed in similar environments pre- and post-experiment. These data
will be used to construct a genome-phenotype-performance-fitness map,
demonstrate the functional consequences of adaptive introgression, and test the
hypothesis that environment modulates the phenotype-performance-fitness map.
With this experiment, the Fellow will quantify the sensitivity of the
relationship between morphology, performance, and fitness to a hurricane-induced
environmental perturbation of lake turbidity. Gaining this understanding is
critical to predicting the sensitivity of San Salvador Island’s micro-endemic
pupfish diversity to increased hurricane activity in coming years. This research
will provide the Fellow with a diversity of training, from fish care to
performance assays, field experiments, selection and genomic analyses. The
Fellow will establish a collaboration at the University of The Bahamas,
providing training to their students, and offer lessons on evolution to students
at the San Salvador Island High School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.