* 2109688
* Characterizing dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 transmission and host response
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Keith Crandall, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,825,505.00

This project will improve our understanding of the spread of SAR-CoV-2, the
virus responsible for COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic remains a global threat
given the virus's ability to spread rapidly and ongoing viral evolution. Despite
successes in vaccine development, new strains of the virus, sometimes with
severe health consequences, continue to be identified. The enduring success of
treatment strategies requires the characterization of viral evolution during
initial and subsequent treatments, and the health outcomes of viral variants in
the context of different treatments. This project develops new computational
approaches to integrate diverse data types (such as genetic and medical
information), identify patterns of associations among these data types, identify
treatment targets, and understand how these relationships change over time and
with variation in viral and host populations. The project targets COVID-19 as an
exemplar system because of the explosion of available data associated with this
system, but the methodology developed will be applicable across a broad range of
infectious diseases in humans and other animals and plants. Ten local students
(including under-represented groups) will conduct research projects related to
this award during summers, and a online, nationwide webinar for 30 students
nationwide will be offered to broaden the impact and reach of the funded
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective and sustainable treatment strategies
(e.g., vaccine, drug therapy) for infectious disease outbreaks require 1)
understanding how pathogens evolve and whether discrete omics features (e.g.,
host/viral genomic variants, differential gene expression) exhibit different
clinical outcomes and viral phenotypes (e.g., climate association, drug
resistance, and vaccine escape mutants); 2) characterizing the transmissivity
element of viral and human systems, and 3) investigating biological pathways of
biomarkers of anti-CoV-2 immune response and their occurrence and durability.
The interplay between expansion and contraction of viral populations and anti-
CoV-2 immune responses are likely to generate distinct genomic signatures and
immune responses. This project develops and applies phylodynamic and
transmission modeling to advance knowledge about the evolution and epidemiology
of SARS-CoV-2. It further develops deep learning and statistical techniques to
analyze serological (e.g., metabolite data) and phenotypic clinical data. The
project leverages large-scale data from monitored communities, including
vaccinated individuals. The methods and analytical approaches can facilitate the
investigation of transmission and serological dynamics of infectious diseases
using high-throughput data in relation to clinical and epidemiological data. The
development of new open-source computational tools provides the research
community with a comprehensive framework for characterizing genotype-phenotype
associations and functional dynamics for COVID-19 in particular and infectious
disease research in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.