* 2109774
* Combining Models and Data to Understand the Spatial Dynamics of Host-Pathogen Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Gregory Dwyer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,646,031.00

The goal of this project is to create mathematical models that describe the
spread of pathogens that cause infectious diseases across space, and to identify
the circumstances under which disease hot spots develop. Models are often useful
for understanding and projecting pathogen spread, but most models assume that
host organisms move so rapidly that the distances between organisms do not
matter. This assumption may be appropriate for some pathogens of humans and
other animals, but for others host movement rates are slow enough that distances
matter. When movement rates are slow, it is possible for local hot spots of
disease to develop, but predicting where and when these hot spots will occur
requires new models. This project will begin by constructing models that
describe the spread of insect pathogens of the Douglas-fir tussock moth, Orgyia
pseudotsugata, which is a serious pest of forests in the western U.S. This
species undergoes outbreaks at 10- to 11-year intervals, such that its densities
increase from levels that are undetectable, to levels at which entire forests
are destroyed. The devastation that the insect imposes would be far worse if not
for pathogen epizootics (epizootics are epidemics in animals), which decimate
the insect population. By then simplifying these models so that they can be
applied to a wide range of pathogens, the project will construct a general
theory of the spatial spread of disease. Because the initial models will focus
on insect pathogens, the models will be useful in predicting when populations of
pest insects will be controlled by pathogens, allowing pest managers to
determine when artificial insecticides are not needed. The researchers will be
working with the US Forest Service to apply their results to contol efforts for
the Douglas-fir tussock moth. In addition, the project will train graduate and
undergraduate students, including individuals from groups that are
underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s first step
will be to use statistical model selection to choose between competing spatial
models, by comparing the models to spatial data on viral pathogens of the
Douglas-fir tussock moth. Previous work by the PIs showed that epizootics in
small forest patches can be accurately predicted by non-spatial disease models,
but at larger scales the data for the tussock moth show strong spatial
patterning. These patterns roughly resemble the patterns predicted by some
spatial models of disease spread, but whether the models can explain the data is
unknown. The project will therefore compare the ability of a range of spatial
models to explain the data. To do this, the investigators will use a Bayesian
statistical approach, in which informative Bayesian priors constructed from
experimental data are combined with likelihoods based on large-scale spatial
data to calculate model selection statistics, and thus to choose the best model.
This approach will allow the investigators to determine whether the mechanisms
incorporated in the models are truly useful for understanding the spread of
disease in nature. The models that best explain the data will undoubtedly
incorporate mechanisms that are specific to the tussock moth-virus interaction.
The investigators will therefore develop a more general theory of the spatial
spread of disease by producing simpler version of their models that can be used
to generate analytic results relating the spatial spread of pathogens to the
biology of host-pathogen interactions. The project thus aims to create a general
theory of the spatial spread of disease that is useful for describing the spread
of real diseases in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.