* 2109306
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The role of dosage balance in duplicate gene retention
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Zheng Li, Li, Zheng
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Organisms show immense diversity of lifestyles
and forms, and this diversity is based on the origins of new genes during
evolution. The main source of new genes is the duplication of older genes. But a
central problem is how newly duplicated genes can persist and acquire new
functions despite ongoing mutations. Although some duplicate genes are lost
quickly, others persist for millions of years. The central hypothesis to explain
gene retention is the need to maintain the proper amount of protein products
(dosage balance). This dosage balance hypothesis (DBH) has been found to play a
major role in gene retention and loss in plants, yeast, and humans. However, it
has not been tested in any insects, which represent the majority of animal
diversity. This project will address why some duplicate genes are retained over
time by testing the DBH in aphids. This project will also shed light on the role
of gene duplication, and improve understanding of how genomes evolve. Outreach
in bioinformatics and genomics will be conducted in undergraduate biology
courses, in addition to the mentoring and training of undergraduate researchers
from diverse backgrounds.

This project aims to integrate genomics, proteomics, and phenotypic information
in aphids to test the DBH as a potential Rule of Life that governs the fate of
genes. Aphids are a unique system to test the DBH because they have high
fractions of duplicate genes and have not experienced a whole genome
duplication. This research will use a comparative genomics approach on
chromosome level genome assemblies to reveal the tempo and mode of gene
duplications in aphids. This study will also build a protein interaction network
using co-fractionation mass spectrometry to determine the interactions of
thousands of proteins in aphids, using supervised machine learning. Predictions
from the DBH will be tested under a statistical framework by integrating results
from gene duplication history and protein interaction networks. This project
will also test to determine if DBH can affect ecologically important phenotypes
by integrating gene duplication history, with protein interactions, and
phenotypic information for gene families with ecological roles involving
symbiosis, oxidative stress, and coloration. The Fellow will receive technical
training in genomics and proteomics at the University of Texas at Austin. All
data and computational resources generated during this project will be freely
available to the broader research community through public repositories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.