* 2109710
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Color polymorphism: a model system for predicting phenotypic evolution in nature
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kinsey Brock, Brock, Kinsey M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Climate change is expected to generate extreme
environmental conditions, and our ability to predict the way organisms will
respond to projected environmental change is critically important for the
future. In nature, thousands of species have evolved color polymorphism. That is
where multiple distinct color morphs, that also differ genetically and
behaviorally, coexist within the same species. Color polymorphic species are an
ideal system to develop predictive power in biology because often color morphs
of the same species are associated with different aspects of the environment.
The aim of this project is to identify repeatable associations between lizard
color morph traits, genetics, and specific environmental variables that are
expected to change with climate change (temperature, air moisture,
precipitation, etc.) to develop predictions about how animals will evolve and
adapt to changing environments. The fellow will use the Aegean wall lizard,
which has three color morphs: orange, yellow, and white, that differ by
environment to study how color morph genetics and environmental change variables
interact to produce different color morphs in different environments. The fellow
will engage undergraduates underrepresented in the sciences in research as lab
and field assistants. This project will also include an international outreach
component that will communicate basic principles of evolution to elementary
school children in the San Francisco Bay Area, United States and Athens, Greece
with art-based activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use
genetically determined color morphs of the Aegean wall lizard to identify gene-
phenotype-environment interactions that have naturally produced repeated
evolution of the same morph phenotypes in similar environments. This research
will use color polymorphism as a model system to test for: predictable
associations between intraspecific morph diversity and environmental variation,
the evolution of repeated morph phenotype-environment associations in isolated
populations, and correlated macroevolution of morph phenotypes and environmental
variation across many color polymorphic species. The fellow will train in
integrative approaches that combines adaptive landscape theory, genomics,
computation, fieldwork, and experiments to identify predictable patterns of
phenotypic evolution from complex interactions across biological scales. The
fellow will engage undergraduates from underrepresented groups in research and
science outreach activities with local and international elementary
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.