* 2109835
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Replaying the tape of Genotype-Phenotype Evolution: Integrating Evidence of Climbing Habit Evolution across Alstroemeriaceae
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Carrie Tribble, Tribble, Carrie M
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 01/31/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2021. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Carrie M. Tribble is "Replaying the tape of Genotype-Phenotype Evolution:
Integrating Genetic, Anatomical, and Phylogenetic Evidence of Climbing Habit
Evolution across Alstroemeriaceae" The host institution for the fellowship is
the University of Hawai`i at Manoa and the Universidad de Antioquia (Colombia)
and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Rosana Zenil-Ferguson and Dr. Fernando
Alzate-Guarín.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different species occasionally evolve the
same feature independently. This process, called convergent evolution, can occur
in distantly or closely related species and may be due to different or similar
changes in the underlying DNA. Often, convergent evolution occurs when distinct
species evolve in response to similar environments. To better understand how and
why convergent evolution occurs, this research will gather data on the
convergent evolution of climbing vines and model how changes in the environment
where plants grow and modifications to DNA can lead to the evolution of shared,
independently evolved features. Training objectives include acquiring new skills
in mathematical modeling, fieldwork, plant anatomy and systematics. Support
through this fellowship will provide new opportunities for the Fellow to train
students through two educational programs: a Spanish-language undergraduate and
graduate student methods course at partner institutions in Colombia and an
educational botany internship program for high school students at Lyon Arboretum
at the University of Hawai`i. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convergent and parallel
evolution have generated some of the most iconic examples of environmental
pressures driving phenotypes, including the mind-boggling similarity of
distantly related succulent plants, the extraordinary ability to fly among
vertebrate and invertebrate animals, and the novel emergence of antibiotic-
resistance in bacteria despite the lack of resistance in common ancestors. Yet,
despite the importance of these processes in producing much of the observed
phenotypic variation, knowledge of the genomic and environmental factors that
generate repeated phenotypes is lacking. It is still unknown to what extent
“convergence” at the morphological level is matched by convergence at the
anatomical or molecular level. To better understand how repeated phenotypes are
produced, the project will include detailed studies on a botanical family –
Alstroemeriaceae – with clear variation in the climbing habit, a repeated
phenotype and key innovation in flowering plants. Through three aims, this
research will characterize the detailed environmental, morphological,
anatomical, and genetic underpinnings of this habit and test the hypothesis that
shared genetic, environmental, and anatomical changes are responsible for the
evolution of climbing by: (1) developing a novel model for identifying the
molecular basis of repeated phenotypic evolution; (2) modeling the evolution of
stem anatomy and environments of climbing and non-climbing plants; and (3)
implementing the new model to identify the genetic underpinnings of climbing in
Alstroemeriaceae. The data generated by this project include (1) field-measured
environmental variables, (2) herbarium vouchers, (3) stem anatomy descriptions
over a developmental series, (4) evolutionary relationships (phylogenies) of
Alstroemeriaceae, (5) genome-level genetic sequences (RADSeq regions), and (6) a
whole genome of Luzuriaga radicans. All data will be made publicly available
through online data repositories such as NCBI, TreeBASE, and Data Dryad.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: convergent evolution, climbing,
Alstroemeriaceae, phylogenetic comparative methods&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.