* 2109942
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways and Research Alliance-Michigan Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (MI-LSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Theodore Caldwell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,792,477.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented groups
(African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska Natives,
Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete high
quality degree programs in STEM. The Michigan Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (MI-LSAMP), a STEM Pathways and Research Alliance, has been
supported by LSAMP funding since 2005 and will build on their successful work to
provide a holistic approach to student success in STEM based on a Multilevel
Strength-based model, including emphases on research and a multimodal mentoring
plan, that also addresses non-cognitive abilities. The work of the MI-LSAMP
Alliance supports developing a more diverse and skilled STEM workforce, a strong
need for Michigan and for the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MI-LSAMP Alliance
consists of four, 4-year institutions (University of Michigan, lead institution;
Michigan State University; Wayne State University; Western Michigan University)
and two community colleges (Mott Community College and Washtenaw Community
College). The overall goal of the Alliance is to increase four year degree
production in STEM, by African Americans and other historically underrepresented
groups, by 20%. This goal will be achieved by activities focused on increasing
degrees earned at both community colleges and four year institutions, increasing
numbers of students transferring from two year to four year programs, and
increasing numbers of students matriculating in graduate programs in STEM. The
Alliance has developed a holistic, cohort-based approach, the NXTGen STEM
Scholars Program, where students start out together in a summer program before
entering the four year institution and have continued support throughout the
academic year and through graduation, including research experiences.
Professional and personal development for students will include individual
development plans, experiential learning, peer mentoring, culturally responsible
financial advising. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Allianceâ€™s knowledge generating
research study is focused on investigating which strength based interventions,
at the institutional, program and personal level, are most effective in
broadening participation in STEM. Baseline survey data of MI-LSAMP participants
will initially be collected with longitudinal follow-up data collection, from
both MI-LSAMP participants and comparable non-participating students in STEM at
Alliance institutions. The research is complementary to project evaluation with
a focus on testing the theories underlying the Alliance
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.