* 2110615
* Nonlinear Photonics for Quantum State Generation and Processing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Alexander Gaeta, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Controlling the nonlinear interaction of
light with matter is critical for future technologies based on quantum science.
For example, such interactions can lead to the generation of single photons
through photon-pair generation or through transferring quantum states from one
wavelength regime to another as is realized through quantum sum frequency
generation. A long-standing goal has been to make these interactions so strong
that they can be induced by single photons. While impressive, proof-of-principle
demonstrations of single-photon interactions have been realized with ultracold
atoms and with microwaves, many critical advances are needed to realize systems
based on light that can be scaled to useful solid-state devices that can operate
at room-temperature. In this research effort, the PI will investigate
theoretically and experimentally new types of light-matter interactions using
second-order and third-order nonlinear optical processes in chip-scale photonic
structures to advance photonics for quantum science. Such structures enable
tight confinement of light in all three dimensions, which can potentially
produce interactions that are exquisitely sensitive down to the single-photon
level. The proposed research will have impact on both fundamental and applied
aspects of quantum information science including, for example, the ability to
detect precisely the number of photons in a light beam. Such technology could
find extensive applications in quantum computation, quantum metrology, and
quantum communications. The graduate students supported by this funding will
develop a foundation for understanding how light interacts with matter at the
photon scale and will acquire the experimental skills necessary for
characterizing such interactions. In addition, one or two undergraduates per
year will work in the PI’s laboratory on projects related to this research
effort and gain their first taste of performing research in optical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the PI will explore theoretically and experimentally new nonlinear
optical phenomena using second-order and third-order processes in chip-scale
structures to advance photonics for quantum information applications. Such
structures will be designed to produce tight confinement of light in all three
dimensions while engineering the dispersion to enhance specific nonlinear
optical processes. These aspects will be strongly leveraged to enable processes
such as photon-triplet generation and parametric down conversion and sum-
frequency conversion with single photons. In addition, the group will exploit
cascaded second-order nonlinearities within microresonators to perform quantum
non-demolition measurements that allow for photon-number-resolved detection of
more than a thousand photons. Lastly, the group will create coupled squeezed-
state generators on a photonic chip that will enable continuous-variable quantum
teleportation and cluster-state generation. The proposed research will have
impact on both fundamental and applied aspects of nonlinear optics with single
photons and more broadly on quantum science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.