* 2110854
* EHR-Polar DCL: Authentic Research through Collaborative Learning (ARC-Learn): Undergraduate Research Experiences in Data Rich Arctic Science
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Miguel Goni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 587,463.00

The ARC-Learn project is a partnership between the Oregon State University STEM
Research Center and the College of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences Polar
Research programs. Access to quality research experience opportunities is a high
impact educational practice that supports undergraduates to successfully
continue their education in STEM fields. Many of these programs include
intensive experiences that occur over the summer months, often requiring
students to travel to distant or remote locations to participate. This common
structure limits access for many students, especially those who have extended or
delayed educational paths as they balance work, family, and dependent care
obligations. ARC-Learn will provide a more flexible lower-intensity model to
eliminate common barriers to participation. Over the course of two years ARC-
Learn students, working within an affirmative science community, will be exposed
to the full “arc” of research from understanding scientific challenges to
sharing the results of research with the public. The unique design of this
program will have three major benefits. First, it will provide critical training
to develop the next generation of scientists, who will be charged with solving
globally relevant environmental challenges for which the Arctic is ground-zero.
For example, students will work in teams to better understand the ways in which
continuing loss of Arctic sea ice impacts heat exchange between the ocean and
atmosphere, intensifies coastal erosion, and alters the food web and food
security. Second, ARC-Learn will leverage the vast data resources already
available by focusing on developing critical science skills such as data
literacy and visualization. Third, the project will increase access to
undergraduate research for students who are underrepresented in the Polar
sciences, transferring from two-year colleges, and those who are unable to be
away from home and family obligations for extended periods of time. Success
among these groups can broaden participation in science and lead to a more
diverse future Polar science workforce. To support students’ success, ARC-Learn
will employ inclusive and culturally responsive mentoring practices, a flexible
and modular schedule, and the option for students to engage both in person and
online. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project directly responds to the research and
programmatic recommendations in the National Academies of Science, Engineering
and Medicine consensus studies on Undergraduate Research Experiences (2017) and
Science of Effective Mentorship in STEMM (2019). The overarching goals of ARC-
Learn are to: 1) develop and diversify the next generation of Polar scientists;
2) expand knowledge about design and implementation of undergraduate research
experiences; and 3) build understanding about how mentors can develop inclusive
mentoring competencies and efficacy. The project research objectives are to
understand the specific mechanisms and program design elements that contribute
to: 1) achievement of learning outcomes; 2) cultivation of STEM identity and
STEM persistence; and 3) mentor development of team science and inclusive
mentoring practices and mindsets. Research methods will focus on using empirical
data (collected through observations, surveys, interviews and reflective
journals) to explain the program processes that enable (or inhibit) student
progress and mentor development. The researchers will investigate students’
(self-efficacy, STEM identity and STEM trajectories) and mentors’ (self-
concepts, perceptions of students, and inclusive mentoring and collaborative
competencies) experiences. The team will seek to uncover how ARC-Learn program
elements (formal collaborative and problem-based learning, inclusive mentoring,
community, science lifecycle, and long-duration and low intensity schedule)
contribute to student success and development of STEM identity and persistence.
Additionally, the team will interrogate how external factors and institutional
contexts impact student and mentor development and success. The project team
will broaden the impact of this research through direct support and development
of 50 participating underrepresented and non-traditional students and mentors,
as well as development and broad dissemination of an empirically-based framework
and programmatic lessons learned to support propagation and scaling of promising
elements of this novel program design to support a richly diverse
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.