* 2110343
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Scientific Reasoning in Online and In-Person Introductory Physics Labs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lei Bao, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 268,072.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by analyzing and improving
undergraduate students' skills in scientific reasoning. This collaborative
project involves investigators at the University of Cincinnati (Award
DUE-2110334) and Ohio State University (Award DUE-2110343). "Scientific
reasoning" is often used a label for the set of skills that support critical
thinking, creativity, and problem-solving. Goals in modern education have
shifted toward fostering those high-end skills, which are necessary for the 21st
century workforce, but college science courses often do not significantly impact
students in those areas. In the context of an introductory physics lab course,
the investigators plan to develop lab modules and assessments designed around
specific scientific reasoning skills and to study how the modules impact college
students' development of the targeted skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
intends to focus on the cognitive strand of skills that support critical
thinking, problem-solving, and systems thinking in undergraduate STEM education.
The targeted skills include Control of Variables (COV) reasoning, data
analytics, and causal decision-making, all of which are essential to the process
of coordinating theory and evidence, which in turn is integral to scientific
inquiry. Building on their prior work, the investigators plan to develop and
refine a first-semester physics lab curriculum for in-person or online delivery,
assessment tools for measuring targeted scientific reasoning skills, and a suite
of associated resources for instructors. They intend to study the impact of
certain pieces of the curriculum on students' development of the targeted
skills; differences, if any, in skill development by different populations of
students (including women and underrepresented racial and ethnic minorities);
differences, if any, in skill development in online versus in-person
instructional settings; and best practices for disseminating and implementing
the curriculum in different settings, including online, to optimize learning and
promote use. The curriculum will be tested at a variety of institutions,
including universities, a liberal arts college, and two-year colleges. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.