* 2110925
* The Pierre Auger Observatory Operating Funds Request
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Paolo Privitera, Universities Research Association Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2026
* USD 194,097.00

Cosmic rays produced in the Universe’s most extreme astrophysical events have
been detected at the highest energies recorded to date, far exceeding those
realized at human-made particle accelerators. The sources of these ultra-high
energy cosmic rays remain one of the most compelling long-term mysteries in
particle astrophysics. The Pierre Auger Observatory (PAO) is the largest cosmic
ray detector ever operated. Located in Malargüe, Argentina, the observatory was
constructed by an international collaboration of 18 countries and instruments an
area of 3000 square-kilometers. Since commencing operation in 2008, the PAO has
recorded the interactions of more than 200,000 of the highest energy particles
in the Universe. This award provides partial funding for the continuing
operation of the PAO. With an advanced data analysis program and the AugerPrime
detector upgrade underway, the observatory will continue to be an important
training ground for student and postdoctoral researchers. The observatory also
promotes extensive outreach initiatives both locally through its Visitor Center
and internationally, including agreements with planetariums and museums within
the US. An actively developed online data access program with accompanying
visualization and analysis tools brings the science of the observatory to the
public around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PAO has accumulated the most
extensive dataset of ultra-high energy (exceeding 2.5e18 eV) cosmic rays
recorded to date, providing world-leading precision in the measurements of the
ultra-high energy (UHE) cosmic ray spectrum, composition, and arrival
directions. The next five-year operating period for the observatory is set to
tackle a number of key questions including the origin of the observed features
in the energy spectrum, the sources of UHE cosmic rays and the search for new
physics at particle energies above 100 TeV. The observatory is currently
undergoing an upgrade, AugerPime, and combined with larger statistic data sets
and planned improvements in the analysis methods, significant enhancement in the
ability to address the above questions is anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.