* 2110628
* Theoretical Studies of Ultrafast Electron Dynamics in Molecules Interacting with Intense Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 120,000.00

The ability to capture and control in real time the rearrangement and motion of
electrons is considered a grand challenge in physics, chemistry, and biology.
Ultrashort laser pulses allow for direct probing of the transient properties of
(quantum) matter on the natural time scales of its quantum evolution. The
present project is directing toward providing theoretical insights into how to
identify, understand, and control changes in the electron wavepacket dynamics
and rearrangements in the quantum electron density in molecules during laser-
induced processes. Theoretical studies within this project are motivated by
recent breakthroughs in making measurements at the attosecond (one quintillionth
of a second) time scale and will support experiments that study the molecular
ionization process under the impact of high-intensity laser fields, high-order
harmonic generation that produces high-energy electromagnetic radiation, and
ultrafast multi-electron dynamics in molecules.

One of the central goals of the present project is to apply methods that
describe the time evolution of the electronic wavepacket including both ground
and excited states as well as continuum. Ab initio numerical simulations within
time-dependent density functional theory will explore the properties of quantum
dynamics during the sharing and migration of electrons between participating
atoms in a molecule. Of particular interest is the connection between
nonadiabatic electron localization features in the dynamics and the unique
signatures present for molecular superposition states for nonlinear processes
such as intense field ionization and high harmonic generation. (Bi)-circularly
polarized laser pulses offer a way to control and explore the ring current
related dynamics where a circularly-polarized light pulse transfers its
chirality to the molecule, which is manifested in either clockwise or counter-
clockwise current. The intellectual merit of the research project arises from
the combination of theoretical and numerical challenges, present when attempting
the solution of the many-body problem in an external field of nonperturbative
strength, and numerical simulations of time-dependent highly nonlinear
processes. The results of the project are envisaged to contribute to
understanding the photophysical processes occurring in molecular systems in the
presence of intense laser fields and attosecond science. Studies within this
project will be directly relevant to experimental work performed to study strong
laser field ionization and high order harmonics generation devoted to uncovering
the details of electron dynamics occurring in simple and complex systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.