* 2110404
* Collaborative Research: RoL: The Evolution of the Genotype-Phenotype Map across Budding Yeasts
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Antonis Rokas, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 703,286.00

How organisms’ external characteristics or traits are encoded in their genomes
and how they change over time represent important and largely unanswered
biological questions. This project will address these questions by studying the
metabolisms and genomes of the more than 1,000 known species of budding yeasts
and their evolution. Some of these yeast species are important opportunistic
pathogens, while others are of great industrial relevance as producers of foods,
beverages, medicines, and biofuels. This project will span multiple scales of
biological organization (from molecules to cells, species, and beyond) and ~400
million years of evolution to yield fundamental insights into how traits are
encoded in genomes, how new functions evolve, and how the relationship between
traits and genomes itself evolves. The project will support the Wild YEAST and
Computational Genomics Programs, two established and highly successful
educational and training programs that immerse early-stage undergraduate
students, including those from underrepresented backgrounds, in authentic,
discovery-driven research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using draft genomes for nearly
all known budding yeast species and state-of-the-art genome-editing tools that
are broadly active in diverse species, this project will predict the connection
of every metabolic gene in every yeast species’ genome to its function(s), as
well as examine the evolution of every known metabolic gene, pathway, and trait
across the budding yeast subphylum Saccharomycotina. Through genome-scale
evolutionary analyses and targeted functional experiments on key representative
taxa spanning budding yeast genomic and metabolic diversity, this project will
functionally characterize how between-taxa variation at the level of genotypes
gives rise to variation at the level of phenotypes. In particular, the project
will chart how variation at the level of DNA, RNA, proteins, and metabolites
sequentially transforms genetic variation into biochemical functions and
physiological traits with an emphasis on functionally characterizing gaps and
correcting discrepancies in the predicted Genotype-Phenotype
Map.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Evolutionary
Processes program in the Division of Environmental Biology and the Genetic
Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences of the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.