* 2110732
* Travel Support for the 2021 American Control Conference; New Orleans, Louisiana; May  26-28, 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Shreyas Sundaram, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 04/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

This grant will provide the opportunity for between 40 and 200 students from
groups underrepresented in control science and engineering to attend the 2021
American Control Conference (ACC), either physically or virtually, where they
will attend lectures, present their research, and network with other students,
faculty, and professionals in the field. The American Control Conference is
internationally recognized as a premier scientific and engineering conference,
dedicated to the advancement of control theory and practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2021 ACC technical program will comprise physical,
virtual, or hybrid activities, including presentations in regular and invited
sessions, tutorial sessions, and special sessions along with workshops and
exhibits. Control theory and control applications considered in this conference,
including energy, transportation, manufacturing, span research areas relevant to
the mission of the National Science Foundation. This award will expand the
opportunities in the fields of control science and engineering for women,
minorities, persons with disabilities, veterans, first-generation students, and
students from non R1 institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.