* 2110352
* Boosting Algorithmic Efficiency: Numerical Relativity in Dynamical, Curvilinear Coordinates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Zachariah Etienne, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,803.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Einsteinâ€™s theory of general relativity (GR) provides science's current best
understanding of gravity. It predicts the existence of bizarre objects like
black holes and neutron stars, and ripples in spacetime called gravitational
waves. These predictions motivated the construction of NSF's Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), which has detected several
gravitational wave signals from colliding black holes and neutron stars over the
past years. For their efforts in making these detections possible, the leaders
of LIGO were awarded the 2017 Nobel Prize in Physics. Much of gravitational wave
(GW) science depends on GW observations being compared with millions of
theoretical predictions, which must be built upon GW catalogs extracted from
numerical relativity (NR) simulations. NR simulations solve the GR equations in
full on the computer, and to date each of these NR simulations has required a
small computing cluster, which has limited throughput to only about 3,000 GWs in
15 years. Given the vast number of possible scenarios for even the simplest and
most commonly observed GW source, binary black holes (BBHs), such a small GW
collection threatens potential science gains from future GW observations.
BlackHoles@Home is a proposed citizen-science project leveraging new techniques
to fit NR BBH simulations on a consumer-grade desktop computer, enabling new GW
catalog generation with unprecedented throughput using volunteer computers. Such
throughput will enable far more detailed analyses of observed GWs from current
and future GW detectors, maximizing the science gained from hard-fought
observations. To educate the public and advertise this volunteer computing
project both locally and globally, convocations will be given in underserved
high schools, and updates will be posted to a widely disseminated
BlackHoles@Home email newsletter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements to the
algorithmic and mathematical underpinnings of NR codes have recently culminated
in a coming-of-age for the field, moving it beyond proof-of-principle
calculations and into the realm of predictive astrophysics. Over the past six
years, NR-based theoretical predictions of gravitational waves (GWs) were
central to uncovering the binary parameters in LIGO and Virgo's recent GW
discoveries. Looking ahead, GW catalogs generated by NR simulations of compact
binaries will need to grow greatly to ensure that parameter estimation accuracy
can keep up with increased sensitivity of GW interferometers. BlackHoles@Home is
a proposed BOINC project that aims to fit binary black hole (BBH) simulations on
the consumer-grade desktop computer. In doing so the general public can be
enlisted to help generate the large GW catalogs that form the foundation for a
great deal of GW science. Traditionally, these BBH simulations have been
performed on supercomputers. BlackHoles@Home implements new approaches for
robustly solving Einstein's equations of general relativity in highly efficient
coordinate systems, so that these simulations will fit on consumer-grade desktop
computers in only a few gigabytes of RAM. BlackHoles@Home's core infrastructure
provides a firm foundation for compact binary simulations beyond BBHs. To this
end, the dynamical-spacetime GRMHD code IllinoisGRMHD will be incorporated into
this infrastructure to enable state-of-the-art binary neutron star simulations
on supercomputers. These simulations will leverage both recent advances in
solving the GRMHD equations in spherical-like coordinate systems, as well as
recent improvements to IllinoisGRMHD that add both advanced nuclear equation of
state support and basic neutrino physics. Monte-Carlo-based photon and neutrino
feedback will also be incorporated to enable state-of-the-art realism in these
binary neutron star simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.