* 2110591
* Rotational Spin-Optomechanics in an Ion Trap
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tongcang Li, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 258,909.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;As it becomes more and more challenging to
increase the energy of particle accelerators to explore new physics, precision
measurements provide an attractive approach to probe fundamental questions in
physics. Levitated dielectric particles in high vacuum are ultrasensitive
devices and have the potential to test the limits of quantum mechanics and to
search for dark matter and dark energy. This project will develop an
ultrasensitive levitated system with a nanodiamond in an ion trap. A levitated
nanodiamond with a built-in spin qubit can be considered as a massive artificial
atom. It will be used to study the quantum geometric phase due to fast rotation
and to develop a rotational nanoparticle matter-wave interferometer for
precision measurements and macroscopic quantum mechanics. The project will
support the training of graduate students during the research. Essential
research results will be integrated into the course taught by the PI for senior
undergraduate students and graduate students. The PI will co-organize “Nanodays”
and “Physics Inside Out” outreach events for K-12 students near Purdue
University, and cooperate with other professionals to do outreach that combines
science, art, and other fields to convey science to broad
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate rotational spin-optomechanics with a levitated
nanodiamond in an ion trap. Theoretical investigations have suggested that a
nanodiamond matter-wave interferometer would potentially test the limits of
quantum mechanics and probe quantum gravity. However, a significant obstacle to
creating quantum superposition states of an optically levitated nanodiamond is
laser heating. In this project, the PI’s group will address this critical issue
by using an ion trap to minimize heating and optical refrigeration to cool the
internal temperature of a nanodiamond. A nanodiamond with a built-in spin qubit
will be driven to rotate at high speed for studying both adiabatic and non-
adiabatic quantum geometric phases. Besides, a non-Abelian 3D rotation will
provide the opportunity to study the non-Abelian geometric phase. The system
developed in this project will be important for quantum sensing and fundamental
physics. This project will build on the recent accomplishments of the PI’s
group, which has observed electron spin resonance of optically levitated
nanodiamonds in a vacuum, driven a nanoparticle to rotate at a record high speed
and created an ultrasensitive torque detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.