* 2110633
* Probing and Controlling Electronic Dynamics in Matter with Atomic Spatiotemporal Resolution
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Uwe Thumm, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Photoelectron emission is a fundamental light-matter interaction process in
nature. It occurs upon the incidence of electromagnetic radiation with
sufficiently short wavelength and adequate intensity on matter, proceeds through
the coupling of the incident radiation with electrons, and results in the
transfer of photonic energy to internal excitations of the target and the
emission of electrons. The emitted photoelectrons carry information about the
photoemission dynamics and electronic properties of the target material. For
more than a century, the measurement and analysis of their energy and momentum
distribution has been one of the most prolific methods for determining the
electronic structure of matter, importantly promoting the development of laser
and detection technologies as well as accurate quantum-mechanical theoretical
methods. Energy-domain spectra image the sample's time-averaged internal
electronic dynamics during the photoemission process, but do not resolve the
ultrafast time-dependent electronic dynamics during the photoelectron-release
(or –rescattering) process. The proposed theoretical work is motivated by
extraordinary progress in ultrafast laser technology that enabled the generation
of ultrashort light pulses and their accurate control and synchronization. These
pulses allow for investigations of the electronic dynamics in isolated atoms and
condensed matter systems with temporal resolution at the natural timescale of
the electronic motion in matter and with atomic spatial resolution. In the same
way as making a movie of a fast-moving object, such as a bullet in flight,
requires the stroboscopic assembly of many frames, each constituting a momentary
image of the object, time-domain spectroscopy is about to provide “electronic
movies”, capable of displaying the motion of electrons in and their emission
from matter with atomic spatiotemporal resolution. The proposed studies will
advance our understanding of (i) single--electron and collective electronic
excitations and (ii) the dynamics of electrons and fields in layered
semiconductors, adsorbate-covered surfaces, and nanoparticles, promoting
emerging technologies, such as light-wave computing, nano-catalysis, and
artificial photosynthesis, thereby contributing to the development of novel
computers and catalytic devices for securing our energy supply and preserving
our environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attosecond time-resolved spectroscopy has
led to impressive time-domain studies of ionization processes on isolated
(gaseous) atoms and is anticipated to significantly advance our understanding of
electronic properties of layered-semiconductor structures and nanoparticles.
However, the physical interpretation of time-resolved photoemission spectra
faces significant conceptual challenges and necessitates comprehensive
theoretical investigations, even for simple atomic systems. For complex systems,
such as nanoparticles and solid surfaces, additional severe technical
difficulties in describing the transiently photoexcited electronic dynamics must
be overcome. The proposed work addresses these challenges. It focuses on the
modeling of time- and spatially resolved emission of electrons and the
generation of up-converted high-harmonic (HH) radiation from adsorbate-covered
metal surfaces and nanoparticles. It proceeds by developing and applying
complementary quantum-mechanical methods, including numerical solutions of the
time-dependent Schrödinger equation, and physically more transparent semi-
classical methods. It will assess the fidelity with which time- and emission-
angle-resolved photoelectron and HH spectra can reveal information on (a)
electronic forces and dynamics in solids and (b) non-homogenous nano-plasmonic
electric-field enhancements of incident light pulses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.