* 2110929
* Collaborative Research: FASER and FASERnu at the Large Hadron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Torrence, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2024
* USD 220,000.00

The Standard Model of particle physics has been a successful theory, agreeing
with decades of experimental observations involving weak, electromagnetic, and
strong interactions. The discovery of the Higgs boson at the LHC was further
confirmation of this success. However, the Standard Model remains an incomplete
theory. The precise measurements of the properties of the Higgs boson at the LHC
could provide insight into new physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM). In the
almost ten years since the Higgs discovery, there is no clear evidence of BSM
coming from the big LHC experiments. This has spawned new experiments to make a
breakthrough. This award is such an experiment, looking for new forms of Dark
Matter produced at the LHC. The experiment, FASER (Forward Search Experiment),
placed almost half a kilometer away from the beam interaction points, will
search for long-lived new particles predicted in various theoretical models of
Dark Matter. This far-forward detector covers signals that escape the big LHC
detectors like ATLAS and CMS, and many models predict low transverse momentum
transfer interactions that would produce new particles like dark photons and
axion-like particles that could produce signals in the FASER
detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FASER will look for very high energy (TeV)
electron positron pairs which would leave a clean, clear signal in the FASER
charged- track detector. The complete detector includes scintillators, magnetic
tracking detectors and a calorimeter, all using borrowed technology from the big
LHC detectors. This results in a general-purpose detector that is sensitive to a
wide variety of possible new particles. A large component of the work in this
award is the development of the data acquisition system, trigger and data
analysis software needed to collect FASER’s data and dig out of this data the
discovery of new particles. This very experienced team are expected to be able
to discover new long-lived particles, if they are there, within a relatively
short three years of data taking. The team also will work with the California
State Summer School for Mathematics &amp; Science (COSMOS) for high school
students, giving them FASER data for hands-on experience in high energy physics
data analysis techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.