* 2110475
* Programmable Optical Tweezer Arrays for Studying Strongly Correlated Fermions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Waseem Bakr, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 340,610.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The development of materials with novel
properties is a primary driver for new technologies. The behavior of the
electrons in a material influences its electrical, thermal and optical
properties. In particular, at low temperatures, the interplay of quantum
mechanics and strong interactions between the electrons gives rise to
spectacular collective phenomena. These include superconductivity (the lossless
transport of electricity) as well as unusual forms of magnetism. A microscopic
understanding of the physics of quantum materials is very useful in controlling
their properties, but it is hindered by fundamental limitations on simulating
large-scale quantum systems on classical computers. This award supports the
development of a programmable analog quantum computer which can simulate
electronic systems of up to a hundred particles, a task beyond the reach of even
the fastest supercomputers. The analog quantum computer will consist of
ultracold atoms, playing the role of the electrons, hopping and interacting in
artificial crystals created with focused spots of laser light known as optical
tweezers. Unlike other platforms for electronic quantum simulation, the crystal
geometry is programmable in software, allowing on-demand simulations of a wide
range of model electronic systems. The main outcome of the research will be a
major advance in the ability to create, control, and study interacting quantum
systems. The research will also train graduate and undergraduate students in the
field of quantum science and prepare them for careers in industry, national
labs, and academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The deterministic preparation, control, and readout of large
ensembles of interacting quantum particles remains a frontier in modern
experimental physics. Recent progress in this arena has enhanced our
understanding of many-body systems and stimulated advances in quantum computing.
In particular, ultracold neutral atoms in optical lattices, due to the ease of
tailoring their Hamiltonians, have provided valuable insights on a wide range of
topics including many-body localization, entanglement dynamics and driven many-
body systems. However, two challenges have impeded quantum simulations with
fermionic lattice gases from reaching their full potential: the preparation of
states with entropies low enough to realize strongly-correlated phases of
interest and “on-demand” reconfigurability of trapping potentials at the single-
site level. This award funds the development of techniques to prepare low-
entropy states of strongly-interacting fermionic atoms in programmable optical
tweezer arrays, with single-site readout from quantum gas microscopy. The
research will focus on realizing correlated states in one-dimensional and two-
leg Fermi-Hubbard ladder systems, including interacting topological states and
d-wave resonating valence bond states. This will be an important stepping stone
for future work on preparing low-entropy states in 2D Hubbard tweezer
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.