* 2110313
* EAGER SENTINELS: The PCR-free Biosensor for a Fast, Simple, and Sensitive Detection of RNA.
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Artavazd Badalyan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2024
* USD 279,148.00

The recent pandemic has highlighted the urgent need for rapid and accurate
detection of viruses to allow for early disease diagnosis and monitoring to
prevent future pandemics and to reduce the risk of complications and mortality
through timely health care. Currently, diagnostic tests based on polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) are widely applied for the detection of viruses. Despite
outstanding analytical parameters, significant drawbacks of this technology have
become evident during the recent COVID pandemic. More specifically, PCR-based
tests require not only expensive laboratory equipment and highly trained
personnel, but they are also time-consuming and not well adapted for point-of-
care devices. For example, it usually takes two to three days to get the result
of a PCR-based COVID-19 test. Consequently, the spread of the virus becomes less
containable. The purpose of this project is to develop a fast, easy, and
economically feasible biosensing platform that does not require PCR. This
project also aims to provide undergraduate students with interdisciplinary
training in the development of biosensors, and local high school students with
an opportunity to explore the field of diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is to design and realize a rapid, ultrasensitive, and adaptable PCR-free
biosensing platform for viral RNA detection. Specifically, the proposed
biosensor will be based on the newly discovered CRISPR-Cas (Clustered Regularly
Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeat – CRISPR associated) nuclease that shows
high selectivity, and can be reprogrammed to detect various viruses’ RNAs. The
development and integrations of a novel signal amplification scheme will allow
circumvention of the PCR amplification step. Not only will this research lead to
the novel RNA sensing approach, but it will also provide a blueprint for
developing a DNA biosensor based on an alternative but closely related Cas
nuclease. Due to the ease of configuration and operation, the proposed biosensor
is more economical, faster, and will not require sophisticated equipment and
personnel training, thereby addressing current needs in public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.