* 2110139
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 ACM International Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems (ACM SIGMETRICS 2020)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Bo Ji, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2024
* USD 12,500.00

The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Special Interest Group on
Measurement and Evaluation (SIGMETRICS) 2020 conference will be held at the
International Science and Engineering Complex of Northeastern University in
Boston, MA from June 8â€“12, 2020. ACM SIGMETRICS 2020 aims to provide a high-
quality forum for presenting results and discussing ideas that further our
knowledge and understanding of the measurement, modeling, analysis, and design
of computing and networked systems. The conference interprets computer systems
broadly, including traditional computing systems as well as social networks,
data networks, and other types of systems. Contributions containing highly
original ideas, new approaches, and/or ground-breaking results are particularly
encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides travel support for about 25
US based students to attend the SIGMETRICS 2020 conference. The support will
make possible the participation of students who would otherwise be unable to
attend the conference. Particular attention will be paid to directing support
towards various underrepresented population. SIGMETRICS brings together
professionals from a wide variety of academic and industrial backgrounds;
student participants will thus get the opportunity to interact with mentors and
peers of varying gender, ethnicity and background. Students will also benefit
from the student-centric events, including a student workshop/panel and a
student research competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.