* 2110509
* LIGO Instrument and Data Characterization
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gabriela Gonzalez, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,210,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
last several years were very exciting in gravitational wave astronomy, with the
first detection of gravitational waves in 2015 from a collision of black holes
1.3 billion years ago, and with more than 50 detections published in 2021; the
LSU group has been a critical contributor to these discoveries. The group's
activities in the next years will focus on aspects of improvement of the
Advanced LIGO detectors and the characterization of data from the Advanced LIGO
interferometer. These efforts are fully integrated with those of the LIGO
Scientific Collaboration (LSC) and are closely related with the activities of
the LIGO Livingston Observatory, since that Observatory is located only 30 miles
from the LSU campus. In doing its research, the group will train students and a
postdoc who will add to the quality and diversity of the STEM workforce, as well
as share the research with the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSU
group will pursue research activities in two main topics, all coordinated with
the LSC and key to the improvement of detection rates of gravitational waves
with the Advanced LIGO detectors. The first topic is about characterizing the
Advanced LIGO detector and applications to future designs; the group will help
diagnosing and improving the detector's noise in the frequency domain due to the
sensing and control of the alignment degrees of freedom, and the feedback
control of the suspended masses. The group will model the performance of the
system, compare models with actual performance, and then apply the models and
the experience to the conceptual development of such systems for upgraded
detectors. The second topic is analyzing data from Advanced LIGO detector; the
group will identify instrumental artifacts, in particular those related to the
group's expertise on scattering sources. The group will eliminate the cause of
the transients when possible, and find out the artifacts that most affect the
low latency searches for astrophysical signals in LIGO
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.