* 2110707
* AF: Small: Algorithmic and Market Design Challenges in Cloud Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ian Kash, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,766.00

The global market for cloud computing is worth hundreds of billions of dollars,
consumes about one percent of worldwide electricity use, and is growing rapidly.
Thus, even small improvements in its operation would have substantial impacts on
economic activity and society's ability to meet sustainability goals. Despite
their importance, cloud-computing resources are currently priced and allocated
using simple approaches. On the pricing side, most resources are sold using
utility-style pricing where resources whose usage can be measured are priced
based on the time they are used for and quantity used. On the allocation side
simple policies are used to assign resources to customers and manage contention.
This project will develop new algorithms and market designs to enable fairer and
more efficient solutions to resource allocation problems faced by cloud
providers around two main themes: (1) managing future demand and (2)
simultaneous allocation of multiple resources. While the focus of the project is
on challenges arising from cloud computing, similar challenges arise in other
contexts, for example in electricity markets adapting to increased use of
renewable resources with high variability in supply.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With
utility-style pricing, cloud providers have no information about the future
plans of their customers, resulting in challenging online problems when managing
future demand. This project will develop new resource-allocation algorithms to
manage highly stochastic demands in the online setting as well as analyze new
market designs that pair richer information elicited from customers about their
future needs with novel algorithms to make use of that information. What makes
this problem particularly complex is that satisfying these demands requires
simultaneous allocation of multiple resources. Fair and efficient division of
multiple resources with Leontief utilities (which require resources to be
perfectly matched in quantity, like hot dogs and buns) has been studied for a
decade since the introduction of the dominant resource-fairness algorithm, which
attempts to equalize the amount each customer receives of their most demanded
resource and was explicitly inspired by the challenges of allocating cloud-
computing resources. However, several important issues have received only
limited attention, thereby limiting the opportunities to apply these techniques
in cloud systems. This project is addressing two such issues. First, many
customers are seeking to complete a fixed amount of work, and so care about the
time taken to complete that work rather than directly about the immediate
quantity of resources allocated. Second, this is not a static allocation problem
to be solved but a dynamic, online one. Thus, this project is developing new
analyses and variants of fair-division approaches such as dominant resource
fairness and maximum Nash welfare (the product of customer values) suitable for
settings with limited demands and dynamic allocations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.