* 2110496
* Rapid, High-Fidelity Numerical Models of Gravitational Waves from Generic Binary Black Hole Mergers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Scott Field, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
direct detection of gravitational waves by the Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory has realized a long-awaited promise to open a new
window on the Universe. These waves typically originate from other galaxies
through a violent merger of two black holes or neutron stars. These waves, which
travel over galactic distances to reach us, provide clues about the black holes,
spacetime, and Einstein's theory of general relativity. To realize the full
scientific potential of current and future gravitational wave experiments, a
model of the expected gravitational wave signal must be both highly accurate and
very fast to evaluate. This award will support a multi-disciplinary approach to
gravitational-wave modeling to produce new algorithms and computer programs
aimed at maximizing the scientific output of gravitational wave observations.
The models produced as part of this research will be especially useful for
analyzing powerful black hole mergers and novel eccentric binary black hole
systems. This research project, and more generally gravitational wave science,
will continue to engage the public in these discoveries through outreach as well
as train a diverse group of students with a strong STEM background to prepare
them for careers that require technical and computational
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the development,
implementation, and use of numerical techniques designed to overcome some of the
most urgent challenges in gravitational-wave science. Crucially, the
interpretation of gravitational wave datasets requires access to a model which
is both fast-to-evaluate and faithful to the relevant physics. Using traditional
techniques, these two requirements are often at odds with one another. Recently,
a set of targeted data-driven surrogate modeling tools have emerged as a means
to accurately reproduce numerical relativity waveforms at arbitrary parameter
values within a fraction of a second. The goal of this project is to build on
these recent successes and to (i) continue the development of this methodology
by extending it to handle more challenging cases including eccentricity and
intermediate-mass ratio systems, (ii) construct waveform model error estimators
to be used in parameter inference or for model refinement, (iii) implement these
methods and models within existing public codes so that they are widely
available, and (vi) carry out high-impact scientific studies made possible by
the rapid, high-fidelity waveform models that have been
built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.