* 2110309
* Mesoscale modeling of Controlled Degradation and Erosion of Polymer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Olga Kuksenok, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 04/30/2025
* USD 207,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development
of a computational framework that captures the controlled degradation of polymer
networks at the mesoscale. Understanding and controlling degradation of polymer
networks plays a vital role in a multitude of applications from wound dressings
and tissue adhesives to the delivery of drugs and the growth regulation of
neural networks. Of particular interest is light-induced degradation with its
potential to spatially resolve the control over physical and chemical properties
of degrading polymeric materials. Current models, often analytic and continuum
approaches that inform our understanding of polymer network degradation, focus
on small or large length scales. Small and large length scales reach down to the
level of individual atoms and extend to and beyond visible distances,
respectively. Our understanding on intermediate length scales, from a few
nanometers to tens or hundreds of micrometers that are known as the mesoscale,
remains limited. The development of an efficient computational approach for
modeling the dynamics of degrading polymer networks on the mesoscale is expected
to advance fundamental understanding and help establish guidelines for efficient
design of degradable materials. The project includes ample research and
educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students; strong
emphasis will be placed on recruiting students from underrepresented groups.
Some of the outcomes of the research will be incorporated into courses taught by
the PI, and relevant educational materials will be made available via a science
and engineering gateway that is part of the Network for Computational
Nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development of a computational modeling
framework that captures photo-controlled degradation of polymer networks at the
mesoscale. A suitable Dissipative Particle Dynamics approach capturing erosion,
reverse gelation, and elasticity of the degrading network will be developed and
validated. To establish a reliable model of degradation, a modified Segmental
Repulsive Potential will be used to prevent unphysical topological crossings of
bonded polymer chains. As a model system, hydrogels formed by the end-linking of
four-arm polyethylene glycol (PEG) macromolecular precursors, often referred to
as tetra-PEG gels, are chosen. The four-arm PEG precursors can be modified
during their synthesis by including photocleavable functional groups to enable
controlled degradation. The applicability of the proposed model can be extended
to various network architectures and used to study their behavior under
externally imposed conditions. To demonstrate the utility of the developed
mesoscale approach, it will be used to capture the effects of controlled
degradation on spreading and reconstruction of nanogel particles at liquid-
liquid interfaces. An original multiscale model of early stages of gel
degradation will also be developed, where the mesoscale model will be
effectively scaled up into the respective continuum model.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; The development of an efficient computational approach for modeling
the dynamics of degrading polymer networks will advance fundamental knowledge by
accounting for the specifics of network architecture, diffusion of all the
involved species, hydrodynamic interactions, network heterogeneities, and
reaction rate constants that are locally controlled by the solvent quality.
Proposed simulation methods will allow to probe the applicability of relevant
network theories at the mesoscale and may establish guidelines for future design
of novel degrading materials with dynamically and spatially controlled
properties. This project will train graduate and undergraduate students and
support diversity. Research outcomes will be incorporated into courses taught by
the PI, and relevant educational materials will be made available through the
NanoHub portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.