* 2110883
* SBIR Phase I:  Using Brainwaves in Virtual Reality Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Lotfi Ben Othmane, BRAINSOFT, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to make virtual reality (VR) applications
more intuitive and thereby increase their adoption of immersive technologies.
The VR market was estimated to be $6.1 billion in 2020 and is expected to reach
$20.9 billion by 2025. This project addresses the VR developers’ challenge of
creating interfaces that enable intuitive navigation. As envisioned, the
technology resulting from this project may enable developers to write user-
friendly human interfaces for VR software by removing the current constraints
posed by the need to master the domain of brainwaves. The project seeks to
provide capabilities for deriving the user’s mental and emotional states, thus
facilitating objective user feedback. That new capability may impact other
domains, including education and therapy. Acquiring capabilities to establish
relationships between the mental and emotional states of the users and the VR
and real-world environment stimuli could be developed and used to identify
patterns that may answer important questions about human behavior and help
people with limited mobility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances the use of brainwaves to
control VR environments. This project will develop techniques for inferring
users’ decisions while navigating a VR environment and for deriving insights
into users’ reactions to stimuli in real-world and VR environments. For this
Phase I proof-of-concept work, these innovative techniques will be evaluated in
jury consulting and game therapy scenarios. The research addresses four
technical hurdles: 1) inferring users’ decisions in virtual environments from
brainwaves with reasonable accuracy, 2) deriving insights into users’
intellectual and emotional states as a result of exposure to stimuli, 3)
designing an architecture for useable brainwaves-based applications, and 4)
designing security and privacy solutions for this VR
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.