* 2110760
* Transforming the Classroom into an Active Learning Environment to Improve Comprehension, Retention, and Graduation Rates
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Michael Gyamerah, Prairie View A & M University
* Continuing Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,714,193.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by significantly increasing
student retention rate from 39%, well below the national average, to about the
national average (59%) at the College of Engineering at Prairie View A&amp;M
University. The approach to be employed is the transitioning of instruction from
traditional lecture mode to an innovative approach called the Formatively
Assessed Student Centered Instruction and Active Learning (FASCIAL) approach.
The FASCIAL approach is focused on greater student-centered instruction in which
learning is made more interactive by engaging students in individual and small
group activities which test students’ understanding of important concepts.
Frequent feedback is sought with regard to student knowledge and difficulties,
teaching is then modified in a way that enhances learning. Transformation of a
total of fifteen courses impacting 1900 students is planned. The expectation is
that the use of the FASCIAL approach will result in improved student conceptual
understanding as well as enhanced retention and graduation rates at Prairie View
A&amp;M University, a public, historically black land grant institution. The
project will contribute significantly to the (i) production of competent future
STEM faculty through training of graduate and undergraduate student assistants
in the new FASCIAL strategy, (ii) lessening of student loan burdens through
accelerated graduation, and (iii) reduction in student attrition rate, hence
increased retention and graduation rates to help meet the urgent labor demand
for the future technological workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
involve the training of a team of nine faculty members in Discipline Based
Educational Research (DBER) practices. Faculty will be drawn from Chemical,
Civil, Computer, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering as well as the College of
Education. Fifteen engineering undergraduate courses are to be re-structured for
an innovative instructional delivery approach which uses DBER-based active
learning to improve students’ conceptual understanding. Six different active
learning activities including, Think-Pair-Share collaborative learning and
process oriented guided inquiry learning, are to be incorporated in the
instructional materials. The effectiveness of the new instructional approach
will be investigated through rigorous data collection and analysis, furthermore,
findings will be disseminated for broader adoption within the institution and
beyond. Appropriate hypotheses are posited to guide the investigations, and
there are plans to develop comprehensive surveys for students, program level
instructors and student learning assistants to assess the hypotheses. To help
faculty transition from traditional lectures to the FASCIAL approach, there will
be systematic training by renowned experts, thereby improving instructors’
ability to design effective learning tasks that are critical to enhanced student
learning, retention and graduation rates. Additionally, to facilitate student-
centered instruction and active learning, the redesign and re-arrangement of
classroom spaces will be carried out as per the well known Student-Centered
Active Learning Environment with Upside-down Pedagogies (SCALE-UP) approach. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.