* 2110260
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra Wide Band (UWB) Ka-Band Flat Panel Antenna
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,04/30/2022
* John Erhinyo, ALLBEAMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2022
* USD 242,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to advance the development of Ultra-Wide
Band (UWB) Flat Panel Antenna (FPA) which is a catalyst for ubiquitous,
satellite-based communication. This project focuses on the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) Ka-band frequencies (Tx 27.5-31GHz, Rx
17.7-21.2GHz) with FPA capable of connecting to all three constellations: Low
Earth Orbit (LEO), Medium Earth Orbit (MEO), and Geostationary Orbit (GEO)
simultaneously. The development of these FPA will enable a new era of satellite
communication, making the internet network a global network regardless of the
user’s location on earth, with speeds comparable to, and in some cases higher
than, land-based networks. FPA technology may spur further research into higher
millimeter-wave (mmWave) frequencies and the bandwidth benefits they offer. FPA
technology may also be an enabler of the future hybrid wireless network used in
connected cars and machines with direct Line of Sight (LOS) to a
satellite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to develop a novel method of radiating aperture design for
high bandwidth, high efficiency, low-cost, and lightweight next-generation
satellite terminal Flat Panel Antenna (FPA). Recent activities in the satellite
industry such as the new LEO constellations and High-Throughput Satellite (HTS)
networks in GEO orbit have prompted the development of the FPA to be used in the
user’s terminal. To support such a multi-orbit constellation, certain
performance criteria such as Bandwidth, polarization diversity, cross-
polarization rejection, and Antenna Gain need to be met with sufficient margin
to guarantee reliable communication links. The existing Flat Panel Antenna
technologies are either narrowband or bulky, which makes them not suitable for
emerging satellite technology or multi-orbit communication. As a result, there
is a need for a new Flat Panel Antenna that can cover the entire Ka-band
frequencies (both Tx and Rx) to unlock the full potential of satellite
communication in the Ka-band. The core of this project is developing the novel
technology with all the attributes needed for multi-orbit
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.