* 2110985
* Rare Isotope Reaction Studies for Nuclear Structure and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jolie Cizewski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 440,000.00

This award will support the principal investigator and her group of early career
scientists to advance our understanding of the structure of atomic nuclei as
well as their reactions and synthesis in exploding stars. Nearly all elements
heavier than iron are made in stars and stellar explosions through processes
that involve the capture of neutrons. To learn more about those processes the PI
will lead experiments using beams of rare isotopes, concentrating on neutron-
rich nuclei. This research program will use state-of-the-art instruments and
accelerator facilities in the U.S. The project will also serve to enhance the
diversity of the nuclear science workforce. The participation of these early
career scientists in forefront research and the development of scientific
instruments will prepare them for careers in higher education and fundamental
and applied research at national laboratories and in industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light-ion transfer reactions will be studied with beams of
rare isotopes with energies near the Coulomb barrier and about 45-MeV per
nucleon. Studies will concentrate on neutron-rich nuclei near the N=50 neutron
shell closure and light nuclei important for understanding the synthesis of
nuclei in stars and their explosions. These studies will be carried out with
accelerated beams of rare isotopes at Michigan State University, first with the
ReAccelerated (ReA) beam capability and starting in 2022 with the Facility for
Rare Isotopes Beams (FRIB). Additional experiments will be performed at the
ATLAS accelerator facility at Argonne National Laboratory. At FRIB the focus is
to constrain the shape of the potential that binds neutrons in a neutron-rich
nucleus and, therefore, extract spectroscopic strengths and direct neutron
capture rates with reduced dependence on theoretical model parameters. The
neutron-transfer reaction with deuterated targets has been validated as a
surrogate for neutron capture when reaction products are measured in coincidence
with gamma rays. Therefore, both charged particles and coincident gamma
radiation will be measured with Gamma-array ORRUBA: Dual Detectors for
Experimental Structure Studies (GODDESS), where the Oak Ridge Rutgers University
Barrel Array (ORRUBA) is coupled to large, highly segmented arrays of high-
purity germanium gamma-ray detectors. The results will be compared with
theoretical predictions of nuclear structure and reactions away from stability
and disseminated as input into calculations of nucleosynthesis in stars and
their explosions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.