* 2110428
* Collaborative Research: Fe and Na Lidar Investigations of Geospace-Atmosphere Temperature, Composition, Chemistry, and Dynamics at McMurdo, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Xinzhao Chu, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,932,457.00

This award is funded in whole or part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021
(Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Geospace coupling system consists
of multiple domains transferring solar wind energy and momentum through the
Earth's magnetosphere down to the polar ionosphere and thermosphere (neutral
upper atmosphere). The 100-200 km altitude region is one of the most important
domains where the magnetospheric energy dissipates by precipitating charged
particles and respective Joule heating of the upper atmosphere. However, this
plasma-neutral coupling in this domain is the lees understood one because it is
located well below satellite-observing altitudes, so only remote sensing
techniques from the Earth's surface are available here - and observations of
neutral winds and temperatures in this range of altitudes are rare. The
observations that have been acquired by the LIDAR instrumentation at the McMurdo
Station in Antarctica over the last decade have already enabled compelling new
science. Studies of plasma-neutral coupling significantly advanced understanding
of these complex space-atmosphere interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will advance a new concept of multistep vertical wave coupling from ground to
the thermosphere that was develop from discoveries made by McMurdo lidars. This
concept helps advancing the space weather modeling by better assessing the
impact of the lower atmosphere forcing on the ionosphere and thermosphere
dynamics. Gravity wave forcing on the polar upper atmosphere via wave drag and
mixing is important to a wide range of research problems, including general
circulation modeling, atmospheric chemistry modeling, thermal balance
calculations, studies of airglow and metal layers, and the estimates of the
cosmic dust influx. The development of the absolute temperature climatology is
crucial for calibrating satellite observations of the polar thermosphere and its
connections with the mesosphere and lower atmosphere – they are needed to
validate global climate models, and decades from now will serve as the baseline
against which long-term temperature trends in the changing Antarctic climate are
assessed. The sodium and Fe-Boltzmann lidars that have been operated at McMurdo
acquire vertical profiles of neutral atmospheric parameters, including
temperature from 30 to ~200 km, vertical winds, and iron &amp; sodium densities
in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere region. This will provide answers on
new science questions related to the complex physics, chemistry, and dynamics of
the polar atmosphere and Geospace that are inspired by McMurdo lidar
discoveries. These studies provided unique opportunities to train a new
generation of scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.