* 2110207
* Explorations in Quantum Gravity: Cosmological and Black Hole Spacetimes
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Parampreet Singh, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Einstein’s theory of general relativity, though immensely successful in
describing the evolution of the universe and the dynamics of black holes, breaks
down at singularities such as the big bang and inside the black holes. It has
been widely believed that a quantum theory of gravity overcoming the problems of
singularities would give answers to long-standing questions in Einstein’s
theory, such as if there is space and time beyond the big bang, what replaces
big bang and black hole singularities, what is the physics beyond Einstein’s
theory and how does it leave observational signatures. This NSF funded research
aims to address various such fundamental questions using techniques of loop
quantum gravity. A primary objective of this research would be to discover new
physics at the Planck scale which is responsible for the resolution of
singularities and robust observational signatures in the cosmic microwave
background by using a combination of rigorous analytical, phenomenological and
state-of-the-art numerical methods for various quantum gravitational
cosmological and black hole spacetimes. Progress in this area of research will
benefit communities and scientists engaged in classical and quantum gravity and
cosmology and may lead to answers to fundamental questions which are of interest
to the public. Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will be trained on
state-of-the-art research on quantum gravity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this research is to discover the new physics emerging from the quantum
properties of spacetime and generalize the results on quantum bounce, which
replaces the big bang singularity, to anisotropic and inhomogeneous spacetimes.
Using techniques of loop quantum gravity it aims to address fundamental issues
such as the fate of singularities in quantum gravity, the way quantum gravity
affects the physics of the very early universe and black holes, and reliable
potential observational signatures of quantum gravity in the cosmic microwave
background. These fundamental questions will be explored by: (i) systematically
investigating the quantization and resulting physics of different spacetimes
including anisotropies, inhomogeneities and black holes, (ii) exploring
phenomenological implications of quantum gravity by analyzing effects on
cosmological perturbations and (iii) addressing foundational issues in quantum
cosmology such as the quantum to classical transition and quantum probabilities.
This research is expected to significantly broaden and advance our understanding
of the physics of quantum gravity and lead to insights on the nature of
spacetime beyond Einstein’s theory of general
relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.