* 2110521
* PM: Atomic Physics Investigations of Rare Earth Elements: A Prologue to New Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Clayton Simien, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2026
* USD 345,585.00

This award supports the investigation of cerium (Ce) and terbium (Tb) as
prospective candidates for next generation optical atomic clocks and laser
cooling. Atomic clocks have been instrumental in the advancement of science and
technology in the twentieth century, leading to innovations such as global
positioning, advance communications, and tests of fundamental particle physics.
A next generation optical atomic clock would extend the capabilities of these
systems and will enable a renaissance of timing applications such as enhanced
security for data routing and communications, advanced earth and space time-
based navigation, geophysical surveying, testing Einstein's Theory of General
Relativity, and searches for variations in the fundamental constants of the
universe. Laser cooling is a technique that utilizes the mechanical action of
light to reduce the velocity of an atom in a gas. The use of lasers to cool
atoms opened up new frontiers in physics ranging from the formation of new
states of matter to enabling emerging quantum technologies. The goal of this
project is the extension of laser cooling to the proposed atomic species to
enable additional experimental discovery platforms to facilitate new scientific
explorations to address fundamental physics questions related to dark matter
searches and the composition of the universe. More specifically, this project
will investigate the atomic physics properties and implement laser cooling of Ce
and Tb for their potential uses as next generation time/frequency standards and
as ultracold ensembles with unique properties and dynamics. The project will
involve minority graduate, undergraduate, and high school students via existing
University of Alabama-Birmingham programs to participate in research projects in
the Simien Spectroscopy and Laser Cooling group. Additional outreach activities
will aim to get K-12 students interested in science and engineering by
performing physics and chemistry demonstrations at local schools in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an experimental research program
directed towards investigating spectroscopic, laser cooling, and collisional
properties of atomic cerium and terbium as it relates to optical clocks,
variation in fundamental constants for new physics searches beyond the Standard
Model, and dipolar quantum gases. These atoms have exotic electronic
configurations and large ground state magnetic moments that allows them to have
submerged shell optical clock transitions that are sensitive to variations in
the fine structure constant alpha, and exotic quantum gas phases with phenomenon
dominated by dipole-dipole interactions. In particular, the spectroscopic
studies will involve measurements of the hyperfine structure, isotope shifts,
and radiative lifetimes of strong electric dipole and spin-forbidden
transitions. The objective of this study is to determine Ce and Tb hyperfine
constants, isotope shifts, and natural linewidths and lifetimes. The hyperfine
constants define the ordering of the hyperfine peaks and contributions to the
energy shifts from the magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole interactions. The
isotope shifts are small deviations in the transition energies due to
differences between masses and the volumes of the nuclei. The natural linewidths
and lifetimes are associated with transition rates. The determination of these
spectroscopic properties are necessary for implementing laser cooling and
trapping of cerium and terbium. Furthermore, Ce and Tb will be laser cooled as a
first step towards performing precision measurements and studying atomic dipolar
physics. In addition, measurements of collision quenching cross sections,
pressure broadening, and frequency shifts will occur inside an atomic vapor
cell. These quantities will characterize the collision sensitivity and give
insight into the combined action of electron screening and configurational
interactions of the proposed Ce and Tb laser cooling and optical clock
transitions. This study will help determine the effect of collisions on the
accuracy of cerium or terbium as a frequency standard. This project is funded by
the Atomic, Molecular and Optical Experimental Physics program, the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), the Experimental Particle
Physics program, and the Experimental Nuclear Physics
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.