* 2110898
* Fundamental Studies in Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bradley Filippone, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,462,840.00

The PI will make precise measurements of the physical properties of the neutron
in three separate experiments. His main focus will be to develop a sensitive
search for the electrical properties of the neutron by searching for an electric
dipole moment (EDM). A neutron EDM could signal new physics beyond our current
understanding of physics and help to explain why the universe is dominated by
matter rather than equal amounts of matter and antimatter (as predicted by the
present laws of physics). The asymmetry between matter and antimatter remains
one of the great puzzles in our understanding of the evolution of the universe.
The PI will also participate in the UCNtau (Ultra-Cold Neutron Lifetime)
experiment where the goal is to trap neutrons to make a precise measurement of
the lifetime of a free neutron. This provides important information about the
weak nuclear force that is part of understanding the Big Bang at the beginning
of the universe as well as nuclear energy generation in the sun. Participation
in these experiments by postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, and
undergraduates helps provide the nation with a highly trained workforce in
Nuclear Science, with applications in medicine, technology, and national defense
as well as basic science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use newly developed
techniques to perform precision measurements with trapped Ultra-Cold Neutrons
(UCN) at Los Alamos and Oak Ridge National Laboratory. His group has recently
completed one of three independent analyses of the latest data from the UCNtau
experiment which uses a magnetic/gravity neutron trap at the Los Alamos UCN
facility. This data provides the world’s most precise measurement of the neutron
lifetime, with a factor of two smaller uncertainty compared to previously
published results. Future data taking will further improve the precision of the
experiment. The team also plays a leading role in the development and
construction of a new experiment which will be used to search for the Electric
Dipole Moment (EDM) of the free neutron. The nEDM@SNS experiment (at the
Spallation Neutron Source, ORNL) is designed to improve the sensitivity of the
measurement by two orders-of-magnitude compared to previous experiments. The
observation of a neutron EDM signals a violation of time-reversal symmetry and
could provide important input related to the origin of the matter-antimatter
asymmetry of the universe and new physical phenomena that may be responsible for
it. The critical cryogenic magnets and magnetic shielding of the experiment will
be commissioned and then installed and tested at the SNS using a cold-neutron
beam to perform neutron polarization and transmission studies during the time
frame of this grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.