* 2110071
* Louis Stokes B2B Alliance: Central Florida STEM Alliance Paths to Engagement : Central Florida STEM Alliance Paths to Engagement
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Kathleen Plinske, Valencia Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations to successfully complete high-quality degree programs in STEM. Over
the next three years, the Central Florida STEM Alliance (CFSA), an alliance of
four community colleges, will partner with three baccalaureate degree-granting
institutions (Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Florida Institute
of Technology, and Florida Polytechnic University) from the State University
System of Florida to support the retention, transfer, and successful graduation
of Alliance students in STEM fields. The alliance institutions include Valencia
Community College (Lead institution), College of Central Florida, Pasco-Hernando
State College, and Polk State College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the
Allianceâ€™s past successes, it will continue to work with students who are
historically underrepresented in STEM fields while studying innovative and
evidence-based strategies to maximize STEM opportunities for community college
students. The project will achieve a 30% net increase in the number of students
who successfully transfer into STEM baccalaureate degree programs over the
three-year project period. The CFSA will analyze innovative strategies aligned
with the intersection of sense of belonging, STEM identity, STEM self-efficacy,
and the impact these factors have on persistence in STEM pathways among
minoritized students. This project will more deeply examine the conditions under
which targeted students begin to identify as emerging STEM professionals and as
belonging to a STEM community, building on the LSAMP program theory and Tinto
Model (1987) by examining the social, emotional, educational, financial, and
cultural conditions that accelerate student progress in the community college
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.