* 2110082
* STEM Pathways Implementation-Only Alliance:  Central New York LSAMP Alliance (CNYLA)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Patricia Conklin, Ithaca College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2026
* USD 703,916.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the number of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations to successfully complete high-quality degree programs in STEM. The
new Central New York LSAMP Alliance (CNYLA) STEM Pathways Implementation-Only
(SPIO) projects consists of seven small two- and four-year colleges and
universities in New York state (Ithaca College, Utica College, State University
of New York at Cortland, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry,
Hobart and William Smith Colleges, Tompkins Cortland Community College, and
Herkimer County Community College). The alliance focuses on majors in natural
sciences, math, and computer science programs to expand high-impact practices
enabling historically underrepresented minority (URM) students to experience the
maximum benefits of a STEM education in a small school environment. It also aims
to strengthen transfer pathways to the STEM baccalaureate for URM students who
begin at a community college. The project team hypothesizes that minority
students will benefit from smaller school environments if given opportunities to
experience improved faculty and peer relationships; mentoring; strong support
for transfer between two-year and four-year schools; and early research
experiences to develop a sense of identity, self-efficacy, and belonging in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNYLA activities will support URM students to succeed
in a high-quality education as provided by smaller schools with a liberal arts
focus. As evidenced by the quality of the STEM graduates from the alliance
institutions, support that increases retention and graduation rates of URM
students will increase the number of highly competitive persons of color in STEM
fields, thus diversifying the perspectives needed to advance those fields. The
alliance activities and shared resources will strengthen the partnerships
between the member institutions and support a model of cooperation between
smaller schools to improve efficiency while maintaining high-quality student
support. The project will leverage faculty training and mentoring using best
practices to increase faculty competency to support students from rural
communities and change the classroom, lab, departmental, and institutional
cultures to become more inclusive. Project results will be disseminated broadly
via professional STEM conferences, scholarly publications, and especially to
small liberal arts undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.