* 2110526
* Photoswitchable Polymers for 2-Step Dry Transfer of 2D Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kenneth Liechti, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2024
* USD 607,146.00

Graphene and other atomically thin materials have very attractive mechanical,
electrical and thermal properties and their mass production via chemical vapor
deposition has greatly improved the opportunities to scale up the production of
devices that employ them. However, before these materials can be used, they need
to be transferred from their growth substrate to a target substrate for
microelectronics devices. This award addresses the transfer step, which is a
roadblock to manufacturing scalability. Historically, transfer has been
accomplished by so-called wet methods, where the growth substrate is dissolved
away. These are slow, wasteful, and often lead to relatively high levels of
contamination. Dry transfer methods developed here provide an attractive rapid
and “cleaner” alternative. Because these materials are so thin, they need to be
supported at all times and polymers are an attractive medium for removing the
materials from their growth substrate and depositing them on the target
substrate. High and low adhesion is required for the first and second steps,
respectively. The challenge being addressed in this award is the development of
novel polymers, whose adhesion can be switched on or off by shining light on
them. It is expected that successful development of such polymers will place the
US in a leadership role in manufacturing these atomically thin materials and
promote the fabrication of next generation electronics to be found in phones,
computers, cars and televisions. There is extensive educational outreach to K-12
and STEM audiences that highlights switchable adhesion and the polymers
developed in the course of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
research are to (i) develop a new class of photoswitchable adhesives that is
tailored specifically to the 2-step, dry transfer of graphene via (ii) a
thorough and deep characterization of the interactions of all the interfaces
that play a role in the transfer process and (iii) the design and fabrication of
a separation tool that is common to both transfer steps based on the
understanding obtained in the first two steps. This multidisciplinary effort is
highly coupled in that the development of this class of polymers will be guided
by both the characterization and tool development efforts, which will both
feedback into the fine tuning of composition, architecture and associated
adhesion characteristics of the polymers. From a fundamental materials
perspective, the impact of polymer composition and architecture (e.g., networks
vs surface-bound brushes) on the photoresponsive change in order and topology
will be unveiled and inform the design of next generation “smart” adhesives.
These light-responsive adhesive characteristics will be judiciously
characterized and applied to the efficient, large area 2-step dry (patterned)
transfer of graphene using an innovative and efficient advanced manufacturing
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.