* 2110575
* Pathfinder: Low-loss 2 UM Faraday Isolators for 3G Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Rodica Martin, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

In September 2015 the twin Advanced LIGO detectors directly observed for the
first time the ripples from the merger of two black holes that travelled through
space for more than one billion years. More than 50 other detections followed,
in coincidence with the Virgo detector, from a variety of sources, including the
collision of two neutron stars, an event observed by the broad astronomical
community in both gravitational-waves and light, marking the beginning of the
new era of multi-messenger astronomy. A new generation of detectors with much
increased sensitivity will observe gravitational waves from sources across the
cosmic time of the universe. They will make more frequent detections, and from a
wider variety of sources, with extraordinary sky localization accuracy. This
will help us expand our understanding of the dynamic of the universe and of the
warped nature of the spacetime and will surely astonish us with new and
unexpected discoveries. This new generation of detectors is envisioned with much
larger mirrors, cryogenically cooled to remove thermal vibrations and lower
thermal noise that will likely operate at longer laser wavelength. Low coating
absorption for cryogenically cooled silicon seems to favor a nominal wavelength
of 2 microns. Optical components known as Faraday isolators are key components
in determining the sensitivity of gravitational wave detectors by rejecting the
scattered light from building up and resonating in the interferometer. Their
performance is strongly affected by the operating wavelength, while high-power
operation presents additional challenges. This work will address the development
of low-loss Faraday isolators at 2 microns, including high-power
characterization as well as research on low-absorption materials for improved
isolator performance. The proposed project will continue to provide research
training and mentoring to undergraduate students at Montclair State University
in experimental gravitational physics. It will help the students develop
practical scientific skills in areas of optics and lasers, spectroscopy, vacuum
systems and cryogenics. In addition, it will give them opportunities to interact
with other researchers and engineers in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports the development of low-loss Faraday isolators for 3G detectors,
including high power studies for near-future upgrades of the LIGO detectors.
Parasitic interferences due to backscatter from moving surfaces are limiting
factors on the sensitivity of gravitational wave detectors, and improvements in
the performance of Faraday isolators directly boost the sensitivity range.
Developing and designing low-loss Faraday isolators at 2 micron is important in
several areas, including the input optics, output and squeezer path, and the
pre-stabilized lasers. This award also supports broadband and cryogenic studies
of low-absorption magneto-optical materials for 3G gravitational wave
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.