* 2110181
* Aiming at Discovery -- Searching for Continuous Waves from Spinning Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* J. Keith Riles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 900,000.00

The discoveries of gravitational waves from colliding black holes and from
colliding neutron stars marked key milestones in science, simultaneously
confirming fundamental predictions of Einstein's General Relativity, while
opening up an entirely new field of astronomy. The detection of continuous
gravitational waves from rotating galactic neutron stars will mark another major
milestone because such sources are expected to continue emitting for long
durations, allowing follow-up investigation of increasing precision, including
correlation with potential signals in the radio, optical, X-ray and gamma-ray
bands. Combining these gravitational and electromagnetic signals will provide
critical insight into the poorly known structure of these exotic stars. The
research to be carried out will provide training to undergraduate and graduate
students in state-of-the-art science at the frontier of
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will focus on a number of specific
areas related to the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave
Observatory (Advanced LIGO) Experiment: Searches for continuous gravitational
waves from 1) unknown isolated neutron stars anywhere in our galaxy; 2) isolated
neutron stars at the centers of young, nearby supernova remnants; and 3) both
isolated and binary known pulsars. In addition, detector characterization of
Advanced LIGO interferometers focused on spectral line identification and
mitigation will be carried out, in order to improve searches for nearly
monochromatic continuous gravitational waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.