* 2110033
* Deep Learning Accelerated Inverse Design of Lab-Scale Energy Efficient Heterojunctions for Wide-Bandgap Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Chen Li, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

Efficient and reliable wide-bandgap high power transistors based on group III-
nitrides (GaN, AlN, InN, etc.) are increasingly needed in today’s most demanding
industries such as electric vehicles, data centers, radars, and consumer
electronics. The functions of these systems rely heavily on the efficiency of
removing excess heat from the devices’ active area, which is composed of
function materials, substrates, and associated interfaces and heterojunctions,
the dominant factor determining the overall interfacial thermal resistance (ITR)
of the devices. Therefore, appropriate design and manufacturing of corresponding
interfaces with minimized ITR are crucial to developing next-generation wide-
bandgap devices. However, due to the immense search space of interfacial
structures, it is impractical to evaluate all potential interfacial
configurations using current trail-and-error experimental or computational
approaches. One of the promising strategies is to use machine learning
techniques, which are transforming the engineering field spanning from property
predictions to inverse design. The overarching goal of this project is to
develop novel deep neural network algorithms and workflow for the inverse design
of lab-scale tailored interfacial structures to realize thermally efficient
high-power wide-bandgap devices, along with experimental validation and
demonstration. The success of this project will provide computational design
tools and experimental fabrication protocols, not only to facilitate disruptive
developments of key high-power electronic systems by breaking the bottleneck of
thermal inefficiency issue, but also to speed up the material-to-industry
processes. The project offers a unified platform to promote interdisciplinary
collaborations spanning computational thermal science, experimental physics, and
data science. The developed algorithms would benefit all engineers who study
structure-device property relationships. This project will also increase public
understanding and appreciation of machine learning for accelerating structure
discovery and inspiring young researchers to pursue careers in STEM. Minority
graduate students will get involved and trained in this interdisciplinary
research project to strengthen high quality workforce in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aiming to address the main obstacles in the inverse
design of heterojunctions for thermally efficient III-nitrides transistor
devices, a set of key deep learning based techniques in the full inverse design
pipeline will be developed: (1) deep neural network potentials will be
developed, for calculating interatomic force constants to accurately and
efficiently deal with large number of compositions with hundreds to thousands of
nano-scale interfaces via nonequilibrium Green’s function method, which is not
feasible for other traditional computational approaches. This will be
facilitated by using frequency-resolved phonon transmission coefficient curves
as the learning target in neural network training, which is the dominant factor
in determining desired ITR across the functional interface or heterojunction and
is unique for specific interface and provides more detailed hidden information
of interfacial phonon transport. (2) powerful deep learning and spatial deep
convolutional neural networks will be exploited in order to learn the features
of phonon transmission curves and then unravel the complex, nonlinear, and
usually implicit relationship between atomic structures of heterostructures and
interfacial thermal resistance. (3) Genetic algorithms and the newest generative
adversarial networks for the inverse design of hypothetical interfaces or
heterojunctions will be developed. (4) A versatile and state-of-the-art
technique, namely pulsed laser deposition, will be used to synthesize atomically
thin films that have been theoretically proposed, with thickness approaching a
monolayer, and their ITR will be validated. By combining computational thermal
science with data science and experiment teams, this project will transform the
study of complex interfacial thermal transport process using deep learning
strategy and significantly accelerate the exploration process for optimal
interfacial structures to achieve best thermal management performance and thus
spur the practical implementation in semiconductor
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.