* 2110158
* Dynamics of Matter and Light-Matter Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Doerte Blume, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

While many everyday life experiences are governed by the laws of classical
mechanics, important technological applications such as, e.g., the laser
pointer, rely on quantum effects. Describing the time dynamics of quantum
systems with multiple degrees of freedom from first principles is a highly
challenging task. Correspondingly, many aspects of the quantum dynamics remain
elusive despite the fact that most processes in nature are time dependent. This
project considers two dynamical quantum systems, a pure matter system and a
matter-photon system. Understanding the dynamics of these quantum mechanical
systems will not only significantly advance fundamental science questions but
also open the door for the next generation of quantum devices that take
advantage of quantum coherences and entanglement. The research effort will
contribute to educating the next generation of technologically literate
workforce, thereby contributing to helping remedy the severe “skill gap” in the
State of Oklahoma. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will significantly advance
two topics. (1) The dynamical control of the weakly-bound helium dimer, trimers,
and tetramers will be explored. Motivated by exciting experimental progress, it
will be investigated how to efficiently couple rotational and vibrational
degrees of freedom through intense laser pulses of ~100 to 1000 fs duration. The
goal is to induce and control alignment dynamics that is distinctly different
from that of any molecule studied today, including that of heavy diatomic
molecules such as the iodine molecule. The studies are expected to open an
entirely new research direction, where initial universal states are being
manipulated with intense lasers that probe the system’s non-universal energy and
length scales. (2) Master equation approaches applicable to situations where the
photon bath, coupled to emitters, has a non-trivial mode structure or where the
dynamics is non-Markovian, will be developed. A key goal is to explore how a
structured bath can be used to control collective emitter dynamics. The studies
are expected to contribute significantly to the understanding of the dynamics of
few-level systems coupled to an environment, focusing on regimes where many-body
correlations are expected to be driven by few-body physics. The tools employed
will range from analytical calculations to numerical approaches that utilize
neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.