* 2110926
* III: Small: Graph Generative Deep Learning for Protein Structure Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Liang Zhao, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 386,687.00

Decades of scientific enquiry beyond molecular biology have demonstrated just
how fundamental form is to function, whether in understanding phase transitions
in statistical physics, predicting the evolution and dynamics of real networks
in network science, or successfully steering an articulated robot arm to a
target pose. A fundamental question in all these scientific domains is how to
effectively explore the space of all possible forms of a dynamic system to
uncover those that satisfy non-trivial constraints imposed by function. The most
visible instantiation of this question in computational structural biology is
de-novo protein structure prediction (PSP). PSP takes a structure-driven view of
understanding molecular mechanisms in the cell and seeks to determine one or
more biologically-active/native structures of a protein from knowledge of its
chemical composition. Elucidating such structures is central to inferring the
biological activities of a rapidly-growing number of protein-encoding gene
sequences and thus advancing our understanding of the inner workings of a cell.
While PSP has a natural formulation under stochastic optimization, current
efforts are approaching a saturation point. This project proposes a radically-
different, complementary approach. Inspired by recent momentum in generative
deep learning, the project approaches de-novo PSP under the umbrella of
generative, adversarial deep learning. The approach is firmly grounded in
information integration and informatics, as it proposes generative models that
learn in an adversarial setting to generate native-like tertiary protein
structures. The project benefits researchers in machine learning, deep learning,
and information integration with interests in graph generative models, molecule
generation, and protein structure prediction. The project will result in open-
source codes, online teaching modules and tutorials, publicly-available data and
models, workshops, software demos, and will broaden the participation in
computing of under-represented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities in this
project chart a new algorithmic path under the umbrella of information
integration and informatics to address the current impasse in structure-function
related problems in molecular biology. The focus is on the de-novo protein
structure prediction problem. With experimental structure determination lagging
behind the rapidly-growing number of protein-encoding gene sequences by high-
throughput sequencing technologies, computational approaches have a central role
in molecular biology research. Great progress has been made through stochastic
optimization, but current approaches are experiencing diminishing returns,
partly due to fundamental challenges concerning the resource-aware exploration-
exploitation control in complex search spaces and inherently inaccurate scoring
functions. This project puts forth a novel approach to structure prediction
under the umbrella of generative, adversarial deep learning, leveraging recent
advances and opportunities in graph generative learning, adversarial learning,
and deep learning. Generative models learn in an adversarial setting to generate
native-like tertiary protein structures. The proposed activities span multiple
disciplines and promise to make general contributions in machine learning, deep
learning, explainable AI, molecular modeling, and computational biology. The
work will also benefit researchers and students interested in modeling complex,
dynamic systems. The investigators will disseminate the proposed research via
open-source codes in C++ and Python so as to reach diverse communities of
researchers and students, online teaching modules and tutorials, trained models
and data. They will actively educate involved communities through workshops,
tutorials, and software demonstrations. This interdisciplinary project also
creates excellent opportunities to broaden the participation in computing of
under-represented students of all backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.