* 2110397
* NSF-BSF: SHF: Small: Efficient, Automatic, and Trustworthy Smart Contract Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Clark Barrett, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 492,818.00

Blockchain-based cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ethereum are becoming
widespread, and come with great promise: instead of centralized financial
institutions that act as middlemen for money transfers, blockchains offer a
decentralized ledger, in which transactions occur directly between its
participants. Such transactions can range from simple transfers between peers to
complex contracts with various conditions. These are written as computer
programs that are called "smart contracts." The potential of smart contracts and
blockchains on the world economy is huge; however, they also carry many risks.
The direct impact smart contracts have on actual assets requires a high level of
assurance before this technology can be widely accepted and trusted.
Verification methods for traditional software fall short in verifying smart
contracts, and hence there is a pressing need to adapt these methods and develop
new techniques in order to be able to verify the correctness and safety of smart
contracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the challenge by
developing algorithms capable of reasoning about smart contracts, and
implementing them as part of state of the art automated reasoning tools. The
project has three main objectives: first, developing algorithms for reasoning
about nested datatypes and sequences, which are useful for modeling the
execution of smart contracts within a blockchain, as well as for their
combination with more traditional data structures; second, using these
algorithms for reasoning about real-world smart contracts and collecting and
developing challenge benchmarks from them; and third, automatically producing
proofs for the verification results of smart contracts, which can either be
checked independently or incorporated into proof assistants. Given the current
limitations of traditional verification methods and the rapid growth of smart
contracts and blockchains, this project intends to increase trust in this
technology, which in turn can enable it to fulfill its
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.