* 2110720
* Rare Event Searches at MIT
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Lindley Winslow, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2024
* USD 634,000.00

The nature of dark matter is one of the great mysteries of physics. Second only
to this is the mystery of the universe’s observed matter-antimatter asymmetry.
Axions and Majorana neutrinos, respectively, are as-yet undiscovered particles
which may participate in providing the answers. Axions are a well-motivated dark
matter candidate while Majorana neutrinos can produce the matter antimatter
asymmetry of the universe through a process called leptogenesis. Rare-event
searches are the only feasible techniques to explore these models. For this
reason, the types of experiments are the highest priority for particle and
nuclear physics, respectively. This award will support two efforts: the search
for micro-eV axions with ABRACADABRA and DMRadio, and the neutrinoless double-
beta decay (0νββ) search KamLAND-Zen. These efforts build on the expertise
within the MIT group, and both experimental efforts use novel multidisciplinary
techniques from deep learning to quantum sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts are two-fold: the development of robust vibration isolation for
cryogenic experiments and the training of the next generation of scientists.
This award will bring together disparate communities from gravitational wave
detection to 0νββ for a workshop on vibration isolation. Undergraduate research
is a priority for the PI since it is critical for recruiting and retaining
physics students. This award will sponsor a study of undergraduate research at
MIT and the development of best practices to engage a diverse group of students
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The string and QCD axion models motivate a
search for Axion dark matter with masses below 10^−6 eV. The ABRACADABRA and
Dark Matter Radio experiments have joined forces to probe this mass-range as the
DMRadio experiment. This is a staged program that builds on the success of
ABRA-10 cm, expands to DMRadio-50L to test the resonant readout, then moves to
higher frequencies at the m^3-scale to search down to the QCD axion.
Neutrinoless double beta decay is sought in the KamLAND-Zen experiment. Deep
learning techniques will be used for training and benchmarking the search
algorithm. The tuning of the KLZ detector is non-trivial because many of the
Monte Carlo (MC) inputs have the same gross effect and the experiments are
tuning on minor deviations of the light curves in various dimensions. The group
is exploring generative adversarial networks (GAN) as a way to tackle this
problem. The main use of GANs is the generation of artificial images. The
adversarial network is good at picking up many small features to increase the
accuracy of the classifier for candidate rare events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.