* 2110237
* I-Corps: A device for defensive charging to augment the security of mobile devices
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Abdul Serwadda, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a smart phone charging technology that protects the privacy of
users who charge their phones at public charging hubs. By virtue of being
public, such hubs are a prime target for tampering by malicious actors who could
embed illicit meters that perform power analytics to glean information about
keys typed, websites visited, multimedia content consumed, etc. The proposed
system mitigates these attacks and may be of significant value to frequent
travelers given that they often find themselves having to charge their phones at
hubs that are within the jurisdiction of entities that might not be trustworthy.
Beyond individual frequent travelers, the proposed technology also may be of
value to companies seeking to mitigate the security threat posed by employees
who connect to the company network using their phones. As smart phones
increasingly become central to activities such as communication, banking,
storage of sensitive data, etc., the proposed technology has the potential to
significantly augment end-user security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a defensive charging scheme designed to
mitigate power side-channel attacks during the charging process. The hardware
form of the proposed technology is a charger or charger add-on that morphs the
power drawn by the phone during charging. It consists of a micro-controller and
metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) that switch on and
off random combinations of resistors while the phone is being charged. The
variation in resistance, in turn, produces the effect needed to obfuscate the
true footprint of the phone’s power draw. The software form of the solution uses
bogus operations (e.g., random image rotations) in the background while the
phone is being charged. These operations cause disruptions in computer
processing unit (CPU) and memory load needed to obfuscate the phone’s true power
draw. The system has been designed to minimize the impact on charging time and
the CPU and memory used by the software approach. By virtue of being external to
the phone, the hardware option does not consume CPU/memory on the phone. As a
software solution, this technology may offer convenience given that it runs
automatically during charging and could easily be updated as threats and the
defense mechanism evolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.