* 2110279
* Non-Adiabatic Photonic Processes in Molecular Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Viatcheslav Kokoouline, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 231,094.00

When light propagates through a gas of molecules, such as air, it can remove
electrons from the molecules, the processes known as photoionization. This
process and the one reverse to it, recombination, play an extremely important
role in modern technology, in atmospheric sciences, in astrophysics, and many
other fields of research. This is the reason why there is a growing need for
theoretical methods able to interpret and predict behavior of molecular gases
under ionizing radiation. Although there has been significant progress in a
theoretical description of atomic photoionization, the situation with theory in
molecular gases is far from being satisfactory. A reliable theoretical
description of ionization in molecular gases is complicated due to the complex
quantum-mechanical structure of molecules. The main science question of the
present project is whether theory can describe photoionization of diatomic
molecules, such as those present in air, especially in situations where
experimental data do not exist. The major goal of the project is to develop
theoretical methods able to model photoionization of linear molecules (and
negatively charged molecular ions). An important broader impact of the proposed
research is the development of a web-based platform and a related methodology to
teach Quantum Mechanics in studio mode-like classes. The platform allows
students and their instructors to perform numerical experiments for all main
concepts of Quantum Mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The photoionization spectrum
of molecular nitrogen, N2, will be computed for photon energies above the
ionization threshold from the ground vibronic state. Transition dipole moment
functions between the N2 ground electronic state and three lowest electronic
states of N2+ will be computed and made available to the community. Vibrational
and rotation motion of N2 and N2+ will be accounted for as well as non-adiabatic
coupling between electronic states of the N2+ ion. For this purpose, the
multichannel quantum defect theory (MQDT) and rovibronic frame transformation
will be employed. Using the developed theoretical model of photoionization in
N2, cavity-free lasing of N2+, observed in several experimental groups, will be
studied. The second objective of the project is to study time-delay and
thresholds laws in photodetachment. The PI will model and study photodetachment
spectra of molecular anions, taking into account non-adiabatic effects,
interaction of the photoelectron with rotational and vibrational motion of the
molecule. The study will include the dependence of main features in the spectra
(such as resonances, threshold behavior...) on the dipole moment of the
molecule, the rotational and vibrational structure of the molecule, and the
presence of one or several dipolar electronic states. The study will be
performed using a FEM (Finite-element method) code able to treat collisions of
electrons with linear molecules, solving the Schrodinger equation for electronic
and rovibrational motion of the target at the same time. The time-delay in the
photodetachment process will be considered and a scheme to observe the time-
delay in photodetachment experiments will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.