* 2110049
* Spectroscopy and Quantum-State Manipulation of Excited Rb Atoms and Molecules Using Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Georg Raithel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 518,629.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Atomic spectroscopy is important in
metrology, such as time measurement, and in efforts to learn about the
fundamental workings of atoms and molecules. For instance, the 5S-5P-5D
transition of the rubidium atom is used in practical vapor-cell atomic clocks,
and its wavelength is used by the Consultative Committee for Length (CCL) as one
of its references for realizing the meter. In the project, properties of the
quantum states of the rubidium atoms are measured that can affect the accuracy
of such devices. The laser-spectroscopic investigations conducted in the project
also aim at a better understanding of highly excited atoms (Rydberg atoms) in
laser atom traps, at the exploration of a new type of molecule that involves
Rydberg atoms, and at high-precision measurements of Rydberg-atom transitions
that can help address current questions in fundamental physics (including, for
instance, what is the exact size of building blocks of matter such as the
proton). Rydberg atoms are a critical component in numerous quantum devices that
are being worked on in science and technology, making a thorough understanding
of their physics and of the breadth of their possible applications an important
goal. The research engages graduate students in the fields of laser physics,
optics, quantum mechanics and quantum measurement technologies, which are areas
that are highly sought-after in academia, industry and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
project work includes an investigation of the AC polarizability and the photo-
ionization cross section of the rubidium 5D3/2 level in a strong 1064-nm laser
field. Lasers are stabilized and scanned over several GHz, while being
referenced to lasers locked on atomic vapor cells. AC shifts and photo-
ionization-induced line broadening of the Rb 5D3/2 level in the 1064-nm laser
field are on the same order of magnitude, allowing a measurement of both
quantities. In the same setup, laser-spectroscopic studies are conducted to
explore the physics of Rydberg atoms in molecules and in optical lattices.
Rydberg levels can become heavily mixed in GHz-deep lattices, leading to novel
types of potential energy curves, which are measured. The project also aims at
research on a new type of molecule between a Rydberg atom and a positive ion. In
related work, high-precision Rydberg-level spectroscopy is conducted using an
optical-lattice modulation technique, a novel sub-Doppler spectroscopic approach
to Rydberg-atom spectroscopy that is based upon the ponderomotive interaction of
bound electrons with fields rather than the more common electric-dipole
interaction. All-optical preparation of circular Rydberg atoms, which allow for
the most precise of Rydberg-atom-based spectroscopies, using a time-orbiting
optical lattice is pursued. The work is conducted by a principal investigator
and several graduate students, and it will offer opportunities for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.