* 2110060
* Searches for Gravitational Wave Transients:  Data Analysis for Advanced LIGO and A+ LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sergey Klimenko, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 719,999.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Gravitational waves (GW), predicted by Albert Einsteinâ€™s theory of General
Relativity, are the ripples in the fabric of space-time created by relativistic
astrophysical systems. Gravitational waves have eluded detection for a hundred
years, until 2015, when Advanced LIGO observed GW from two colliding black
holes, starting a revolution in the field of multi-messenger astronomy. This
detection confirmed a major prediction of General Relativity and opened an
unprecedented new window onto the cosmos. Gravitational waves provide a direct
probe of complex astrophysical systems. Since 2015, LIGO and its European
partner instrument Virgo have reported more than 50 GW events, which are
currently under active investigation. Numerous public alerts have been sent to
the astronomical community, enabling the multi-messenger observations of those
events. In the next few years hundreds of sources are expected to be detected as
advanced LIGO reaches its design sensitivity and other instruments join the
world-wide network of GW detectors. Even higher detection rates are expected
when the LIGO is fully upgraded to its A+ configuration. GW observations will
address key research questions including the formation and evolution of black
holes and neutron stars, the role of compact objects in the emission of high
energy radiation, the properties of nuclear matter, and the nature of gamma-ray-
bursts and probe the structure and evolution of the Universe, and, possibly,
find physics beyond General Relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research
projects will study some of the most extreme astrophysical events and hold a
promise for discoveries of entirely new astrophysical phenomena. Leveraging the
extensive experience at UF, the projects outlined here will utilize detection
and reconstruction algorithms that use minimal model assumptions and that are
capable of detecting GW transients in a wide range of the source parameters,
including yet unknown sources. Among the primary detection targets are the
recently discovered Intermediate-Mass-Black-Hole (IMBH) objects, hierarchical
BBH mergers, and the core-collapse supernovae, which will address a number of
open questions in astrophysics. The proposed activities will extend the most
promising GW searches for compact binary sources into the binary parameter space
not explored yet by existing template-based algorithms. These searches have the
potential to study the IMBH sources, constrain the supernovae pair instability
mass gap, look inside the galactic nuclei by detecting hierarchical binaries and
enable precision tests of General Relativity in the strong field regime by
comparing the reconstructed signal waveforms with numerical relativity
predictions. Rapid source reconstruction and sky localization will enable joint
observations with electromagnetic telescopes and neutrino detectors advancing
the field of multi-messenger astronomy. This award also supports the planned
upgrade of the baseline data analysis algorithms for the LIGO O4 and O5 runs and
increases the scientific potential of the future GW
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.