* 2110439
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Hybrid Green-Gray Coastal Infrastructure Processes and Performance Uncertainties for Flood Hazard Mitigation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Daniel Cox, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2024
* USD 233,100.00

The vulnerability of shore regions to coastal flooding is increasing. Coastal
communities need resilient and sustainable adaptation alternatives to mitigate
damage and protect lives during hazard events. Conventional structural (gray)
methods (i.e., bulkheads, revetments) have been implemented to stabilize and
protect coastlines. Natural (green) and hybrid green-gray solutions have gained
attention as effective alternatives. Green methods may provide ecological,
economic, and cultural co-benefits in addition to protecting new development or
expanding the service life of legacy infrastructure near developed coastlines.
However, a fundamental lack of understanding of the performance and associated
uncertainty of green and hybrid infrastructure limits these systemsâ€™ broad
implementation. In this project, the investigators will develop a framework to
quantify the response of hybrid natural-structural systems to water hazards. A
targeted large scale physical model investigation and numerical model campaign
will focus on two system types common to southern Florida: mangrove + bulkhead
and mangrove + revetment. The project will leverage the expertise of nature-
based engineering, ecology, and biology experts and stakeholders from
government, industry, and research institutions. A Research Coordination and
Advisory Network (RCAN) will be created to inform experimental design and
disseminate project outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
leverage data from previous field investigations characterizing mangrove
geometric and mechanical properties and inherent variability to inform the
construction of a large scale physical model and targeted numerical model
simulations. These data will allow the investigators to disaggregate system
component effects on hydraulic response and to validate and compare model
limits. The validated numerical models will be used to investigate the expected
performance of hybrid systems over a range of incident hydrodynamic conditions,
vegetation configurations, and structural geometries. This work will enable
quantification, with propagated uncertainties, of wave response to hybrid
vegetation-structural systems, including temporal variations such as time to
system maturity and expected future conditions (e.g., relative sea level rise).
Fundamental processes affecting wave transformation through these systems will
be identified and synthesized to inform the design of these systems for enhanced
coastal resilience. The project will expand fundamental understanding of wave
interaction with natural and hybrid systems through two approaches: (1) Identify
and parameterize fundamental interactions among incident wave and surge
conditions, bathymetry, emergent vegetation, and subsequent overtopping of
coastal bulkheads and revetments; and (2) Quantify interaction uncertainties to
enable stochastic approaches for assessing the range of expected performance in
hybrid coastal systems. By identifying fundamental relationships between
incident wave conditions, surge level, vegetation, and structural details, the
investigators will determine performance metrics for hazard reduction (wave
overtopping reduction, wave force reduction) as a function of structural
geometry (crest elevation, slope, permeability), vegetation characteristics
(width, density, emergence), and environmental parameters (surge level, wave
height, wave period). Numerical models validated by targeted physical model
tests will be extrapolated to other hydrodynamic conditions and
vegetation/structural configurations to determine exceedance probabilities of
performance metric thresholds and sensitivity to system geometry and epistemic
and aleatory uncertainties. The RCAN will bring together domain experts in
engineering, ecology, and policy to inform the project and broadly disseminate
project outcomes, with the goal of catalyzing the successful implementation of
research findings into practice. Student training will be integrated throughout
the project through opportunities to engage with the RCAN and contribute to
physical and numerical modeling efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.