* 2110212
* Non-Hermitian Physics in Ultracold Atoms and Photonics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Chuanwei Zhang, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 243,001.00

Quantum and optical technologies are emerging as two major research frontiers
that could potentially revolutionize computing, communication, security,
measurement, and sensing for modern science and engineering. A common foundation
for these technologies is that part of the underlying quantum equation, the
Hamiltonian, that governs the internal phases and dynamics of the physical
system. A quantum Hamiltonian that describes the unitary time-evolution of real
physical observables is said to be Hermitian (named after the mathematician
Charles Hermite). This work explores the dynamics of systems described by a non-
Hermitian Hamiltonian. Significant theoretical and experimental progress has
been made in exploring non-Hermitian physics in classical photonic systems.
Advances in classical systems naturally suggest extending the studies to quantum
platforms such as ultracold atoms, which possess major ingredients that are
lacking in classical photonics. This project investigates the non-Hermitian
physics in both classical photonics and ultracold atoms and explores their
device applications. The proposed research will not only pave the way for non-
Hermitian control of photonic and ultracold atomic systems for many important
applications, but also influence fundamental research in optical and cold atom
physics. The project provides a diverse platform for both graduate and
undergraduate students to explore theoretical cold atomic, optical and condensed
matter physics. The scope of this project also includes specific outreach
activities for K-12 students and involving students from under-represented
groups, such as women and minority students, for broadening
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the proposal is to
investigate the non-Hermitian driven topological physics in classical photonics
and non-Hermitian quantum physics in ultracold atoms. Specific projects include:
i) construction and characterization of new topological photonic lattices (e.g.,
fractal and 3D higher-order topological insulator) through Hermitian and non-
Hermitian control; ii) study of novel topological phases (e.g. coupled edge
states facilitated topological photonic lattice) arising from unique continuous
hyperbolic metamaterials; iii) generation and control of non-Hermitian ultracold
atomic matters utilizing their quantum, interacting, or fermionic properties. A
diverse set of physical problems and systems will be investigated using
versatile analytic and numerical tools (e.g., mean field theory, non-Hermitian
density-matrix-renormalization-group algorithm, etc.). The proposed projects
will not only lead to the experimental advances for exploring non-Hermitian
matter, but also provide platforms for developing novel photonic and quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.