* 2110109
* RAPID: Curtailing Nosocomial Amplification of COVID-19
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Assefaw Gebremedhin, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2024
* USD 195,381.00

One of the populations hardest hit during an emerging epidemic are frontline
healthcare workers. Infections in healthcare workers and in healthcare settings
produce two separate but related challenges. The first, and most obvious, is
that sick or dying healthcare workers cannot care for patients, causing labor
shortages right at the moment when demand on a healthcare system is likely
increasing due to the epidemic. The second problem is that, because of how
difficult it is to control infections within hospitals, the epidemic itself can
accelerate once it reaches the healthcare system, causing a rapid increase in
the number of cases. Examples of this phenomena, which we call “nosocomial
amplification”, are common, including both previous major coronavirus epidemics
before COVID-19 (SARS and MERS) as well as Ebola. This project will seek to
model and understand what factors within a hospital can prevent this from
happening, to increase the resilience of healthcare systems. Outcomes from this
effort will be informing behavioral guidelines for healthcare systems. Other
broader impacts from this project include training and professional development
opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The researchers will adapt an
existing model of within-hospital infection transmission to COVID-19 and combine
this model with a spatially explicit agent-based model of the healthcare
facilities in the state of North Carolina. This approach allows for the
representation both of the healthcare environment, as well as the community
where initial cases are seeded, where healthcare workers can infect – and be
infected by – their community, etc. It also allows for the modeling of facility-
level impacts of state-level decisions and allows us to address the question of
how to best protect the health of both patients and healthcare workers in an
environment where both are at significant risk of infection and critical
supplies such as PPE are not necessarily unlimited. Simultaneously, they will
collect data from hospitals in the SHEA Research Network on the changes brought
on to staffing and clinical practice from COVID-19, such as whether or not the
ratio of nurses to patients has changed, as well as ascertaining to what extent
modeling has been used in hospital decision making, and whether or not it has
been useful in that role. This project will thus have both a robust and
sophisticated model for the interaction between hospitals at a granular level
and the surrounding community, as well as timely parameter estimates from a
diverse array of hospitals on how COVID-19 has changed their practices, as well
as how modeling might be better tailored to inform the control of both COVID-19
and future epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.