* 2110430
* Collaborative Research: Isotopic Fingerprinting of Nitrous Oxide Emissions from the United States Corn Belt
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Wendy Yang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2024
* USD 360,970.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The goal of this research is to increase the
understanding of the sources and dynamics of nitrous oxide emissions from the US
Corn Belt through a combination of isotopic fingerprinting, tall tower
observations, and regional-scale inverse modeling. Nitrous oxide is a long-lived
trace gas that contributes to climate warming and the destruction of
stratospheric ozone. Agricultural regions are a major source of nitrous oxide to
the atmosphere, but large uncertainties exist in the magnitude and pathways of
their emissions from these regions. This project will provide new knowledge
about nitrous oxide source dynamics that will be critical to designing effective
strategies for mitigating nitrous oxide emissions from heterogeneous
agricultural landscapes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research
project are to: (1) Establish intensive field campaigns to quantify
representative isotopic signatures for nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from
agricultural soils, natural soils, and agricultural drainage networks typical of
the Corn Belt; (2) Make high-frequency, high-precision tall tower (185 m)
observations of N2O isotopocules that will be used in combination with
atmospheric transport modeling to characterize the isotopic composition of N2O
emissions at the regional scale; and (3) Use a dual-tracer inverse modeling
approach that leverages concentration and isotopic constraints to partition N2O
emissions into direct emissions from agricultural soils as well as indirect
emissions arising from N leaching and volatilization
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.