* 2110170
* IIS:RI Theoretical Foundations of Reinforcement Learning: From Tabula Rasa to Function Approximation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Simon Du, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Reinforcement learning, a technique that trains intelligent agents to make
decisions, has become the central algorithmic paradigm for various applications,
such as robotics, healthcare, manufacturing production, game playing, and
transportation. However, reinforcement learning is equally infamous for
demanding significant amounts of data and computing resources. This project aims
to contribute to the fundamental understanding of reinforcement learning to
reveal its inherent difficulties and develop efficient algorithms with strong
theoretical guarantees. The results of the project are readily applicable to
solving practical resource-hungry problems. The success of this project also
requires new algorithmic techniques and mathematical tools in a variety of
disciplines. An education plan is integrated into this project; the investigator
will develop new courses, mentor students, organize workshops, and deliver
lessons to high school students through the University of Washingtonâ€™s Partner
School program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two major components. The
first thrust studies the most canonical setting, tabula rasa reinforcement
learning. The investigator will identify fundamental limits and develop optimal
algorithms for several problems of both theoretical and practical interests:
worst-case complexity, adaptation to problem structure, and data collection for
batch RL. The second thrust is motivated by the modern usage of RL, where
function approximation is employed for generalization over a large state space.
The investigator will systematically examine the necessary and sufficient
conditions that permit efficient learning algorithms for three of the most
popular function approximation schemes: value-based, policy-based, and model-
based. For both thrusts, the investigator will utilize the inherent
combinatorial structures of reinforcement learning to characterize its
fundamental hardness and design efficient algorithms. In addition to theoretical
developments, the project also aims to implement all algorithms developed as
open-source software and evaluate them on benchmark simulation
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.