* 2110676
* SBIR Phase I:  A simple, targeted and flexible method for transferring value-added genes from wild relatives of crop plants
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Kanwardeep Singh, BIOTECH NATURALE, INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve agricultural production. Of the global production
differences with projected yields, about 25% results from disease and insects,
and the remaining 75% is due to abiotic stresses. Wild relatives of crop plants
harbor tremendous number of value-added genes for various agronomic traits
including biotic and abiotic stress tolerance, but their transfer using
currently available methods is practically impossible as it is time-consuming,
technically challenging, and risky as undesirable traits may be transferred with
the target trait - rendering it unusable in the field. The proposed project will
develop a novel method to transfer useful genes from wild relatives in a precise
and targeted manner, without the accompanying undesirable traits. This will
improve agricultural yields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
develop a quick, targeted, and precise method of transferring value-added genes
from wild relatives into crops, without accompanying unwanted genes (linkage
drag). While the crop plants can easily be crossed to their wild relatives,
chromosomes of wild relatives do not pair with their crop plant counterparts.
This is due to a strict chromosome pairing and recombination control that is
present in all crop plants. Lack of chromosome pairing between crop and wild
relative chromosomes results in the transfer of whole chromosomes/arms carrying
thousands of genes of which only one or two are useful. Tremendous efforts over
the last 70 years have resulted in the transfer of 540 genes from wild relatives
into wheat. While each transfer effort took more than 10 years, fewer than 10 of
these genes are actually present in wheat varieties, mainly because of the
associated negative effects of linkage drag as almost all transfers are complete
chromosomes, arms or large segments. The proposed project will develop a novel
method to transfer value-added genes from wild relatives into crops in less than
a year without any linkage drag.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.