* 2110737
* Very High Energy Astrophysics with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lucy Fortson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 564,999.00

Gamma-ray astronomy probes the extreme physics of systems such as the black
holes at the centers of active galaxies or the remnants of supernova explosions
that end the lives of many giant stars. These systems emit radiation throughout
the electromagnetic spectrum and hundreds are now detectable in the very-high-
energy gamma-ray energy band observable by ground-based detectors. The VERITAS
gamma-ray observatory, located at the F. L. Whipple Observatory in Arizona, has
been and continues to be a key driver of the field’s expansion, making
discoveries that, combined with the information obtained from telescopes
operating at multiple wavelengths, has significantly increased our understanding
of the most energetic processes in the Universe. The VERITAS team at the
University of Minnesota, involving postdoctoral and student researchers, focuses
on investigations that can help decipher how active galaxies power the emission
of gamma rays and the possible links to the origin of ultra-high-energy cosmic
rays and astrophysical neutrino production, two outstanding questions in the
field. The team is also developing calibration techniques for the prototype
Schwarzschild-Couder Telescope envisaged as a component of the next-generation
Cherenkov Telescope Array. Through this effort, a citizen science project via
Zooniverse.org provides direct opportunities for public participation in gamma-
ray related science via crowdsourced classifications of VERITAS images that will
improve the classification of astrophysical objects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ground-based very-high-energy (VHE) gamma-ray astrophysics
has matured as a field in the last decade, expanding the VHE catalog from a
handful to over 200 objects across a wide range of source classes that represent
the most extreme phenomena in the Universe. VERITAS observations combined with a
wealth of multi-wavelength data from radio to X-ray, and especially high-energy
gamma rays from NASA’s Fermi-LAT satellite, has significantly increased our
understanding of the most energetic processes in the Universe. The work carried
out under this grant is crucial to maintaining the sensitivity of VERITAS to
maximize the science return on data taking campaigns across the spectrum as well
as with multi-messenger observatories. New analysis methods are targeted that
boost sensitivity to weak sources, implement modifications that monitor and
account for changes in the overall detector throughput, and address systematic
uncertainties at the highest recorded energies by the observatory. These efforts
will enable discoveries of new VHE emitting active galactic nuclei (AGN) and
observations of known VHE blazars with the goal to better characterize the so-
called blazar sequence that postulates an inverse relationship between blazar
luminosity and peak synchrotron emission frequency potentially due to cosmic
evolution. It will also enable the investigation of blazar spectra at high
optical depth where absorption features due to gamma-ray interactions on the
extragalactic photon fields becomes important. Results from this work can also
be used to elucidate the astrophysics behind gamma-ray emission in blazars and
its links to the origin of ultra-high-energy cosmic rays and astrophysical
neutrino production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.