* 2110264
* Restricting Ferroelectric Domain Wall Motion with Volume Defects--Nanoprecipitates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Lin Zhou, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 422,494.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Piezoelectric ceramics are functional materials that
develop electric charges when subjected to mechanical forces and change their
dimensions when subjected to electric fields. Such conversion of energies
between mechanical and electric forms can have extremely high efficiency (up to
90%); and hence, these ceramics have widespread applications in critical
technologies such as SONAR, medical imaging, and non-destructive evaluation.
Currently, the technique to manipulate and improve their functional properties
is to introduce impurity atoms in the ceramic. However, this technique has
reached its fundamental limit. The current project explores a radically new
mechanism -- introducing highly dispersed impurity nanocrystals (~50 nm) into
the bulk ceramic -- to further improve the performance of piezoelectric ceramics
and allow them to function at higher temperatures and under higher electric
fields. These improved ceramics can then be used to create next generation high-
power devices that operate under more extreme conditions. In addition to
technical contributions, this project also provides learning and career
advancement opportunities for many communities. Both graduate and undergraduate
students, many of whom from underrepresented groups, are involved in this
project; graduates who study ceramics science can typically find employment in
national labs and industry sectors of microelectronics and manufacturing; and
various demonstrations on piezoelectric technologies are given to K-12 students
to encourage scientific thinking and spark interest in science and engineering
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project aims to establish
a novel mechanism of stabilizing the domain structure and hardening
piezoelectric ceramics with nanoscale coherent precipitates. Compared to the
state-of-the-art point-defect technique, volume defects provide stronger
restrictions and are stable under higher temperatures. Therefore, this project
helps realize high-power piezoelectric transducers that can be used at higher
driving frequencies and vibration velocities. As a model system, this project
focuses on lead-free BaTiO3/CaTiO3 compositions, where slanted solvus lines in
the phase diagram guide the precipitation of uniformly dispersed nanoscale
coherent crystals in bulk polycrystalline ceramics. Presumably, the CaTiO3-rich
precipitate remains non-polar when it is larger than a critical size and becomes
polar when it is below the critical size. The ferroelectric domain wall in the
BaTiO3-rich matrix is hypothesized to be restricted in different modes by
precipitates of different sizes. The hypotheses are directly verified using the
in-situ heating and biasing, and other advanced transmission electron microscopy
techniques. Both graduate and undergraduate students are involved in this
project and are trained with ceramic manufacturing and property
characterization. The doctoral student is further trained with cutting-edge
transmission electron microscopy techniques, which are used to characterize
precipitate/matrix interfaces at the atomic level in terms of chemistry,
displacement, strain, and charge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.