* 2110358
* Polarized Electron Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Timothy Gay, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 689,917.00

Electrons have the fundamental property of “spin,” which is analogous to that of
a spinning top, and is associated with their angular momentum. This project
studies collisions between polarized electrons, which have their spins aligned
in one direction, and chiral, or “handed” molecules. Such molecules, of which
DNA is an example, are characterized by a spiral, or helical geometry. These
experiments address physics questions about the dynamics of electron-chiral
molecule scattering, particularly with regard to the magnetic effects caused by
the electron spins. They will also provide important clues about the origins of
biological homochirality – the fact that all naturally-occurring DNA spirals in
the same direction. A recently developed source of polarized electrons called a
rubidium spin filter is being used in this work; it has the advantage that it is
insensitive to the contamination by chiral target molecules that has plagued
earlier experiments using polarized electron sources based on photoemission from
gallium arsenide. Molecules of hydrogen (that are not chiral) are also being
studied. Hydrogen is the simplest molecule, but its interaction with very slow
electrons is poorly understood. This project will use very slow electrons that
have very well defined energy and that are spin polarized to provide stringent
tests of theory calculations that consider spin-dependent effects in such
fundamental collisions. Improved sources of polarized electrons are also being
developed that use multiphoton ionization of very sharp semiconductor tips to
give the photoemitted electrons a preferential spin direction. This research
done to develop polarized electron technology holds the promise of providing
new, high resolution analytical tools that can be used for biological and
materials research, and for industry. Graduate and undergradute students will
develop their scientific abilities by their involvement in the research as will
the general public though education outreach by the scientific team.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments involving collisions between polarized
electrons and chiral molecules will extend previous work that showed chiral
effects with halocamphor targets. The goal is to now demonstrate such effects in
molecules that have biological significance, such as cysteine, cystine, and
selenocysteine, and to study the effect of the maximum target nuclear charge and
location of the target’s chiral center on the chiral asymmetries we observe. The
scattering of electrons by simple atoms is well understood, but the theory for
electron scattering by even the simplest molecules such as H2 is in its infancy,
especially when one considers processes involving electronic excitation. The H2
experiments will focus on the energy region just above the excitation threshold
for specific processes, where the theory is particularly difficult, because the
excited molecule and the receding electron, which has almost no energy, interact
strongly for a long time. These studies will rigorously test new theories being
developed for such collisions. Ideas for novel sources of polarized electrons
based on multiphoton ionization of semiconducting nanotips and metallic
nanostructures will be studied. The goal of this work is to make pulses of
electrons that are “fast,” i.e., that have a duration comparable to that of the
light pulses producing them, so they can time-resolve processes such as chemical
reactions and magnetic wave motion in solids. Experiments will be done to learn
if current-carrying nanostructures of tungsten can also produce polarized
electrons when struck by short light pulses. This work, based on the spin Hall
effect, will provide a bridge between the field of spintronics and the
production of free polarized electron beams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.