* 2110038
* Collaborative Research: From Quantum Droplets &amp; Spinor Solitons to Vortex Knots &amp; Topological States: Beyond the Standard Mean-Field in Atomic BECs
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ricardo Carretero, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 201,843.00

The realm of Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) was originally proposed as a
curious feature of the statistical properties of atomic particles with integer
spin by Bose and Einstein in the 1920's. This consisted of the condensation of
the excited states particles into the ground state of the system and the
formation of a macroscopic, coherent “super-wave” therein, allowing the study
and observation of quantum mechanical properties beyond microscopic scales.
However, the temperatures needed for its experimental realization were so low
that it took about 70 years for E.A. Cornell, W. Ketterle, and C.E. Wieman to
realize BECs in the lab. The importance of this feat was recognized only a few
years later via the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics. This has, in turn, enabled a
pristine platform where numerous exciting features of nonlinear dynamics of
waves and coherent structures can be studied and experimentally observed.
Importantly, these coherent structures are also of wide applicability in
numerous other areas of physics including, most notably, nonlinear optics,
plasma physics, and water waves. Within atomic physics, BECs have also been
fundamental toward the study of remarkable quantum features such as
superconductivity and superfluidity and, in that capacity, they have been front
and center toward the experimental discoveries connected to the vortices and
their lattices cited in the 2003 Nobel Prize in Physics and the topological
phases and their transitions associated with the 2016 Nobel Prize in Physics.
The aim of this project is to advance the state-of-the-art at this exciting
nexus of atomic physics theory, physical BEC experiments, applied mathematical
analysis, and the forefront of scientific computing, while at the same time
training a new generation of scientists and mathematicians at this scientific
interface and transcending disciplinary boundaries. In line with the past
trajectory of the PIs, an emphasis on the diversity, equity and inclusion of
under-represented groups will be sought within this research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More concretely, the principal thrust of the
present project consists of the study of non-trivial extensions of standard BEC
settings. In particular, the main axes of the proposal consider the following
themes. (1) Two-component mutually attractive BECs that allow, through quantum
corrections and the famous Lee-Huang-Yang (LHY) contribution, for the highly
timely formation of so-called quantum droplets. The key realization for such
droplets is that their emergence stems from the interplay between repulsive
mean-field and attractive beyond-mean-field contributions. (2) Three (F =1) and
five (F=2) spin component settings supporting symbiotic (dark-antidark and dark-
bright) solitary wave structures with unprecedented integrable or weakly non-
integrable properties. (3) 3D vortex knot structures in one and multi-
component/spinor settings. Vortex knots constitute one of the most elusive types
of vortical structures for which limited experimental and theoretical analysis
exists. The PIs will also explore in the spinor settings complex non-trivial
topological patterns such as Alice rings and Dirac monopoles. (4) Topologically
nontrivial toroidal trapping settings, where the interplay of the intrinsic
metric and curvature of the system with the effective nonlinearity can yield
unprecedented coherent structures and dynamics thereof. More broadly within this
theme, the PIs will study nonlinear waves such as solitons and vortices confined
on different types of curved surfaces. This ambitious program should push the
boundaries of the state-of-the-art mean-field-theoretic understanding, offering
numerous beyond-mean-field insights and elucidating their range of validity as
well as the interplay of nonlinearity with quantum, as well as thermodynamic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.