* 2110799
* Expanding Accessibility of Learning through Blended Synchronous Instruction of Face-to-face and Remote Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Shawn Farrington, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,980.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by optimizing a highly flexible
instructional model that enables college students to participate in scheduled
classes either in-person or remotely as needed. This model of instruction,
called HyFlex, offers learners the option of participating remotely for a few
lectures or the entire course and enables students’ participation mode to change
in response to their daily needs. Although the Hyflex model shows great promise,
its implementation in the US and globally as an emergency response to COVID-19
has proven challenging. The mass transition from traditional in-person classroom
environments to online learning in March 2020 required STEM educators to design
flexible learning experiences and reconceptualize student engagement and
participation. This project has the potential to transform and improve the
accessibility of undergraduate STEM education in a Polytechnic Design Thinking
core course required of 1500 students each year. The project proposes to expand
upon a 2020-2021 pilot implementation of Hyflex by studying active learning
strategies in blended synchronous instructional environments. This project is
designed to further define HyFlex as an educational model, optimize the
approach, scale to 1500 students annually, and study the efficacy on student
learning and sense of community. Lessons learned will be shared across campus
(47,000 students, faculty, and staff) and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will implement literature-based best practices in HyFlex learning,
use design-based research to optimize the HyFlex learning experience, and study
its impacts. To investigate student learning and sense of community, the project
team will use pre-existing data from a large-scale freshman core course gathered
during traditional face-to-face instruction as a comparison to the proposed
HyFlex environment. The project PI is the course coordinator for an active
learning core Design Thinking course with 1500 students annually, providing an
ideal course for this study. To manage quarantines dictated by COVID-19
protocols, the project team piloted the HyFlex model during the 2020-2021
academic year, blending face-to-face and online learners synchronously. Using
Self-Determination Theory as a lens, the analysis of quantitative and
qualitative pilot data suggests the model meets dynamic and rapidly changing
student needs. This project will build on the 2020-2021 foundation, which also
supports a rigorous study design. Two years of design-based research will
iteratively optimize the HyFlex approach in 80 unique sections of the course,
followed by one year of efficacy study using qualitative data to interpret
quantitative results in a quasi-experimental nonequivalent comparison group
design. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.