* 2110842
* Understanding Multi-stage Neural Stem Cell Function via 4D Bioprinting Reprogrammable System
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Lijie Grace Zhang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2024
* USD 490,000.00

Neural injuries represent one of the most common and devastating clinical
challenges worldwide. Currently, stem cell-based technologies have shown great
promise in treating nerve damage. However, one of the major challenges in
successfully utilizing stem cells for clinical applications is the difficulty in
providing proper environmental cues to regulate their behaviors. Most of the
currently available techniques to guide stem cell behavior utilize simple 2D or
3D microenvironments, which are largely static in nature, and therefore fail to
reflect the dynamic nature of the native neural tissue environment in which stem
cells develop. Thus, the objective of this study is to develop a novel 4D (time
being the 4th dimension) printed smart system, which can change its shape over
time in order to improve neural stem cell (NSC) function and neural
regeneration. This study will elucidate the fundamental mechanisms of NSC
development and differentiation in a dynamic environment. Furthermore, the 4D
bioprinting system will be promising for many potential applications ranging
from tissue/organ regeneration to in vitro drug screening and disease modeling.
Integrated research, educational, and outreach activities will place special
emphasis on underrepresented minorities and female students at different levels,
and will provide a diverse audience with a high-caliber science and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to 4D print a novel
reprogrammable smart system with a time-dependent dynamic transformation, which
can provide an efficient means to cater to the different neurodevelopmental
stages undergone by NSCs and will improve neural tissue regeneration. The 4D
bioprinting system can provide a perfect self-morphing feature when exposed to a
predetermined stimulus for controlling NSC fate. For this purpose, two specific
study aims will be performed: Aim 1 will primarily focus on synthesizing
reprogrammable 4D ink materials, which can execute a two-week shape change at
physiological temperature. The 4D inks will be formulated by varying the ratios
of different ink components in order to achieve desirable, printable rheological
properties. Aim 2 will involve the bioprinting of smart neural constructs and
will explore NSC functions and biomechanics during the 4D transformation
process. The microstructure and mechanical properties of the bioprinted
constructs will be characterized. Furthermore, NSC differentiation, axonal
extension, and gene expression within the context of the 4D dynamic environment
will be thoroughly evaluated in vitro. The successful completion of the project
will provide a revolutionary smart system for enhancing the performance of NSCs
for neural regeneration purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.