* 2110339
* Collaborative Research: Deploying Curvilinear Coordinate and Multipatch Methods on Neutron Star Mergers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Julian Krolik, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
recent observations of a binary neutron star merger using both gravitational
wave interferometers and the full spectrum of electromagnetic telescopes has
initiated the age of multimessenger astronomy and astrophysics. The rapidly
increasing rate of new GW detections by LIGO, VIRGO, and other upcoming similar
interferometers and major astronomical facilities is expected to bring an
unprecedented wealth of observational evidence from these sources in the near
future. This award will fund a collaborative research effort at the Rochester
Institute of Technology and the Johns Hopkins University into the latter stages
of neutron star mergers, in particular long-lived hypermassive neutron stars
that collapse to black holes and stable neutron stars. The effort also includes
development of new computational tools required for these calculations.
Particular attention will be paid to the roles of the equation of state and
total mass as determinants of final properties such as magnetic fields. Magnetic
fields underly much of what happens because they support both accretion and
jets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations of a wide range of astrophysical events,
including strong sources of both electromagnetic and gravitational wave signals,
will require numerical tools that can handle an increasingly wide range of
microphysical treatments, characteristic scales, and levels of complexity. On
the other hand, many astrophysical systems exhibit approximate symmetries that
can be leveraged to reduce the total computational cost. By choosing coordinate
topologies that mirror the approximate symmetries, or multiple coordinate
patches, one can obtain higher simulation accuracies at lower computational
costs. Spherical polar grids are optimally suited for a host of applications in
relativistic astrophysics. However, the often severe Courant stability
limitation of these methods have made them prohibitively expensive. This project
is to develop new coding infrastructures to overcome these limitations and apply
them to perform highly-accurate, but also very fast simulations of hypermassive
neutron star remnants. On the other hand, multipatch method, while computational
more complex than single spherical patches, are ideal for simulations of jets
around these compact objects. In addition to developing new algorithms, this
award will be used train a postdoc and a graduate student in highly-parallelized
computing. It will also provide material for educating students in
multimessenger astronomy and high-performance computing, and enhance public
outreach through a variety of channels, including both an REU program in
multimessenger astronomy and a summer program giving underrepresented minority
undergraduates experience in physics research. Further educational benefits will
accrue through improvements in undergraduate science education. Scientific
visualizations from the proposed simulations will be used as a vehicle for
public outreach events on science and computing through annual community-wide
public exhibits. There will also be benefits to the broader scientific
community: both the new simulation tools and the output data sets will be made
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.