* 2110444
* RUI: Negative Ion Photodetachment Spectroscopy and Lifetimes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* C Walter, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 386,277.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project will experimentally
investigate the properties of negative ions, which are atoms or molecules with
an extra electron. Negative ions are important in a variety of physical
situations including chemical reactions, the atmospheres of planets and stars,
and electrical plasmas. The primary goal of the project is to improve the
understanding of how electrons interact with each other on the atomic scale
(“electron correlation”) — a very important aspect of quantum mechanics that
plays a key role in the structure of atoms and molecules. In experiments at
Denison University and at the DESIREE national lab facility in Sweden, laser
light will be used to excite or detach electrons from negative ions; the laser
supplies a finely controlled amount of input energy to probe electron
correlations within the ions. The results will build the fundamental physical
chemistry database, provide valuable tests of state-of-the-art theoretical
atomic structure calculations, and yield key insights into dynamical many-body
interaction, which is a topic of interest for a broad range of fields in
physics, chemistry, materials science, and nanotechnology. Undergraduate
students will participate in all aspects of the research, providing significant
technical training for young scientists in cutting-edge electronics, lasers, and
computers, and enhancing their ability for advanced study and future careers in
science, technology, and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The interactions of photons with negative ions will be
investigated in a series photoexcitation and photodetachment experiments. The
extra electron in a negative ion is bound predominantly by electron correlation
effects and therefore negative ions provide a fertile testing ground for
detailed atomic physics calculations regarding these multi-body interactions. An
ion beam–tunable infrared laser system at Denison University will be used to
measure multiple bound states of the negative ion of thorium with resonant two-
photon detachment spectroscopy. Complementary experiments of excited state
lifetimes and decay processes in the negative ion of lanthanum will be performed
at Stockholm University in Sweden using the cryogenic electrostatic ion storage
ring DESIREE. Thorium and lanthanum are important to investigate because they
are promising candidates for laser cooling, which has not yet been achieved with
negative ions but could potentially open up the ultracold regime for a wide
range of negatively-charged species through sympathetic collisional cooling. The
faculty and student researchers will also use photodetachment threshold
spectroscopy to measure isotope shifts in the electron affinities of lead and
thallium, which are sensitive to interactions of electrons both with each other
and with the nucleus. The dynamic multi-electron interactions in highly-
correlated negative ions continue to challenge the fundamental understanding of
atomic structure, and this project will extend the available experimental data
to more complex negative ion systems, spur new theoretical studies, and directly
address pressing open questions in the field. Support from this grant will
enhance the research and teaching infrastructure of Denison University (an
undergraduate college) and provide students with valuable experimental research
experiences and technical training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.