* 2110023
* Photon- and Electron-Driven Atomic Collision Processes: General Theory and Accurate Numerical Calculations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Klaus Bartschat, Drake University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project deals with the interaction of light (mostly lasers) and charged
particles (mostly electrons) with atoms and ions. The results are of importance
for the understanding of fundamental collision dynamics, and they also fulfill
the urgent practical need for accurate atomic data to model the physics of
stars, plasmas, lasers, and planetary atmospheres. The short-pulse intense-laser
part of the project requires accurate solutions of the time-dependent
Schroedinger equation on a numerical space-time grid. With the rapid advances
currently seen in computational resources, such studies can now be conducted for
realistic systems, as opposed to idealized models. This work is important to
facilitate further developments in the imaging and control of submicroscopic
reactions, which in turn are expected to have broad impact by reaching out from
physics to chemistry and ultimately biology. Many experimental efforts worldwide
are supported through the present project, which will also train a post-doctoral
associate and a number of research students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the
numerical calculations will be based upon the non-perturbative R-matrix (close-
coupling) method. In addition to the frequently-used but limited “single-active
electron (SAE) model”, the group has access to some of the most sophisticated
all-electron codes that are expected to provide accurate quantitative
predictions, including for cases where SAE is known to fail. These include the
R-matrix with Time Dependence (RMT) suite of codes developed in Belfast and the
highly flexible B-spline R-matrix (BSR) implementation with non-orthogonal
orbital sets developed at Drake University. While BSR was originally designed
for time-independent processes (atomic structure, electron collisions with atoms
and ions, weak-field photoionization), the group will continue to work on
interfacing RMT with output (multi-electron Coulomb and dipole matrix elements)
generated by BSR. This is expected to result in an accurate and efficient time-
propagation scheme for solving the time-dependent Schroedinger equation for the
interaction of intense short-pulse lasers with complex atomic targets. Even
though the problems in their entirety are very complex, continued student
involvement in testing the numerical methods and visualizing the results is
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.