* 2110669
* SBIR Phase I:  Satellites in Low Earth Orbit as a Learning Tool
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Arthur Palisoc, STEMEd, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,215.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to support development of a Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) workforce. With the recent
successes of space missions to other planets, space-based STEM learning tools
will attract the attention of teachers, students, parents, and the public. This
project proposes a system to teach middle-school students about analysis,
design, building and testing of small satellites. The system uses space-based
systems as a compelling context to teach STEM concepts and methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
creates STEM insights using a satellite as the context. For instance, a major
challenge is accommodating the payload into a small stowed volume.
Miniaturization is sometimes a solution but may be limited by the physics. For
example, if a communications antenna exceeding the satellite size is desired, it
must initially stow into a volume only on the order of a 10 cm cube. Following
stowage, it must be deployed on orbit reliably and with an accurate and precise
shape. The proposed lesson plan includes: preliminary concept design of a
student-accessible small satellite, a teacher and student step-by-step lessons
workbook on introductory remote sensing from space, physics of satellite orbits,
and detailed software specifications to use gaming approaches for educational
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.