* 2110868
* High-Order Invariant Domain Preserving Approximations of Multiphysics Systems of Conservation Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Bojan Popov, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 592,061.00

The objective of this project is to construct robust approximation techniques
for nonlinear conservation systems on unstructured meshes in one, two, and three
space dimensions. This class of problems touches many fields in engineering
(mechanical, aerospace, nuclear, ocean, etc.) and in sciences (geophysics,
astrophysics). A new set of novel robust approximation techniques for solving
complex nonlinear conservation equations in realistic settings will also benefit
numerous applications that involve models mixing hyperbolicity with other
physical effects such as diffusion and dispersion. The results of this project
will be disseminated through graduate classes, mentoring of students, seminars,
conference presentations, publications, and direct collaborations with
colleagues working at various US institutions. The material developed in this
project will be incorporated in an advanced class on conservation equations that
is given every two years in the Department of Mathematics at Texas
A&amp;M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, robustness means that the
proposed methods are guaranteed to deliver solutions that satisfy physical and
thermodynamical constraints (in general based on quasi-concave or concave
functionals). Robustness also means that some asymptotic properties of the
solution may be preserved by the approximation even if the mesh is not fine
enough to be in some asymptotic range (i.e., locking must be avoided). These
types of methods are often said to be asymptotic preserving in the literature.
Finally, the algorithms we have in mind must depend very little on the space
discretization at hand and be simple enough to be programed by users with very
little know-how in numerical analysis and on the mathematical structure of the
nonlinear system. The project will heavily rely on the solid theoretical
foundations recently established by the PIs and will be organized around three
objectives: (i) construct algorithms for nonlinear hyperbolic systems that are
robust with respect to the polynomial degree, the mesh structure, and have very
few (if any) tuning parameters; (ii) construct approximation techniques that are
robust for models mixing hyperbolicity with other physical effects such as
diffusion and dispersion; (iii) construct techniques that will guarantee that
realistic physical bounds and thermodynamical inequalities are satisfied for the
discrete approximation even when incomplete knowledge of the physics is
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.