* 2110709
* Observational and Numerical Modeling Study of Downburst Generation Using Dual-Polarization Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Alexander Ryzhkov, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 297,501.00

This project is to study a hazard weather phenomenon known as downbursts. The
Downbursts are rapidly descending columns of air that can cause strong, damaging
winds that pose a threat to aviation, infrastructure, livestock, and human life.
Meteorologists rely on weather radar data to detect developing downbursts, but
because they are relatively localized and can develop quickly, it is often
difficult to issue warnings for them in advance. However, recent advancements in
radar technology now permit improved insight into the factors that lead to
downbursts, but a comprehensive study examining such signatures has yet to be
performed. By better understanding the causes of downbursts and what these
factors look like in their existing radar data, forecasters will be able to
better anticipate their occurrence and intensity before they reach the ground,
and thus provide earlier warnings with fewer false alarms and more time for
people to safely seek shelter. In addition, as computers play an increasingly
large role in deciding when to issue severe weather warnings, the insights
gained from this study will help determine how reliably weather models simulate
downbursts and provide the basis for future automated downburst detection. The
project involves mentoring a graduate student to be the next generation of
atmospheric scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to use both
observations and numerical simulations of downbursts in a complementary manner
to understand the relation between the sources of negative buoyancy that drive
downbursts and their manifestation in observed dual-polarization radar
variables. A novel cell-tracking algorithm will be used to comprehensively
survey the polarimetric characteristics of downbursts and their variability
across a variety of thermodynamic environments and geographic regions.
Additionally, a one-dimensional model with spectral bin microphysics that is
coupled to a forward polarimetric radar operator will then be used to simulate
downbursts and quantitatively examine the association between the environment,
sources of negative buoyancy (i.e., precipitation loading and diabatic cooling),
and the resultant downburst intensity with the evolution and spatial
distribution of the simulated polarimetric variables. Informed by the findings
of the first two components, the third part of this study will evaluate the
ability for existing convection-resolving models with bulk microphysics schemes
to realistically simulate downbursts and identify any deficiencies limiting
their usefulness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.