* 2110705
* ALPS II: Commissioning and Data Taking
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Astronomical observations have established that the Universe is largely dark,
with approximately 85% of the matter made of yet unknown particles. Determining
the nature of this dark matter will impact our fundamental knowledge of
cosmology, astrophysics and particle physics and is the basis for one of the
most extensive searches for new physics beyond the Standard Model that has been
so effective in describing our understanding to date. Extensions of the Standard
Model predict weakly interacting light (sub-electronvolt) particles, including
axions, which have been introduced as a primary candidate for the dark matter.
The Any Light Particle Search (ALPS) II experiment is designed to provide the
highest search sensitivity for these low-mass particles of any measurements to
date that use the Light Shining Through a Wall (LSW) technique. Located at DESY
in Hamburg, Germany, the ALPS II detector is now under construction and this
award supports the ALPS II group at the University of Florida to perform the
upcoming commissioning and science runs using the heterodyne detection scheme
developed by the team. The experiment provides a unique and diverse training
ground for postdoctoral and student researchers to develop skills in electronics
and feedback control systems, vacuum and cryogenics, computational methods and
data analysis algorithms, large-scale detector commission and operation, and
dark matter physics and cosmology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ALPS experiment is
designed to search for interactions that turn photons into low-mass particles
and vice versa, allowing photons to reemerge behind an otherwise light tight
wall. These low-mass particles include axion-like particles, their scalar
counterparts, as well as hidden sector photons, and would contribute or even
exclusively form the omnipresent dark matter. The ALPS II experiment consists of
two 120 m long strings of straightened 5.3 T HERA dipoles on each side of the
wall. An optical cavity is used to build up the power to up to 1 MW on one side
of the wall while a second cavity amplifies the recreation process on the other
side of the wall. In contrast to helioscopes and also haloscopes used also in
the search for axion-like particles, ALPS makes no assumptions about stellar
evolution; nor does it assume any specific dark matter model. The experiment
only depends on proposed fundamental interactions between photons and postulated
non-standard-model particles. The ALPS II experiment will surpass past LSW
searches by 12 orders of magnitude in regenerated photons and explores a
parameter space which has lately been favored by astronomical and other
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.