* 2110365
* Nuclear Structure Theory and its Applications to Nuclear Properties, Astrophysics and Fundamental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,01/31/2025
* B. Alex Brown, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 01/31/2025
* USD 420,000.00

The research support by this project encompasses a range of topics in nuclear
structure theory with applications to new experimental results, nuclear
astrophysics, and fundamental interactions in nuclei. This research relates to
broad questions in science including: What are the limits of nuclear stability?
How did the chemical evolution of the universe proceed? What are the masses of
the neutrinos? How do the nuclear properties emerge from the underlying nucleon-
nucleon interactions? Computational tools for nuclear structure theory will be
developed, applied and made available to other users. These tools are integrated
with experimental data bases for evaluation and testing. The graduate students
supported by this project will have unique opportunities to train and contribute
to high-profile research in nuclear theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonians
for the configuration-interaction (CI) method that include isospin-nonconverging
parts of the nucleon-nucleon interaction will be developed. Specific projects
that will be used for nuclear astrophysics include those for level densities,
beta decay strength functions, and energy density functionals (EDF). The EDF
project enables one to connect nuclear properties such as the neutron skin to
properties of neutron stars. Many of the projects are in coordination with the
experimental program at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB). This
collaboration is important for maximizing the discovery potential of experiments
at the FRIB facility that will start in the Spring of 2022. Some of the
computational tools are adopted for educational projects that are used for the
education for high-school and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.