* 2110233
* RCN: Integrating Organismal Biology into NEON
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Lynn Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

A central goal in the life sciences is understanding how organisms will cope
with environmental change. This project funds a Research Coordination Network
(RCN) that bring will together a diverse group of biologists to identify how to
best leverage NEON data and infrastructure to address pressing questions about
how organisms will cope with environmental change. The National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) and its associated infrastructure represents one of
the largest infrastructure investments by the National Science Foundation. NEON
serves as an observatory to document ecosystem change through 30 years of
consistent data collection at a series research sites across the United States.
The RCN will develop a professional network whose members are diverse in
background, expertise, and career stage, host workshops and symposia that focus
on the potential of NEON to answer key questions in organismal biology and
provide training experiences for the next generation of researchers through
research exchanges. As a whole, the RCN will broaden participation of under-
represented groups across career stages, develop podcast episodes to enhance
scientific and technological understanding of concepts related to NEON, and
generate new participatory science activities for the general public. Finally,
this RCN will enable research that have direct relevance to human health and the
US economy, such as knowledge of the presence and drivers of disease, their
spread through animal populations, and how environmental change may exacerbate
these threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NEON presents a unique opportunity to
produce novel insights into fundamental biological questions, yet there are
currently disparities in use of NEON by researchers from different fields of
biology. Ecologists have taken the lead with using NEON data to investigate the
responses of populations, communities, and ecosystems to environmental change.
However, the potential of NEON and its associated infrastructure have not been
fully realized by organismal biologists. This missed opportunity is despite the
fact that NEON is well-suited for answering some major questions in organismal
biology. Organismal biologists use diverse and integrative approaches to
understand variation in the behavior, physiology, and life histories of
organisms and how these multiple traits interact across environmental gradients
and produce population differentiation. Through the use of NEON, there is great
potential for organismal biologists to help reveal how genotypes become
phenotypes and discover new patterns at spatiotemporal scales that have not
previously been possible. Organismal biology research using NEON resources has
lagged behind because of a lack of awareness by researchers of NEONâ€™s goals,
infrastructure, and capacity. This RCN will diversify and strengthen NEON usage
by incorporating organismal biologists into the community of NEON users and by
promoting interactions between ecologists and organismal
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.