* 2110243
* Thermodynamic Modification of Winter Storms in a Warmer Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Esther Mullens, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 292,448.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice storms, which consist of
freezing rain and/or ice pellets, are extraordinarily disruptive events that can
cause hazardous travel conditions and power disruptions leading to economic
losses and casualties. The impact of a changing climate on ice storms has not
been thoroughly investigated, and it is complicated by how sensitive ice storms
are to the temperature in the lower part of the atmosphere and at the surface.
This work will use an existing climate model simulation to address how freezing
precipitation events could change in location, timing, and size in a warmer
climate. The project has practical impact to decision-makers who may be dealing
with questions about hardening of infrastructure. The researcher also plans an
education and training aspect that ranges from high school to graduate students,
ensuring the training of the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for the study of freezing
precipitation events, inclusive of ice pellets, freezing rain, and freezing
drizzle, and how they may be altered with thermodynamics modifications
consistent with late 21st century climate change. A key aspect of the project
will be the use of the 4km resolution, hourly National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR) Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) model Pseudo Global Warming
(PGW) simulation. PGW is a technique where a model’s input and boundary
conditions are modified by imposing a thermal change consistent with a warmer
climate. High-resolution dynamical models for the examination of climate change
are very computationally expensive, so the advantage of the WRF-PGW dataset is
that it has already been conducted at a very high spatial and temporal
resolution, with explicit convection and detailed documentation of biases and
limitations. Additional data sources include the NOAA Integrated Surface
Database, gridded precipitation data, and reanalyses. Two main research
questions are posed: 1) What is the distribution of winter storms of different
synoptic ‘type’, and how does their contribution to the freezing precipitation
climatology, intensity, and duration, change in a warmer climate versus the
historical baseline, and 2) How does the structure, evolution, and morphology of
winter storms change with late 21st century thermodynamic modification,
including thermal and dynamic evolution, and distribution of precipitation phase
within the system(s)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.