* 2110953
* STTR Phase I:  Digital Mental Health for Children and Adolescents
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Tamara Fyke, BLUEWONDER CREATIVE, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2023
* USD 275,932.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is improved children’s mental and behavioral
health via the creation of a platform that unifies the silos of healthcare and
education to put children and families first. Due in part to the current
pandemic, there is an increased need to support children’s mental and behavioral
health. The end-users are the 28 million children between 8-12 years old in
America. The team is advancing patient-centered care and personalized education.
After the platform is tested for an initial age group of 8-12-year-olds, the
plan is to expand the platform across the age-span, including early childhood
through senior adults. The platform promises engaging, self-contained,
adaptable, safe, and research-based support and learning. The team expects to
grow their market share through strategic partnerships with healthcare,
education, industry, and non-profit partners. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on leveraging technology,
including natural language processing, machine learning, and chatbots, to
provide information to students, families, and educators about mental and
behavioral health and to get feedback from these groups through their web-based
computing devices. This project seeks to develop an online platform that will
engage students and allow them to leverage personal care resources aimed at
building resilience and providing them access to support and information
customized to their individual needs. This Phase I project focuses on building a
proof-of-concept platform that provides precision mental health solutions by
combining interactive health and wellness methods with engaging content
personalized and delivered by machine learning technologies and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.