* 2110774
* Collaborative Research: Numerical Methods and Adaptive Algorithms for Sixth-Order Phase Field Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Natasha Sharma, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 124,989.00

This project will use computational mathematics models to further the
understanding of two applications, microemulsions systems and crystal formation
models. The first class of applications has relevance for oil-water-surfactant
systems, which are important in oil recovery, development of environmentally
friendly solvents, consumer and commercial cleaning product formulations, and
drug delivery systems. The crystal models to be studied will be useful in
detecting topological defects within crystalline materials, a task which is of
great interest in the material science community. Specific examples include
supercooled liquids, crack propagation in a ductile material, and applications
relating to photonics and semiconductors, cell structure substrates and MRI
contrast agents. A major challenge impeding their use by the general
mathematical and scientific community has been a lack of understanding of these
complex systems. This project will build efficient algorithms for simulation
that will support the study of these processes and the design of advanced
materials. The project will provide opportunities to undergraduate and graduate
students and introduce them to the theory and implementation of state-of-the-art
numerical methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PIs will develop C0
interior penalty finite element methods for the two classes of applications and
mathematical models. The C0 interior penalty finite element method was
originally constructed to handle fourth-order elliptic problems arising in
mechanics, but its adaptations have been applied to other fourth- and sixth-
order partial differential equations. The focus of this project is on numerical
methods for time-dependent sixth-order partial differential equations. The high
derivative order in combination with a time-dependent component presents many
challenges to the creation of stable, convergent, and efficient numerical
methods approximating solutions to these models. The work to be accomplished
includes the establishment of formal proofs for the unique solvability,
stability, and convergence of the proposed numerical methods. The largest
challenge will be to develop a framework which establishes optimal order error
estimates. Finally, in order to improve upon the efficiency of the proposed
numerical methods, the PIs plan to develop efficient solvers for space-time
discretized systems using operator-splitting techniques and space-time
adaptivity based on a posteriori error estimates obtained by the goal-oriented
dual weighted approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Computational Mathematics program, and by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.