* 2110769
* Practicing Self-Regulation of Cognition and Motivation during Problem Solving in Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Oenardi Lawanto, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 05/31/2024
* USD 529,047.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing undergraduate
students' problem-solving skills in engineering and mathematics. To do so, the
project will develop a greater understanding about how students self-regulate
their cognition and motivation during the process of solving difficult
engineering and math problems. It will also support instructors to use teaching
practices that promote self-regulation. Self-regulation comprises the knowledge
and skills that enable students to control their thoughts and emotions while
engaged in academic activities. This project focuses on improving student
practice of self-regulation during problem-solving activities in two required
second year engineering and mathematics courses. In engineering and mathematics,
problems often have implicit constraints and requirements that are not easily
identified by novice students. As a result, research is needed to understand how
engineering and mathematics instructors can help students develop and activate
their ability to self-regulate during problem-solving activities. To be
effective problem-solvers, students must actively coordinate their understanding
of the task at hand, their thoughts, and their motivation throughout the
problem-solving activities. This three-year project will advance engineering and
mathematics education theory and practice regarding engineering students’ self-
regulation of thinking and motivation during engineering and math problem-
solving activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distinct self-regulatory skills to
be investigated include (1) students’ personal knowledge about the problem being
solved (metacognitive knowledge about task), (2) students’ active and reflective
coordination of cognitive processes in light of their metacognitive knowledge
(self-regulation of cognition), and (3) students’ self-control of the motivation
needed to maintain engagement during problem solving activities (self-regulation
of motivation). The project will make three significant contributions. First,
findings will broaden the limited knowledge about how students’ metacognitive
knowledge about a task informs their cognitive and motivation self-regulatory
processes in engineering and mathematics problem-solving activities. Second, by
working directly with engineering and mathematics faculty to understand the
implications of findings and develop new practices and tools that promote self-
regulated learning, this project may advance problem-solving instruction. Third,
because this research will develop, test, and implement new research protocols
to assess students’ metacognitive knowledge about task and the strategies they
use, new knowledge will contribute positively to future studies of students’
self-regulated learning in engineering and mathematics, as well as in other
fields. Four research questions guide the study and a sequential mixed-methods
research design involving quantitative and qualitative research methods will be
used to develop complementary coarse and fine-grained understandings of
students’ self-regulated cognition and self-regulated motivation during
engineering and mathematics problem-solving activities. Coarse-grained
understandings will be developed through analysis of quantitative data collected
using validated self-report surveys (for example, Brief Regulation of Motivation
Scale, BRoMS, and the Physics Metacognitive Inventory, PMI). Fine-grained
understandings will be developed through analysis of qualitative data gathered
via one-on-one interviews, think-aloud protocols, classroom observations, and
course artifacts gathered in class. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.