* 2110201
* GOALI: High-Energy Density and Low Polysulfide Shuttling Sodium-Sulfur Battery System
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Chengsong Ma, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2024
* USD 315,735.00

Concerns over global energy supply and CO2 emissions have spurred intensive
research on energy storage technologies to facilitate the growth and integration
of renewable energy sources such as wind and solar for electric transportation
and power grids. Electrochemical battery systems are the most promising energy
storage technology that would transform these industries. However, incumbent
lithium-ion battery technologies are unlikely to meet the energy density and
cost requirements. Further, their scale-up and wider adoption are constrained by
resource availability. Therefore, new high-energy density battery systems using
abundant and low-cost materials are needed to meet these challenges. In
collaboration with Saft America, the investigators propose a high-energy density
and low polysulfide shuttling sodium-sulfur battery that takes advantage of
abundant elements such as sodium, sulfur and oxygen. Additionally, this new
technology will synergistically incorporate multiple reactions in a single
electrochemical system. The development of the high-energy density and low-cost
sodium-sulfur battery technology can potentially have transformational impact on
the nation’s energy security. The practical, scalable, and cost-effective
battery technology developed here can enable wider adoption of battery
technology for transportation and electrical grid with limited resource
constraints for the material supply chain. By working with Saft America, this
project will enhance partnerships between academia and industry and facilitate
the transfer of laboratory inventions to the market place. Graduate and
undergraduate students will receive training in research and industry internship
through this project, and institutional resources will be leveraged to recruit
students from underrepresented groups to participate in this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI project aims to break ground for fundamental
research on understanding the reaction mechanism in the novel, high-energy
density and low polysulfide shuttling sodium-sulfur battery system (Na/(O2)-S)
to further improve the electrochemical performance of the system and enable
optimal battery design in industry-relevant operating condition. This goal will
be achieved by three objectives: (1) To understand the reaction pathway of the
Na-(O2)-S electrode in Na/(O2)-S battery by identifying the intermediate and
final reaction products by in-situ experimental characterization. (2) To
understand the reaction kinetics by investigating interfacial kinetics and
nucleation and growth rate of the discharge products during the electrochemical
reactions in the Na/(O2)-S system. (3) Evaluate the performance of Na/(O2)-S
battery system under industry-relevant settings. These studies will advance the
knowledge and understanding of the thermodynamics and kinetics of metal-oxygen-
polysulfide electrochemical reactions at room temperature in both solution and
solid precipitation regions. The insight gained here will thus address critical
needs in the development of the high-energy density battery using abundant
materials and lay foundation for future research in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.