* 2110781
* Collaborative Research: Development of Reduced Order Models for Poroelasticity and Related Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeonghun Lee, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 123,224.00

Poroelasticity is a framework of continuum mechanics models for problems
involving a porous elastic medium and a fluid flow. Poroelasticity problems have
real-world applications such as hydrocarbon extraction in petroleum engineering,
physiological processes such as the blood flow in the human body, groundwater
contamination in environmental engineering, and modeling magma and mantle
migration in geophysics. There is a real need to obtain high-resolution
numerical solutions for the poroelasticity but these require large computational
resources, even with theoretically optimal algorithms. This project will develop
methods that can provide high accuracy solutions for large poroelasticity
problems with feasible computational costs. Students will be involved and
trained in interdisciplinary applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Poroelasticity
problems are parametric partial differential equations (PDEs) which are
described by a set of coupled PDEs with various physical parameters. Developing
reliable and efficient numerical methods for these problems involving complex
forms of physical parameters is crucial to obtain high-resolution solutions in a
relatively short time. The project will use the reduced basis method (RBM)
approach which can provide fast algorithms for parametric partial differential
equations of elliptic and parabolic types and has a solid mathematical framework
to derive reduced order models with rigorous, certified error bounds. However,
developing an RBM for a system of coupled PDEs is nontrivial because it must be
devised to preserve the stability structure of the coupled system. The
techniques and analysis developed in this project will advance the understanding
of parametric poroelasticity and its related problems. The results of this
project can also provide a general guideline in developing RBMs for other
coupled parametric PDEs. Once developed, these algorithms can be employed for
complex problems that are currently intractable with traditional numerical
algorithms. These solutions will lead to advances in fields such as petroleum
engineering, environmental engineering, and computational biomechanics with
potential beneficial impacts on human life and health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.