* 2110111
* Flexible Analysis of Gravitational Wave Data: Extracting Information from Unmodeled or Partially Modeled Sources and Mitigating Instrument Glitches
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Katerina Chatziioannou, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,330.00

The field of gravitational wave astrophysics is experiencing accelerating growth
since its birth in 2015. This is the outcome of large improvements in the
sensitivity of gravitational wave detectors as well as the continued development
of advanced tools to interpret the data the detectors collect. The wealth of
signals and information brings new challenges to be addressed both in the
analysis of further signals from compact binaries, such as colliding black holes
and neutron stars, and in the interpretation of anticipated novel signals made
accessible with more sensitive detectors. One such example concerns noise
artifacts in the detectors that can occur at the same time as astrophysical
signals and jeopardize our ability to interpret them. Such noise artifacts have
to be understood and ideally removed from the data before any further analysis
of the astrophysical signals. This project aims to address some of these
emerging challenges with flexible data analysis techniques that can handle the
large expected variety of detector noise artifacts and yet unseen signals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns the use of flexible, morphology-
independent analyses for data analysis during the fourth observing run of LIGO
as well as the development of novel analyses for the interpretation of
anticipated signals such as inspiral and post merger emission from neutron star
binaries. Regarding the former, past experience indicates that the increased
rate of detection expected during the fourth observing run will result in more
instances of astrophysical signals overlapping with instrumental glitches. This
project aims to improve upon the techniques already utilized by the LIGO and
Virgo Collaborations to provide more efficient glitch subtraction on data that
also include an astrophysical signal of interest. Regarding the latter, this
project will explore ``hybrid" data analysis techniques capable of analyzing
partially modeled signals for which we lack exact waveform templates. The aim is
to analyze and extract information from signals such as neutron star mergers
that carry important information about the neutron star equation of state. The
result of these activities will facilitate analyses of LIGO/Virgo data for
extraction of astrophysical information as well as novel techniques to meet the
demands of the detector improved sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.