* 2110626
* Precision Measurement of the 1S-2S Interval in Positronium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 891,952.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The positronium atom (Ps) is an exotic
short-lived atom formed by an electron and its anti-particle, the positron. This
project will improve the accuracy of measurements of the structure of Ps,
revealing detail about the fundamental interactions between the electron and
positron. Unlike more conventional atoms Ps does not contain any protons or
neutrons; thus spectroscopy of Ps atoms is an excellent test of “bound-state
quantum electrodynamics,” the cornerstone theory for modern atomic physics. This
project pushes the state-of-the-art in the ultra-high precision measurement of
short lived atoms and molecules and opens the door to better understanding of
transient chemical species that are produced as a reaction is taking place.
Graduate students will build and operate the apparatus designed especially for
this experiment. Undergraduate students will assist in the experiments, mostly
during the summers. Local high school teachers will attend a week-long
University of California Riverside Summer Academy for High School teachers at
which teachers are exposed to research, visit the labs, and are inspired by
lectures and demonstrations that explain how to incorporate research within the
high school physics curriculum. The PI will visit high school Physics teachers
and classrooms and work with local county Board of Education science projects to
advance junior and senior high school curriculum development under the new Next
Generation Science Standards and state science standards. This project will thus
help expand the nation's high technology work force by training students in
cutting edge techniques and increase the diversity of participants in STEM
fields, starting with the pipeline from junior high school physical science
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
purely leptonic positronium (Ps) atom is uniquely well-suited for testing bound-
state quantum electrodynamics (QED). High accuracy Ps spectroscopy at the few
parts per trillion level will provide background information that can be used to
extract non-QED physics out of precision atomic measurements with heavier
leptons and hadrons. In this way, Ps spectroscopy can shed light on the proton
charge radius puzzle as well as the recent shifting of the value of the Rydberg
constant (by about 7 times the previously accepted experimental uncertainty).
Whenever a measured constant is shifted by such a large amount, then there is an
opportunity for closer examination to yield new experiments and new physical
understanding in how to measure the constants. Higher accuracy can also help
constrain higher level recoil effect corrections in muonium. The previous
precision measurement of the Ps 1S-2S interval, 1,233,607,216.4 +/- 3.2 MHz,
performed by the Co-PI and S. Chu has stood for 25 years. The uncertainty in
this measurement came from positronium atoms spending too little time in the
laser beam (transit time broadening), atoms moving too fast (second-order
Doppler shift), laser intensity too high (AC Stark shift), and metrology limited
at the ~1 MHz level. This project will implement several new techniques to
improve accuracy and precision. A position-sensitive time-of-flight detector
will record the trajectory and speed of every detected atom as it passes through
a larger laser beam profile, and thereby reduce the uncertainty due to second-
order Doppler shifts, AC Stark Shifts, and transit-time broadening. A frequency-
comb and a frequency-beat technique will be used to monitor the instantaneous
laser frequency as positronium atoms transit the excitation beam. These
innovations should reduce the uncertainty in the measurement by a factor of 300,
with the goal of reaching a 10 kHz uncertainty. This work will train graduate
students in a combination of atomic physics, positron science, laser
spectroscopy, and metrology. This training will benefit the students as well as
the nation by providing highly skilled Ph.D.'s for the scientific workforce. The
University of California Riverside is a Department of Education Designated
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) with 50% of Physics majors and 10% of
domestic graduate students from under-represented ethnic minority groups.
Several undergraduate researchers and a high school teacher will also be
involved in these experiments, and this will help to attract more participants
to STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.