* 2110225
* Simulating Spins with an Array of Single Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kang-Kuen Ni, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum mechanics is at the heart of
countless scientific problems, from the detailed behavior of molecules to
superconductivity to microelectronics to lasers. The simplest quantum mechanical
behavior has already been used to build the precise atomic clocks at the heart
of our Global Positioning System, which underlies the smartphone maps that most
Americans use for navigation. The current project funds a study of more complex
quantum behavior, where many quantum systems interact in a precisely controlled
manner. As moderately-sized interacting quantum systems are beyond the
prediction power of even the world’s fastest supercomputers, such “quantum
simulators” are thought to offer new insights that may advance chemistry,
physics, medicine, and energy technology. The systems developed here, based on
individually controlled interacting molecules, will also strengthen American
leadership in the world-wide pursuit of quantum technologies and train and
prepare students for the quantum technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
simulation, where phase diagrams and dynamics of many-body quantum systems can
be simulated directly by precisely controlled laboratory analogues, has
generated much interest in the Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics (AMO)
community. Platforms for quantum simulation abound and have already seen success
in studying quantum magnetism, many-body localization, the Fermi-Hubbard model,
and topological phases. Fully controlled systems of ultracold molecules, with
their rich internal structure and long-range electric dipole interactions, have
been proposed as candidates to add to these platforms in simulating the dynamics
of spin systems, among many others. This project aims to create a quantum
simulator of spin dynamics consisting of a configurable array of ultracold
dipolar molecules, assembled atom by atom and held in individual optical
tweezers. The work involves expanding full quantum state control of a single
molecule to an array of molecules and tuning their inter-particle interactions
by electric field and microwave control. Furthermore, a combination of optical
tweezers and lattices to simultaneously reduce photon scattering while allowing
uniform trapping potentials, high trapping frequencies, flexible geometries, and
a fast repetition rate will be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.