* 2110584
* Quantum Many-Body Thermodynamic Engines
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Weld, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 359,328.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Thermodynamics, originally developed in the
19th century as a tool for understanding the performance of steam engines, has
developed into a central theoretical model which lies at the foundation of our
modern understanding of the physical world. While it is increasingly understood
that quantum phenomena can modify and in some cases enhance the performance of
thermodynamic engines beyond classical limits, few experimental realizations of
quantum heat engines have been demonstrated. This project will realize heat
engines which use deeply quantum-mechanical trapped gases as a working fluid, in
order to explore technological and scientific opportunities at the interface
between 19th-century thermodynamics and 21st-century quantum control. The
experiments may enable not only applications in the energy efficiency of
emerging quantum technologies, but also new insights into the foundations of
technologically-relevant principles of thermodynamics. The research will be
performed by postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students, who will
benefit from mentorship and training in modern techniques of experimental
quantum mechanics. A graduate-undergraduate team will be supported in each
summer of the grant period to develop their skills in mentoring and laboratory
research. The PI will expand his efforts to support the professional development
of young researchers via workshops and lectures in a targeted undergraduate
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;While
quantum coherence has been shown to enable beyond-classical performance in
single-particle quantum heat engines, the role of characteristics such as
entanglement in many-body quantum thermodynamic engines is incompletely
understood and remains a topic of active investigation. This project explores
quantum many-body thermodynamic engines using tunable interacting degenerate
bosonic gases as the working fluid. The project has three specific aims: the
creation of a many-body Feshbach engine using a Bose condensate with tunable
interactions, the experimental optimization of a quantum thermodynamic engine
using shortcuts to adiabaticity, and the realization of a heat engine with a
many-body-localized quantum gas as the working fluid. Success would pave the way
for the application of modern quantum control techniques to some of the most
fundamental thermodynamic processes of energy usage and conversion. In the long
run, a better understanding of quantum thermodynamics could have an impact on
many aspects of science and technology, including potentially the effort to
develop efficient quantum information processing architectures. Furthermore, the
results of this work will strengthen the already-vibrant interplay and exchange
of ideas between the fields of quantum thermodynamics and atomic
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.