* 2110318
* RUI: Photoinduced Ultrafast Relaxation, Ionization, and Impact-Induced Positronium Formation of Fullerene Class of Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* HIMADRI CHAKRABORTY, Northwest Missouri State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 215,999.00

By shining laser light on a molecule, one can probe the molecule’s response to
radiation and the molecule’s successive relaxation processes. This is a powerful
scientific method to learn fundamental properties of materials and is therefore
beneficial for the progress of basic science and applied technology. The
molecules to be studied in the current research program are Buckminster
fullerenes and larger fullerenes, including atoms/clusters caged inside these
molecules (endofullerenes), and polymerized fullerenes. These materials hold the
promise of exciting applications in areas including quantum computations,
superconductivity, biomedical fields, drug delivery research, magnetic resonance
imaging, molecular devices, energy storage, conversion and organic
photovoltaics. Hence, understanding the physical/chemical structure and response
properties of these systems are matters of great scientific interest. Using
large scale, high performance computer simulations the program aims to
investigate in real time these molecular processes. Investigations will be
performed to learn how electrons inside the system individually couple to the
molecule’s vibration, collectively interact with each other to move/relax
internally or exit the system, and the role that structure, geometry, and
internal energy distribution of the system plays in each mechanism. As an
interesting component of the research, plans are in place to test some of these
spectroscopic properties by colliding fullerene materials with positrons, the
exotic antiparticles of electrons. Undergraduate students are involved to
enhance their educational experience and motivate them for physics/science
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes the following detailed
studies: I) Photoinduced charge transfer (CT) is a key process in organic
photovoltaics. The strong coupling of ionic and electronic degrees of freedom
drives these ultrafast processes. Frameworks based on nonadiabatic molecular
dynamics are appropriate for providing accurate, comprehensive descriptions of
the underlying mechanism. Using high-performance computational methodology, the
group plans to simulate and study relaxation processes in selected
endofullerenes to motivate experiments. Initial photoexcitations within the
confined atom, or the confining fullerene, or from-atom-to-fullerene “transfer”
excitations will be considered. Repeated intermediate CTs causing the electron
to toggle between the atom and the fullerene, including transient delay events,
during the relaxation will be followed in real time. This track of research
opens a new subfield of ultrafast chronoscopy. II) Attosecond photoemission
calculations and studies of fullerenes and endofullerenes. This line of research
will dovetail well with active research in ultrafast AMO, where novel attosecond
laser pulses have enabled precision studies of light-matter interactions. III)
Inter-Coulombic decay (ICD) is a nonradiative relaxation of a vacancy in a
cluster and a topic of contemporary interest. Endofullerenes, being asymmetric
dimers of concentric systems, can induce novel ICDs. The planned studies on ICDs
in cluster-endofullerenes can predict fundamental effects and drive experiments.
V) Positronium (Ps) formation following the impact of positrons on matter. The
science to be learned from the study of Ps formation from
fullerenes/endofullerenes at plasmon resonance energies will usher new
directions of Ps spectroscopy, spawning experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.