* 2110811
* Finite Element Approximations of Developable Surfaces with Curved Folds
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Andrea Bonito, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 09/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The ability to generate complex and robust deformations from relatively small
energies has a tremendous number of applications in many areas including the
strategic areas of aerospace, nanotechnology and biotechnology. This research
project explores the potential benefits of folding devices where folding does
not necessarily occur on straight lines. Compared to more traditional origami-
type deformations, curved creases greatly expand the range and rigidity of
achievable configurations. The design of deployable surfaces such as solar
panels, solar sails, space telescopes, airbags, flapping devices, and ingestible
robots are few examples benefiting from this technology. This project
encompasses the mathematical modeling of folding devices, the design of
numerical algorithms predicting their deformations, and a mathematical analysis
guaranteeing the efficiency of the predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
consider thin materials resisting shear and stretch but allowing for bending
away from non-necessarily straight creases. In recent years, these curved
origamis received significant attention from the scientific community in view of
the fascinating variety of shapes they can exhibit, their ability to produce
rigid configurations and flapping mechanisms, their capacity to undergo large
deformations using a small amount of energy, and their applicability at small
and large scales alike. The outcomes of this research program include the
derivation of a reduced plate model for thin materials resisting bending and
allowing for folding along curved locations, the design and analysis of finite
element algorithms approximating the dynamics and equilibriums of the
corresponding plate deformations, and a parallel implementation of the proposed
algorithms illustrating their efficiency on benchmarks as well as on
configurations relevant to practitioners. Central in this study, the concept of
gamma convergence is used to justify the reduced model but also developed for
the analysis of the associated numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.