* 2110460
* WoU-MMA: New Frontiers in the Search for Continuous Gravitational Waves from the Low-Mass X-Ray Binary Scorpius X-1
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* John Whelan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Multimessenger astrophysics (MMA) combines different means of observation such
as electromagnetic and gravitational waves (GWs), as seen in the 2017 LIGO-Virgo
observation of a binary neutron star inspiral associated with a gamma-ray burst,
followed by multiple observations of an electromagnetic counterpart. A promising
MMA target is the low-mass X-ray binary (LMXB) Scorpius X-1, long studied in the
X-ray, radio and optical spectral regions. This binary star system consists of a
neutron star, an extremely dense object more massive than the sun and the size
of a city, together with a less massive star, the outer layers of which are
being pulled onto the neutron star by its gravity. The neutron star is believed
to be spinning tens to hundreds of times a second, and is one of the most
promising sources of long-lived gravitational waves. The goal of this project is
to detect or further constrain those waves, which will broaden the field of
Gravitational Wave Astronomy beyond the short-lived GW signals observed so far
by LIGO and Virgo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve faculty and
students of the Rochester Institute of Technology, who will conduct the most
sensitive search ever for GWs from Sco X-1 using data from the upcoming fourth
observing run of the Advanced LIGO, Advanced Virgo, and KAGRA detectors, probing
the range of plausible signal strengths over a wide range of frequencies. The
program will also be extended by 1) comparing search methods for Sco X-1 with
mock data validation, 2) expanding the search to other LMXBs, and 3)
investigating a hierarchical follow-ups to searches for neutron stars in binary
systems, including previously unobserved objects. It will also enhance the
sensitivity of a variety of continuous-wave searches by incorporating an
improved detection statistic into the LSC algorithm library. The search for the
Sco X-1 is considered a "highest priority" by the LIGO scientific collaboration,
and this grant will be instrumental in maximizing its
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.