* 2110604
* Faculty Research and Education Development Program II
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Blake Riggs, American Society For Cell Biology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2026
* USD 918,584.00

Over the past 40 years, there has been an expansion in our understanding of the
world through a scientific lens; however, there is a recognition that we are not
fully engaging our scientific talent pool. The Faculty Research and Educational
Development (FRED) Program seeks to broaden participation through mentored
relationships for postdoctoral scholars and junior faculty members, many of whom
are from groups historically and currently underrepresented in the sciences. In
addition, given the impact that minority-serving institutions (MSIs) have on
broadening participation in the sciences, the FRED program also encourages the
participation of faculty members at MSIs. FRED was developed by the Minorities
Affairs Committee (MAC), a standing committee of the American Society for Cell
Biology (ASCB) tasked with addressing issues of historically underrepresented
cell biologists. Specifically, the FRED program matches junior scientists with
senior mentors who have demonstrated funding success at research-intensive
institutions for a long-term mentoring relationship focused on the preparation
and submission of a research or educational grant to an external funding agency.
Over the past 7 years, 46 historically underrepresented scholars or junior
faculty at minority-serving institutions (MSIs) have participated in the FRED
Program with a funding success rate of 62% and 27% of them receiving more than
one award. The FRED program is organized with participants attending a Career
Development Workshop, participating in a mentored relationship to prepare a
proposal, and a Mock Review Panel at the annual ASCB conference to review the
proposal and provide the mentee comments before submission to a funding agency.
The FRED-II program will continue with the mission of improving grant funding
success and career development for junior faculty and will implement improved
support pathways for FRED mentees who are not successful in their first proposal
submission and will look to resubmit their proposal. It will continue with the
successful implementation of a summer workshop to be held primarily near or at
MSIs. In addition, in alignment with national imperatives in increasing
diversity among faculty, the program will create a pre-FRED workshop designed to
engage potential FRED mentees to develop an applicant pool for future FRED
workshops. The FRED-II program will continue to support and develop the next
generation of research scientists and leaders and broaden their participation in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FRED-II program will support junior faculty
and postdoctoral scholars through a structured mentored relationship with a
senior faculty member. The year-long program will include a summer career
development workshop for all FRED mentees, monthly mentor-mentee meetings with
in-person reciprocal visits to mentor-mentees campuses. FRED mentees will
develop a proposal with support from their selected mentor and participate in a
winter mock review panel hosted at the annual ASCB meeting. Meetings and
reciprocal visits will continue until a proposal is submitted to a federal
agency. FRED-II will also include continued participation and additional support
for FRED mentees who are unsuccessful in securing funding on their first
attempt. The FRED-II program will also include evaluative efforts to inform the
leadership of the effectiveness of the program and areas where improvements are
needed. Overall, the FRED-II program promotes the careers of underrepresented
junior faculty and postdoctoral scholars at research institutions and MSIs
through mentorship and grant success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.