* 2110314
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Mechanism of liquid-liquid phase separation in pathway-specific transcription regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Kunxin Luo, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 945,168.00

The objective of this research is to determine how a human cell generates
specific biological outcomes in response to a given hormone or growth factor. In
animals, cells are exposed to a variety of regulatory hormones and growth
factors that act as a signal to cause the cells to adopt different fates,
including growth, survival, acquisition of specific functions such as producing
insulin, or becoming a special cell type such as a neuron. These hormones or
growth factors cannot enter cells and thus rely on a series of proteins inside
the cell to transmit the signals into the cell nucleus and orchestrate the
changes in gene expression, leading to specific biological outcomes. A key
unanswered question is how these signaling proteins activate highly specific
sets of genes in response to a hormone. This signaling specificity is essential
for normal development and cell function. Disruption of this specificity results
in defects in development and other diseases. This research project, a
collaborative effort of the Luo lab at UC Berkeley and the Henis lab at Tel Aviv
University, will dissect the molecular basis of an important signaling pathway
to understand how a single signal can create different cellular outcomes, a
long-standing puzzle in signal transduction. The project will also contribute to
interdisciplinary education and training of postdoctoral fellows, undergraduate
and graduate students, including an underrepresented minority graduate student.
Finally, the project is expected to contribute to the broader scientific
community through publication of the major findings and sharing of
reagents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hippo signaling pathway will be used as a
model system for this project. Hippo signaling regulates multiple biological
processes via two homologous transcription effectors, TAZ and YAP. Although they
perform largely non-redundant functions, how this functional specificity is
achieved is unknown. Recently a process called liquid-liquid phase separation
(LLPS) has been discovered that allows intracellular proteins to form
membraneless condensates inside the cells. Our preliminary study has shown that
TAZ, but not YAP, forms nuclear condensates via LLPS together with its important
functional partners. We propose that TAZ may employ LLPS to compartmentaÂ¬lize
its partner proteins that perform similar functions within a physically distinct
domain, enabling efficient gene expression and pathway insulation to generate
specificity. Biochemical and biophysical studies will be performed to define the
molecular basis of TAZ LLPS and to determine the mechanisms of TAZ LLPS
assembly. If successful, this research will provide a new paradigm to address
the broad question of signaling specificity for multiple intracellular pathways
and has many implications for fundamental cell
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function program and the Genetic Mechanisms program of the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.