* 2110172
* I-Corps: Improved Coating Properties Using Janus Particle Additives
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Shan Jiang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project offers cost-
effective, commercially scalable solutions to many long-standing challenges in
the coating industry. The technology will help improve properties such as water
resistance, adhesion, surface hardness, and film formation. The project is not
limited to waterborne architectural coatings. It may also be applied to other
coating systems, including coatings for automobiles, inks for printing,
cosmetics for personal care products, and functional coatings for medical
appliances. The technology can potentially increase the performance and lifetime
for coatings that play a critical role in protecting various surfaces from aging
or deteriorating. In addition, this effort represents a platform technology that
offers a unique way to control surface properties, which may enable new designs
for functional coatings, including self-cleaning and anti-bacterial coatings.
The use of these new coatings may, in turn, reduce the pollution to the
environment and reduce energy costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on a new way of creating self-stratified coatings using amphiphilic
Janus particles, where one side of the particle can resist water and the other
side can be highly adhesive. Upon drying, Janus particles vigorously accumulate
at the air-water interface with fast kinetics. Their hydrophobic sides orient
towards the air to enhance the water-repellency while the hydrophilic sides
sustain strong adhesion with the underlying layer. This proposal explores the
potential commercialization and market of such technology for creating water-
resistant coatings and the broad applications of the newly developed self-
stratification system. It provides potential improvements in surface properties
by directly adding Janus particles without redesigning the original coating
chemistries. The results will help guide future research directions of Janus
particles and self-stratified coating materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.