* 2110780
* Lagrange Multiplier Expression Methods for Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jiawang Nie, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Optimization techniques are useful for solving problems in economics,
telecommunications, quantum physics, and other fields. This project involves
Lagrange multiplier expression methods for optimization, which are use useful in
computing. The project identifies and aims to solve various research tasks from
the field of optimization within computational mathematics and related areas.
The research topics of this project have broad applications in many areas of
STEM. The computational methodology produced by this project will be highly
useful in applications such as game theory, power allocation, environment
pollution control, quantum entanglement, and tensor optimization. This project
will also involve training and education for young
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to solve various research
problems in optimization relevant for the applications. Specifically, the
project will involve Lagrange multiplier expressions which provide useful
framework within computational mathematics. Expressing Lagrange multipliers in
terms of objective and constraining functions is an important issue in
optimization. Tight convex relaxation is efficient for solving computational
questions. The research topics include polynomial optimization, convex algebraic
geometry, moment and tensor problems, bilevel optimization, generalized Nash
equilibrium problems, stochastic optimization, tensor computation, tensor
optimization, and other related problems. The project will address computational
questions involving polynomials, matrices, moments and tensors, frequently
appearing from various applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.