* 2110467
* Spin Squeezing and Entanglement in Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Chapman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 691,598.00

This research will advance the state of the art in quantum-enhanced metrology,
in which measurements of technically important quantities such as time and
frequency, electro-magnetic fields and inertial forces are made with
sensitivities approaching the limits set by fundamental quantum theory.
Technological off-shoots of this research could lead to precision sensors for
navigation and magnetometry, atomic clocks and emerging quantum technologies,
including quantum computing, quantum simulation and quantum communication. The
primary activity of the research is experimental investigation of ultracold
atoms cooled to near absolute zero temperature where they form a uniquely
quantum coherent state of matter known as a Bose-Einstein condensate. The
experiments are performed by graduate students and undergraduate students who
gain important expertise in the advanced laboratory techniques and quantum
science. Additionally, the research is disseminated to a broad audience by
incorporating results into classroom lectures, maintaining a dynamic website,
hosting laboratory tours, making visits to local schools and facilitating
popular press releases about the work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
research project will investigate quantum squeezed and entangled states in
atomic Bose-Einstein condensates with internal spin degrees of freedom. The
investigations employ rubidium atomic Bose-Einstein condensates (BEC) confined
in optical traps. The dynamic evolution of the internal spin degrees of freedom
of the ensemble of atoms results from spin-dependent collisional interactions
that generate quantum correlated or entangled states of the spin ensembles. This
quantum system is simple enough so that both the ground state and evolution of
non-equilibrium excited states can be quantitatively compared to theoretical
predictions. Yet it offers a rich array of phenomena including spontaneous
symmetry-breaking, entangled states and non-trivial geometric phases. The
experimental platform provides a powerful combination of tools to explore
important topics including quantum critical phenomena and the generation of
massively entangled states. A common theme of the research is the role of finite
size effects that are manifested in the quantum fluctuations of the system, and
these studies will provide insight into fundamental principles of many-particle
quantum mechanics that are important to many areas of physics. This work will
build upon recent investigations of quantum spin dynamics that include the
measurement of spin-nematic squeezing, demonstration of dynamical stabilization
and parametric excitation, high precision studies of a second order quantum
phase transition, and exploration of Kibble-Zurek universality in excitations
across a quantum critical point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.