* 2110728
* Numerical Methods for Deterministic and Stochastic Phase Field Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Yukun Li, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 67,715.00

The project will consider algorithms for moving interface problems that have
broad applications in materials science, geometry, and broad physical sciences
and engineering. The phase field model is one of the most important models to
formulate the moving interface problems, and it arises from many
interdisciplinary applications, such as the nucleation and growth processes of
polycrystalline materials, chemical reaction, solidification dynamics, and so
on. This project proposes several accurate and efficient algorithms to solve the
phase field models and to further explore the connections between different
areas. In addition, the project will address randomness, which plays an
important role in the phase field model applications due to the existence of the
impurities, and specifically will consider the design, analysis, and
implementation of numerical methods for the stochastic phase field models which
incorporate the randomness. Moreover, this project trains graduate students to
equip them with necessary skills for their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project develops a few accurate and
efficient numerical algorithms for both deterministic and stochastic phase field
models. The deterministic case discusses the sharpest error bounds for the
general phase field models in various spaces and their approximations to
geometric flows, the adaptive two-grid algorithms, and some optimization
algorithms which are robust to topological changes for the fourth-order phase
field models. A package of the phase field models and geometric flows will be
developed to better study the theoretical results and to predict other new
results. The stochastic case focuses on discrete stability and convergence
results for the fourth-order stochastic phase field models, and sharpest
discrete stability and convergence results for the second-order stochastic phase
field models using stochastic parabolic duality, which may provide theoretical
foundation for the approximations to stochastic geometric
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.