* 2110472
* Hard Scattering Processes in QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Andreas Metz, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

Nucleons (protons and neutrons) make up more than 99% of the mass of the visible
matter of the Universe. They are composed of quarks and gluons (partons), the
fundamental particles of quantum chromodynamics (QCD). The parton structure of
the nucleon is encoded in different types of parton distributions (PDFs), which
can be extracted from high-energy scattering processes or obtained from first-
principles calculations (lattice-QCD). For one crucial PDF, the nucleon
transversity, a striking and persistent mismatch exists between results from
experiment and lattice-QCD. The PI and his collaborators will revisit and
improve the extraction of the transversity from experiment, aiming to obtain
state-of-the-art information about the transversity from phenomenology and to
find the source of the aforementioned discrepancy. Furthermore, the PI will
perform comprehensive calculations in perturbative QCD that are needed to
obtain, from lattice-QCD results, two important classes of PDFs that are
difficult to address experimentally. The PI will also carefully study the QCD
energy momentum tensor, which contains information about fundamental hadron
properties like the mass and the spin, as well as pressure and shear
distributions. Moreover, the PI will mentor graduate students, conduct outreach
activities for high school students and undergraduates, and offer a summer
program on hadronic physics for both undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project deals with three topics in hadronic
physics. First, the PI will perform a new fit of the nucleonâ€™s transversity
distribution based on data for di-hadron production. After a new leading-order
analysis, the transversity will be extracted in a collinear next-to-leading
order (NLO) framework. This includes the first-ever NLO calculation, in
perturbative QCD, of the relevant di-hadron observables in electron-positron
annihilation, lepton-nucleon scattering and proton-proton collisions. The study
can shed new light on the longstanding tension between information on the
transversity from experimental data and from lattice-QCD. Second, the PI will
consider Euclidean parton correlators to enhance our understanding of twist-3
PDFs and generalized parton distributions via lattice-QCD. Specifically, the PI
will compute in perturbative QCD the relevant one-loop matching coefficients,
which are crucial for relating results from lattice-QCD to the light-cone
correlation functions one is interested in. Third, the PI will consider the QCD
energy momentum tensor to study the mass decomposition of the pion in QCD, and
to explore the pressure as well as the distributions of pressure and shear
inside hadrons. A focus will be on properly renormalized operators, an important
topic which so far has not received much attention, especially in relation to
the pressure and shear distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.