* 2110706
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Transport in Self-Assembled Hybrid Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Letian Dou, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 158,534.00

New phenomena emerge when two semiconductors are brought together in a periodic
structure. Such semiconducting superlattices have properties not observed in
bulk semiconductor crystals. Their unique properties have led to novel devices
such as tunable optical filters, infrared photodetectors, and quantum cascade
lasers. Superlattices are expensive to make, requiring ultrahigh vacuum and
meticulous layer by layer assembly. The PIs aim to discover a new type of
superlattice based on hybrid perovskites, materials with both organic and
inorganic components. Hybrid perovskites can be solution processed, allowing for
spontaneous assembly into layered nanostructures. Their chemical diversity can
revolutionize superlattice research with a vastly expanded range of materials
with varied properties. This research will enable future superlattice devices
that are scalable and cost-effective. This project will also provide
interdisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students, providing
them with critical-thinking and problem-solving skills needed for CAREERs in
STEM and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconducting superlattices are quantum
heterostructures important to condensed matter physics and with applications in
advanced electronic technologies. The constituents of the superlattices to date
have been limited to inorganic semiconductors, such as GaAs and AlGaAs. This
project will investigate quantum transport in a new class of semiconducting
superlattices based on Ruddlesden-Popper halide perovskites. The project will
employ theoretical and experimental studies in an iterative manner so as to
accelerate materials discovery. First principle density functional theory (DFT)
calculations will be used to predict materials structures and the optical and
electronic properties will be modeled by combining tight-binding models with the
DFT calculations. Superlattice structures will be prepared by solution
processing and self-assembly, allowing for facile tuning of the electronic
structure by varying constituents. The design strategy, using semiconducting
organic ligands, will create new possibilities for band engineering.
Electrooptical measurements will be used to identify signatures of
semiconducting superlattices such as electronic minibands. Complementary
electrical characterization will be used to search for evidence of quantum
transport, using optical excitation to generate charge carriers without
unintended effects arising from doping. The project will elucidate the
properties of 2D perovskite superlattices, differentiate their behaviors from
conventional inorganic superlattices, and determine if their optical and
electronic properties can be tailored in a controllable
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.