* 2110861
* SHF:Small:Techniques for Generating Correctly Rounded Math Libraries
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Santosh Nagarakatte, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,979.00

Every programming language needs math libraries, which provide implementations
of elementary functions for the floating-point representation and its variants.
This project aims to develop correctly rounded math libraries for a wide range
of representations that approximate real numbers. This project's novelty lies in
creating polynomial approximations that produce the correctly rounded value of
an elementary function f(x) (i.e., the value of f(x) rounded to the target
representation) rather than the real value of f(x). It provides more margin to
identify correct polynomials while generating efficient polynomials. This
project's impacts are in advancing the state-of-the-art in approximating
elementary functions for a large number of data types while allowing domain
scientists to experiment with both precision and dynamic range of their data
types. It has the potential to influence committees on various standards to
mandate correctly rounded results for existing and new representations. This
project also will educate practitioners, graduate and undergraduate students on
foundational abstractions in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
structures the task of generating efficient polynomial approximations that
produce correctly rounded results as a linear-programming problem. Specifically,
it proposes counterexample-guided polynomial generation for generating correct
results for all inputs with large data types. To generate implementations with
good performance, it proposes the generation of piecewise polynomials. It also
explores new range-reduction techniques that are amenable to the linear-
programming formulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.