* 2110102
* PM: Quantum-Enabled Spectroscopy of Highly Charged Metal Ions as a Search for New Physics at the Low-Energy, High-Precision Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Samuel Brewer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 510,530.00

For this project, an experiment will be developed to perform high-precision
laser spectroscopy of trapped highly charged ions for the purpose of testing
fundamental physics at low energy. Highly charged ions (atoms in which several
electrons have been removed) are among the most sensitive systems to a possible
time-variation of the fundamental constants. This high sensitivity, combined
with laser-accessible transitions, makes them a unique platform for
investigating predicted extensions to the standard model of particle physics.
This project will focus on the development of an optical atomic clock based on
trapped highly charged ions. The experiment will combine techniques that have
been developed for ion trap-based quantum computing and optical frequency
standards with a compact source of highly charged ions. This work includes the
training of students in the fields of experimental atomic, molecular, and
optical physics, optical frequency metrology, and precision measurements. The
experimental work will be performed in close collaboration with researchers from
the theoretical elementary particle physics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several optical transitions in highly charged
ions provide both an enhanced sensitivity to possible time-variation of the
fine-structure constant (alpha) and favorable systematics as optical clocks when
compared to singly charged ions and neutral atoms. Using quantum-enabled
spectroscopy techniques, the research team aims to develop an optical atomic
clock based on narrow linewidth transitions in highly charged ions. A highly
charged ion optical clock with a fractional systematic uncertainty at the level
of one part in ten to the eighteen could lead to a factor of one hundred
improvement in the current laboratory limit on time-variation of alpha. Either
an improved limit on the constancy of alpha or a non-zero signal of the time-
variation of alpha could be used to constrain physics beyond the standard model
of particle physics. Results from this experimental work will be analyzed in the
context of theoretical extensions to the standard model that propose new dark
matter candidates and couplings that would lead to the observation of a non-zero
value of the time-variation of alpha.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.