* 2110278
* Unifying the Diquark and Molecular Models for Exotic Hadrons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Richard Lebed, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 307,789.00

The strong nuclear force, responsible for packing protons and neutrons together
into the tiny space of the atomic nucleus, is also the driving force that
combines fundamental “quark” particles into compounds called “hadrons”. For 50
years after the development of the quark model, only two types of hadrons were
known: 3-quark “baryons” (including protons and neutrons) and
1-quark/1-antiquark “mesons”. Since 2003, however, 50 new particles have been
discovered that are apparent “tetraquarks” or “pentaquarks”, and more are being
found every year. Nevertheless, their internal structure, which influences their
external properties and even how many there are, remains unresolved. The two
most prominent models for this structure are to treat the new particles either
as molecules of known hadrons, or as bound states of “diquarks”. Under previous
NSF funding, the PI developed a variant of the latter, the “dynamical diquark
model”, that has been particularly successful in explaining data, and included
PhD and undergraduate students in the research. Under the new grant, the PI will
show (again, with junior colleagues) how to generalize the model by including
physical effects that molecular models incorporate especially well. This work
will produce the best unified model in existence for these new types of
particle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all particles discovered in the 21st
century are either conventional heavy-quark hadrons that fill gaps in the quark
model, or exotic hadrons that are likely tetraquarks or pentaquarks. Of the 50
exotics observed to date, no consensus has emerged regarding their spectrum or
structure. The best-known alternatives are di-hadron molecules and bound states
of diquark quasiparticles. The PI recently developed a complete model of exotics
based solely upon diquarks interacting via the Born-Oppenheimer (adiabatic)
approximation, and obtained multiple quantitative results supported by existing
measurements to a surprising degree. However, the remarkable proximity of many
exotics to di-hadron thresholds suggests a strong molecular component as well.
Including both diquark and molecular components amounts to handling level
crossings in a diabatic formulation. The PI will apply the atomic-physics
diabatic formalism of configuration mixing to the mixing of diquark-based exotic
hadronic states with amplitude enhancements that occur near di-hadron thresholds
(a primary feature of molecular models), and obtain detailed predictions for the
spectrum and decay properties of exotics, thus creating the most physically
realistic model for exotics to date. The approach is straightforward to
implement, and as demonstrated by the PI’s recent publications, is accessible to
both PhD students and advanced undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.