* 2110636
* Know Your Noise: Discovery in Gravitational Wave Astronomy Through Parametric Noise Modeling
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ben Farr, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 180,000.00

After decades of research and development, the search for gravitational waves
has finally succeeded, and their detection has forever changed the field of
astronomy. The LIGO and Virgo observatories detected at least one binary neutron
star merger and ten binary black hole mergers by the end of their second
observing run, and well over 50 more compact binary mergers in their third
observing run. While these detections have already validated the theory of
general relativity at new extremes, enabled novel cosmological measurements, and
greatly advanced our understanding of compact objects, we have only scratched
the surface of what these detectors will teach us. As sensitivities improve, we
continue to push the boundaries of the observed compact binary parameter space,
and we must address limitations in current noise modeling techniques to fortify
our efforts to continue making discoveries. Noise transients — or “glitches” —
have already challenged current analysis techniques, and potentially stand in
the way of discovering binaries with the most extreme mass ratios and spins;
possibly the most informative for understanding compact binary formation and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The group will develop empirical methods to
construct parameterized models of common glitch classes that will model noise
transients with unparalleled fidelity, enabling robust noise mitigation,
facilitating detector commissioning efforts, and enabling impactful discoveries
that gravitational waves are uniquely suited to make. In parallel the group will
leverage astronomy's innate ability to capture the public's curiosity to engage
in conversations on astronomy and broader STEM topics within the Oregon
community. They will launch the Gas Up and Gaze Up program, where researchers
will bring telescopes to gas stations throughout Oregon to host walk-up
observing sessions and discuss astronomy and STEM topics with gas station
patrons. This will be coupled with the efforts of the University of Oregon’s
Pine Mountain Observatory (PMO), where graduate and undergraduate student
facilitators will receive telescope operation and outreach training. These
students will also be the founding members of a pool of teaching assistants and
near-peer mentors trained to use PMO remotely, enabling inclusion of remote
observing projects in existing courses in the undergraduate physics curriculum
at the University of Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.