* 2110598
* Optical Path and Birefringence Characterization of Crystalline Coatings for Gravitational-wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Andri Gretarsson, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2024
* USD 143,321.00

This award supports studies of thermal and optical properties of aluminum
gallium arsenide (AlGaAs) crystalline mirrors. Crystalline mirrors are extremely
thin (micrometer-scale) monocrystalline coatings laid on top of a suitable
substrate such as fused silica glass. These crystalline coatings have the
potential to significantly reduce the noise in interferometric gravitational
wave detectors like those operated by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-
Wave Observatory, LIGO. The Advanced LIGO detectors inaugurated the field of
gravitational wave astronomy with dozens of detections in the last five years.
To increase the astrophysical reach of the detectors, both near-term and future
upgrades are being planned. The work performed under this award supports these
upgrades. It also supports indirect development of science through the training
of future scientists, and contains a significant outreach component to high-
school students and senior citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coating thermal noise
(CTN) in currently available mirror coatings now constrains our ability to
increase the astrophysical reach of upgraded detectors. Crystalline AlGaAs
coatings have the potential to solve this problem since they can reduce CTN by a
factor of at least five. Yet, significant work needs to be done to realize an
AlGaAs coating suitable for installation in interferometric gravitational wave
detectors. Most of the studies are aimed at characterizing AlGaAs coating
birefringence, birefringence uniformity across the coating, thermo-optic effect,
and thermo-optic uniformity. A specialized Michelson interferometer will be
constructed to map birefringence over the full face of 3 inch diameter AlGaAs
coatings. Also, thermo-optic noise cancellation relies on uniformity of the
thermo-optic effect across the coating. Existing thermo-optic apparatus will
therefore be modified to map the thermo-optic effect over the full coating. The
broader impacts of the proposal include the involvement of cross-generational
teams in scientific inquiry. Project “Tap Into Spacetime” will be launched where
teams constituted of at least one senior citizen and one or more high school
students will work together to build a capable, 5-30 MHz, antenna. They will use
free software tools developed for radio reception to perform spectrographic and
aural analysis of the data received by their antenna. This activity "graduates"
them to perform a similar analysis of public gravitational wave data using the
same tools. Each signal has a distinct aural character and spectrographic
signature that together give clues about its origin. The teams will find, save,
and categorize such events and features. They discuss their findings on a
dedicated Slack workspace. The teams will report their results with talks at
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University and some will attend a small scientific
meeting such as the Society of Amateur Radio Astronomer’s annual meeting or the
regional APS four-corners meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.