* 2110348
* Minimizing Quantum Decoherence in Gravitational-Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jonathan Richardson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

This award supports the development of instrumentation aimed at extending the
astrophysical reach of gravitational-wave detectors. Since their first detection
by Advanced LIGO in 2015, gravitational waves have opened a new observational
window on the Universe. These faint disturbances in distant space-time carry new
and complementary information to the light observed by telescopes. In the coming
decade, gravitational-wave detections will reveal new insights into extreme
gravity, ultra-dense states of matter inside neutron stars, and the nature of
black holes. The LIGO detectors employ high-power laser beams over 4-kilometer
distances to measure passing gravitational waves. This project will develop
novel adaptive optics capable of significantly reducing the optical losses
inside LIGO and future detectors, enabling higher laser power and greater
sensitivity to gravitational waves. In addition to its astrophysical impact,
this new technology will provide a general means of achieving lower loss in
complex laser systems, with potential to accelerate discoveries in many fields
including atomic, molecular, and optical physics and optical quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum noise limits the sensitivity of
gravitational-wave detectors at high frequencies, where some of the most
compelling observations—black hole ringdowns and binary neutron star
mergers—stand to be made. The use of squeezed coherent states of light and
higher laser power directly reduce this noise, extending the astrophysical reach
of the detectors. To support higher levels of squeezing and laser power, this
project will develop novel low-noise adaptive optics for dynamic control of the
laser wavefront at higher spatial-frequencies, endowing gravitational-wave
detectors with critical new corrective capabilities. Higher-order optical
aberrations induce decoherence of the squeezed state and degrade the optical
gain of the laser cavities—and currently limit the operating power of Advanced
LIGO. Through the optical loss reduction it will afford, this new technology
seeks to enable a quantum noise reduction factor of 1.7 from reaching the 750 kW
Advanced-era design power, as well as greater squeezed-light enhancement. This
will both extend the astrophysical range of the detectors, increasing detection
rates, and enable higher-precision measurements of individual
waveforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.