* 2110565
* PM: Electron and Positron Magnetic Moments from a Quantum Cyclotron
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Gerald Gabrielse, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,792,026.00

In this project, graduate students will develop apparatus and deploy quantum
methods that are capable of extraordinary precision. The unusual sensitivity
should allow detection of one-quantum transitions of a single elementary
particle. Extremely small motions of a single charge will produce tiny
electrical currents that will be detected using instruments cooled to
temperatures near to absolute zero. The faint noise from the thermal motion of
the electrons in the detector will be greatly suppressed with a new suite of
quantum methods. The quantum state of the particle suspended on the apparatus
will be deduced from the rate at which the trapped electron or positron jumps
between alternate quantum states. The new apparatus and quantum methods will
make it possible to test the most precise prediction of our most fundamental
mathematical description of physical reality, the so-called Standard Model of
Particle Physics (SM). A great mystery of modern physics is that this SM
description works extremely well in most cases, even though it is not consistent
with basic features of our universe. A resolution of this fundamental mystery
would be extremely important, given that a change to our fundamental paradigm
for physical reality would almost certainly lead to new science and technology.
Furthermore, a fundamental constant that is essential to the system of units
used internationally for science and commerce will be measured more accurately
than ever before. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of the new detection
methods are “quantum circumvention” methods for measuring particle oscillation
frequencies. These will be used with quantum jump spectroscopy that employs
quantum nondemolition detection of occupied quantum states. The new methods will
reduce the detection backaction to the minimal intrinsic value to that from the
quantum zero-point motion of particle oscillations. The immediate goal for this
grant period is to determine the electron and positron magnetic moments to an
unprecedented accuracy of 4 parts in 10^14. This will be the most precise
measurement ever made of an elementary particle, and it will make is possible to
test the most precise prediction of the SM to this unusual precision, a test
that is 10 times more stringent than is currently possible. The comparison of
the electron and positron magnetic moments at this extraordinary precision will
test lepton CPT invariance, the most fundamental symmetry invariance of the SM
more stringently by a factor that could be as large as 200. The measurements
will also prepare the way for more accurate measurements of the muon magnetic
moment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.