* 2110824
* Understanding How Students' Sense of Belonging Develops During Undergraduate Field Experiences: Supports, Barriers, and Implications for Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Aimee Classen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2024
* USD 68,875.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by addressing a critical need
in the scholarship of STEM teaching and learning. Specifically, it is designed
to advance understanding about how students' sense of belonging develops in
undergraduate learning experiences outside of the traditional classroom. The
project will focus on residential undergraduate field courses, a pivotal
learning experience in STEM disciplines such as ecology, geology, and geography.
A sense of belonging plays an important role in students' mental health and
well-being, academic achievement and motivation, and institution-level
retention. It is also pivotal for the persistence of students from communities
that are underrepresented in STEM disciplines. The overarching goal of the
project is to build the capacity of geosciences and biology faculty to support
the development of students' sense of belonging. In this way, it can help to
improve the inclusivity of courses that are a critical pathway for thousands of
undergraduate students in field-based STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential for broad reach
and impact on student engagement and learning in multiple STEM disciplines and
is likely to have a positive impact on the inclusivity of undergraduate field
education. It may be especially important for students from communities that
have been historically excluded from field-based STEM disciplines, whose
persistence is strongly linked to sense of belonging in the scientific
community. The project focuses on advancing understanding about how students'
sense of belonging develops in residential field experiences and builds capacity
for faculty from geosciences and biology to support the growth of students'
sense of belonging. The following objectives will guide the project study: 1)
Identify factors that contribute to and hinder the development of students'
sense of belonging during residential geosciences and biology undergraduate
field courses; 2) Characterize the design and implementation of geosciences and
biology undergraduate field courses, specifically what practices faculty are
using and what challenges and needs exist for the development of students' sense
of belonging during undergraduate field courses; 3) Create an empirically-based
framework of how students' sense of belonging develops during residential
undergraduate field courses; 4) Facilitate a Community of Practice that uses and
contributes to promising practices for the design and assessment of inclusive
field courses that support the development of students' sense of belonging; and
5) Articulate a suite of promising practices that have the potential to promote
the development of students' sense of belonging during a range of formats of
undergraduate field courses and for students from different backgrounds. Using
innovative and robust mixed methods research approaches, this work will
contribute to the wider body of evidence-based, student-centered practices in
undergraduate STEM education. The work has the potential to provide a deep and
impactful contribution to the fields of discipline-based education research
(particularly in geosciences and biology), higher education, education and
social psychology, and diversity, equity, and inclusion. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.