* 2110125
* SBIR Phase I:  Computer Aided Design Toolkit for Desktop Digital Fabrication of Circuits on Paper
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Jie Qi, CHIBITRONICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 255,928.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1
project is to increase the diversity of people engaging in science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) by broadening the creative and expressive
possibilities at the intersection of craft and circuit design. The project
hypothesizes that by creating design and digital fabrication tools that leverage
familiar paper craft practices and the intrinsic motivational value the arts,
circuit design and fabrication can be made accessible to those who are novices
to circuit design and fabrication. Research shows that this approach is
especially successful for reaching those who otherwise may not participate in
STEM, especially underrepresented minorities, girls and women. By developing
software to support digital circuit design and fabrication, this project enables
users to easily share and build off of digital design templates, expanding the
reach of beginner-friendly starter projects and creating a community of learners
who can co-create and co-teach. Further, by enabling creators to connect circuit
design to consumer-friendly digital fabrication technologies like desktop craft
cutters, we will bring the digital manufacturing of electronics out of
traditionally technical environments and into entirely new and more mainstream
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation is the development of
novel electrical design software that greatly reduces the complexity of existing
electronics computer aided design tools, making the tool accessible to novice
users such as educators, hobbyists and artists. This will be done through the
elimination of schematic abstractions along with powerful simulation
capabilities uniquely catered for expressive and artistic technological
creations. By combining beginner-appropriate electronic footprints with a
drawing interface for sketching traces, users will be able to represent their
designs exactly as they would appear when built. By incorporating electrical
rule checks along with simulation of circuit behavior, the software will allow
users to iterate on their designs with confidence before they invest time in
fabricating. To address these challenges, the design of the software and
accompanying physical toolkit will be designed iteratively and in close
partnership with K-12 educators and hobby crafters through a series of user
studies to ensure that the intended audience who have never used electronic
design software before can manufacture their designs easily while being able to
express their diverse interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.