* 2110980
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost and Scalable Creation of Genomic Databases with Long-Read Next-Generation Sequencing
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Dario Dilernia, SEQUEGENICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2023
* USD 251,073.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be the development and validation of a new approach to facilitate
population-level access to genetic information contained in the human genome
currently inaccessible. Importantly, it can drive a significant reduction in
time and cost needed to scan the genome of patients who suffer from a specific
disease, from years to months, accelerating discovery cycles and producing data
with higher resolution to develop better diagnostic tools or treatments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project describes a novel approach for high-
resolution human genome sequencing using unique computational algorithms that
facilitate detection of diverse types of genetic variation using a pangenomics
approach, implemented directly on raw sequencing data. Genetic variation
inadequately captured by short-read Next Generation Sequencing, such as large
chromosomal rearrangements, long tandem repeats, or long-range haplotype
configurations, represent a significant gap in knowledge. In the last few years,
maturation of long-read Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies have begun
uncovering the role of Structural Variants (SVs) and haplotypes in disease.
However, the main limitation to expand implementation of long-read NGS is the
cost of generating sufficient sequencing coverage to compensate for the
relatively high natural error rate. The proposed technology can address this
issue directly and facilitate cost-effective long-read sequencing of human
genomes at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.