* 2110523
* PM: RUI: Searching for Optical Cycling in TlF and Long-Range Spin-Spin Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Larry Hunter, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 486,163.00

Precision measurements of the spin interactions of elementary particles can
provide new insights into the fundamental laws of nature. Elementary particles
have an intrinsic property called spin – they act as if they are constantly
spinning around like tops. Just as tops precess in the presence of gravity, the
spins of fundamental particles precess in a magnetic field. This precession is
the basis of nuclear magnetic resonance which is the underlying physics used in
the medical diagnostic known as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Recently
developed precision optical techniques have allowed the study of interactions
with particle spins with unprecedented fidelity. The researchers will use these
techniques as tools to investigate the fundamental forces and symmetries of
nature. At the most basic level, our present understanding of nature is
summarized in the “Standard Model” of particle physics. This model requires four
fundamental forces (gravitational, electromagnetic, strong and weak) to describe
all of reality as it is presently known. In one experiment, the investigators
will look for a new long-range force between particle spins that cannot be
described by the Standard Model. To optimize their search, they will measure the
interaction of their laboratory spins with all of the aligned electron spins
within the Earth. In their other experiment, the researchers hope eventually to
see if the fundamental laws of nature might be asymmetric in time. This breaking
of “time symmetry” can be studied by looking for the precession of a nuclear
spin in an electric field. Here the experimental sensitivity is increased by
using a very cold beam of molecules. Additional time asymmetry (beyond that
which has already been observed) is believed to be necessary to explain the
existence of our universe. Without time-reversal violation, our universe would
have produced equal amounts of matter and anti-matter. Their mutual annihilation
would not have allowed for the formation of galaxies, stars, planets and life.
The pursuit of these experiments will provide an enticing introduction to STEM
for many undergraduate students and provide continue experiences for the next
generation of STEM researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2013 the researchers
created the first map of the electron-spin density within the Earth. These “geo-
electrons” constitute the largest polarized spin source known. Precision
measurement of spin-precession frequencies in laboratories at the surface of the
Earth as a function of the magnetic-field direction, allows one to look for
long-range spin-spin interactions (LRSSI) between the geo-electrons and the
laboratory spins. In the first proposed experiment, a refined spin-precession
apparatus is under construction which is both well-calibrated and relatively
immune to AC light effects. This should allow at least an order of magnitude
improvement in the sensitivity of these LRSSI measurements. If an effect is seen
it would suggest the existence of a new force of nature. In current models this
force might be associated with an ultra-light vector meson, a “dark” photon, the
“unparticle”, or torsion gravity. In the second proposed experiment, the
researchers will continue their investigation of critical parameters that will
ultimately determine the sensitivity of the thallium fluoride (TlF) nuclear
electric-dipole moment (nEDM) experiment that is presently being constructed at
Argon National Lab by the CeNTREX collaboration. Specifically, the researchers
hope to continue to improve their measurements of optical cycling in TlF and to
demonstrate that this cycling can be used to exert optical forces on TlF. These
optical forces will be used to transverse cool a cryogenic molecular beam of
TlF. If successful, transverse cooling could increase the sensitivity of the TlF
nEDM experiment by about an order of magnitude. With this additional sensitivity
it is possible that a permanent nEDM will be found. Such a discovery would imply
a violation of time symmetry and could help explain the existence of our matter-
dominated universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.