* 2110757
* EAGER: Development of fluorescent sensors of temperature and iron ion concentrations around magnetic particles under the action of an oscillating magnetic field
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Igor Sokolov, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 02/29/2024
* USD 100,114.00

The goal of this project is to develop optical sensors to understand the
mechanism of treating cancer by hyperthermia (overheating). This promising
techniques is performed by first injecting magnetic nanoparticles then heating
them with a magnetic field. Hyperthermia treatment is still suffering from
multiple side effects, which prevent its broad use. It is currently believed
that increased temperature is more toxic for cancer compared to normal tissue.
In this project, the investigators will test the hypothesis that the magnetic
nanoparticles actively dissolve themself under the action of the magnetic field,
thereby adding chemical toxicity, which also helps kill cancer cells. To test
this hypothesis, new optical sensors will be developed to measure localized
temperature and iron salt concentration around the magnetic particles. The
collected knowledge will be used to increase the efficiency of hyperthermia
treatment of cancer and eventually decrease the side effects. The project will
also contribute to the education and research training of a female graduate
student in this multidisciplinary area including nanophotonics, physics, and
medicine, and results will be incorporated into “Introduction to scanning probe
microscopy” and “Nano and micro mechanics” courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
understand the mechanism of action of hyperthermia treatment on cancer cells,
ultrabright fluorescent ratiometric nanosensors of temperature and iron ions
will be developed. A thin fluorescent coating of magnetic particles will be
sensitive to the change of temperature and the concentrations of iron ions.
Ultrahigh brightness of the photonic sensors will allow detecting the changes in
temperature and ionic concentration optically, which is otherwise highly
challenging. This technique will aid in the understanding of the action of the
oscillating magnetic field on iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles. This
understanding is important because magnetic fields are considered not only for
hyperthermia treatment of cancer but for various other imaging and drug delivery
techniques as well. This work will also shed light on the understanding of the
photonic properties of encapsulated dyes inside of nanoporous silica matrix of
the proposed nanosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.