* 2110479
* Analysis and Operations for the Precision Measurement of the Muon Anomaly
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Timothy Gorringe, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 520,000.00

This award supports research by the PI with the muon g-2 experiment at Fermi
National Accelerator Facility in Chicago, Illinois. The goal of the experiment
is a precision measurement of the anomalous response of the muon to a strong
magnetic field. The anomalous magnetic moment of the muon comes from the
`quantum foam' of virtual particles that exists in empty space. The anomaly can
be measured precisely and the exact result addresses an intriguing discrepancy
between prior measurements and the theoretical calculation of the muon's
anomalous magnetism - a discrepancy that hints at unknown forces or new
particles of nature. The PI group's responsibilities within the experiment are
the operation and maintenance of the experiment's data acquisition system and
the data analysis for the extraction of the muon anomalous precession frequency
- the measured quantity that determines the anomalous
magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award provides a broader impact through the
involvement and training of high school students, physics majors, graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers. The group's involvement in large-scale
data acquisition, analysis and modeling also exposes students to innovative
computer and telecommunications technologies. Moreover, the experiment itself -
involving a precision measurement of a textbook quantity - will have a broad
impact and a lasting legacy in nuclear, particle and
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The muon g-2 experiment will measure the muon
anomalous magnetic moment to 140 parts-per-billion; a four-fold improvement over
the prior BNL E821 experiment. The measurement will address the longstanding
~3.6 standard deviation discrepancy between the previous BNL E821 measurement
and the Standard Model prediction. It represents a key test of the Standard
Model of Physics and has broad sensitivity to new interactions, particles and
phenomenon beyond the Standard Model. The first data taking run took place from
November, 2017 through July, 2018 and was published in April, 2021. This initial
460 part-per-billion measurement is in agreement with the earlier 540 part-per-
billion result from the BNL E821 experiment and increased the discrepancy
between experiment and standard model to 4.2 standard deviations. The team
expects a factor of two improvement from the data collected in runs that have
not yet been analyzed and a factor of four improvement from future runs of the
experiment. This award will support continuing research involving activities in
experimental operations, data acquisition and data analysis on the Fermilab g-2
experiment. The PI's group is responsible for the development and the operation
of the 20 GByte/sec, 100 TFlop, g-2 data readout and processing system and its
upgrades. The PI's group is also responsible for the integrated energy analysis
of the muon anomalous precession frequency. This new technique for extracting
the frequency uses different raw data, applies different reconstruction
procedures, and inherits different systematic uncertainties, in comparison to
the traditional positron counting approaches and is important to the
demonstration of the robustness of the frequency measurement. Lastly, the PI
will continue his overall leadership in the anomalous frequency team as an
analysis coordinator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.