* 2110385
* Collaborative Research: PM: RUI: Searches for Ultralight Bosonic Dark Matter with Atomic Magnetometer Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ibrahim Sulai, Bucknell University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 179,361.00

Astrophysical observations indicate that up to 85% of the matter in the universe
is unlike the matter that makes up our everyday world. What is this so-called
dark matter? The answer to that question remains a mystery. One possibility is
that dark matter could be in the form of large-scale structures (many times the
size of the Earth) that couple weakly to ordinary matter. Another possibility is
that the dark matter could be in the form of waves of varying intensity. If such
structures or waves were to pass through the Earth they might interact with
atoms and cause effects similar to those from a magnetic field. This grant will
provide support for three undergraduate institutions, California State
University – East Bay, Oberlin College, and Bucknell University, to work with an
international team to search for dark matter of this kind. The Global Network of
Optical Magnetometers to search for Exotic physics (GNOME) is a collaboration of
fifteen institutions throughout the world that have constructed precision atomic
magnetometers that are capable of detecting such signals from dark matter. The
data from the magnetometer network are analyzed to look for correlations that
would indicate the Earth’s passage through dark matter structures or waves. The
principal investigators will work with undergraduate students to develop more
sensitive detectors for the network, analyze the network data, and work with the
worldwide collaboration to detect dark matter. These measurements will give
insight into the possible forms of dark matter and lead to a better
understanding of the makeup of our universe while providing crucial research
experience and training for the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A well-motivated candidate for dark matter consists of
ultralight bosons such as axions, axion-like particles (ALPs), or hidden photons
with very low mass (much less than 1 eV). Ultralight bosonic fields can form
stable, macroscopic configurations such as topological defects or boson stars
due to, for example, self-interactions. Even in the absence of such effects,
bosonic dark matter fields exhibit stochastic fluctuations. Additionally, it is
possible that cataclysmic astrophysical events could produce intense bursts of
exotic ultralight bosonic fields. In any of these scenarios, instead of being
bathed in a uniform flux, terrestrial detectors will witness transient events
when ultralight bosonic fields pass through Earth. The Global Network of Optical
Magnetometers to search for Exotic physics (GNOME) is a network of more than a
dozen time-synchronized optical atomic magnetometers searching for correlated
signals that is sensitive to transient signals due to spin-dependent
interactions with ultralight bosonic fields. GNOME magnetometers have multi-
layer magnetic shields that reduce external magnetic noise but allow most types
of bosonic dark matter to penetrate within with no loss of sensitivity. A
prominent exception is hidden photons, whose signals can be significantly
reduced by shielding. To search for hidden photon dark matter, the principal
investigators and undergraduate researchers will construct a new network of
unshielded magnetometers, based on the GNOME architecture, located in
magnetically quiet environments. The proposed experiments will probe a wide
range of unexplored parameter space describing ultralight bosonic
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.