* 2110569
* New Experiment Techniques For Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Joseph Formaggio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2024
* USD 675,000.00

Two remarkable paradigm shifts have taken place over the past twenty years in
neutrino physics and cosmology. With regard to neutrino physics, or more
precisely on the question of neutrino mass, the field has shifted from discovery
to precision. Measurements gathered from solar, atmospheric, and reactor
neutrinos have shown conclusively that neutrinos change flavor and, as a
consequence, have a very small but nonzero mass. The measurements on these
oscillation parameters are now being probed at the few percent level. Almost
concurrently, observational cosmology has made a similar phase transition into
precision measurements, providing an outstanding view of the cosmos. Precision
measurements on the energy and matter content and evolution of the universe now
allow detailed tests of cosmological models that were simply unavailable even a
decade ago. Investigators are finally reaching the stage in which direct
comparisons between neutrino masses as determined by cosmology and as determined
by nuclear experiments are possible. These new advances compel the field to
develop techniques that push the boundaries of neutrino mass sensitivity. The
Neutrino group at MIT is leading a next-generation neutrino mass experiment
called Project 8 that utilizes an entirely new approach in neutrino mass
measurements. By using frequency to measure energy, one can extract exquisite
spectroscopic information. The collaboration has demonstrated that the Cyclotron
Radiation Emission Spectroscopy (CRES) technique extracts the energy of
electrons created from a radioactive gas and has shown that the technique also
works on tritium beta decay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of neutrino masses
has broad implications for the scientific community, particularly in the fields
of nuclear physics, particle physics, and cosmology. The CRES technique, being a
general spectroscopic technique for low energy electrons, has broad
applicability. The use of metallic superconducting bolometers for recoil
detection also has broad reach, having potential applications in nuclear reactor
monitoring and direct dark matter detection. These topics have and continue to
draw broad support and engagement from undergraduate students in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration is now expanding the CRES
technique to build a new beta decay experiment with improved sensitivity for the
neutrino mass scale. The goal of the Project 8 experiment is to push the
neutrino mass sensitivity down to &lt; 40 meV/c^2 at 90% confidence limit. The
MIT Neutrino Group is also pushing a novel technology designed to detect low
energy recoils created in neutrino interactions from coherent elastic neutrino
nucleus scattering. Specifically, they are developing metallic superconducting
bolometers with thresholds sufficiently low as to enable detection of coherent
scattering from reactor neutrinos. The new experimental effort, Ricochet, has
potential applications in searching for new physics and even nuclear reactor
monitoring. The experiment has recently been approved to be deployed at the ILL
reactor in Grenoble, France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.