* 2110405
* Collaborative Research: PM:  CeNTREX, A Search for Nuclear Time-Reversal Symmetry Violation with Quantum-State-Controlled TlF Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Engel, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 219,618.00

Fundamental symmetries are at the heart of our understanding of the physical
world. In particular, small-scale violations of the time-reversal (T) symmetry
are necessary to explain the observed predominance of matter over antimatter,
one of the most fundamental problems in modern science. New T-violating physics
is likely to be mediated by particles with large masses that exceed the current
reach of high-energy accelerators. This experiment will carry out a high-
precision search for the nuclear Schiff moment, a charge separation in the
thallium (Tl) nucleus, that would signal T-violation. Detecting a Schiff moment
with a sensitivity exceeding the best current limit would provide clear evidence
for physics beyond the Standard Model, while a null measurement would set a
stringent constraint on theories that include sources of T violation, and
potentially identify the technical goals for future particle accelerators.
Experimental molecular quantum science and theoretical nuclear physics will be
combined here in a new collaboration using table-top experiments and state-of-
the-art calculations. The Tl Schiff moment will be measured using thallium
fluoride (TlF) polar molecules that are aligned with an applied electric field
in a long interaction region. The presence of a Schiff moment will be manifested
by a precession of the Tl magnetic moment (spin) about the applied field. This
project will broadly impact technology and education. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be actively involved in research, acquiring hands-on skills that
are highly valued in academia, industry, and national labs. The results of this
work are expected to have a strong appeal to the media and members of the
public, and will be widely disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
applies the techniques of molecular quantum science to a measurement of time-
reversal symmetry (T) violation, as part of the Cold Molecule Nuclear Time
Reversal Experiment (CeNTREX). The investigators seek to improve upon previous
measurements of T violation in atomic nuclei by nearly two orders of magnitude
in terms of sensitivity to fundamental parameters. This level of precision will
help address grand challenges such as the observed matter-antimatter asymmetry
in the universe. The investigators will use a beam of cold TlF molecules in
order to combine the intrinsically high sensitivity of Tl to the T-violating
nuclear Schiff moment, the large effective electric field at the Tl nucleus
within strongly polarized molecules, and state-of-the-art techniques for
controlling individual molecular quantum states including optical cycling for
laser cooling and high-fidelity detection. In parallel, they will address the
theoretical question of interpreting the measurement by developing modern
methods of nuclear physics to accurately calculate the dependence of the Schiff
moment on the underlying nucleon-nucleon interactions and to quantify its
uncertainty. This measurement will have intellectual synergy with other ongoing
T violation searches; complementary experiments can identify the source of an
observed symmetry violation via their different sensitivities to fundamental
parameters. This project is also complementary to the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) which is poised to detect new high-energy particles and potentially
identify the nature of their T-violating interactions. The measurement supported
by the current award relies on long-lived coherent superpositions of molecular
quantum states, and will make an impact on quantum sensing with molecules via
the meticulous quantum state control of TlF, ultrahigh-precision spectroscopy
including internal co-magnetometry, and radiation pressure forces applied to
novel systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.