* 2110466
* Fundamental Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alexander Vilenkin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 405,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Alexander Vilenkin at
Tufts University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Vilenkin will study the
evolution and possible observational signatures of cosmic strings. Cosmic
strings are very thin and highly energetic linear objects. Many theories of
particle physics predict that such strings must have formed in the early
universe, and if so they can produce a variety of effects which are observable
at the present time. In particular, such strings could be responsible for a
background of gravitational waves and for cosmic rays at the highest energies,
which are hard to explain through conventional astrophysical processes. A
detection of cosmic strings would be of great importance, as it would open a
unique window into the physics of very high energies, inaccessible in particle
accelerators. Another direction of Professor Vilenkin's research is the study of
bubble formation in a high energy phase of the universe. Bubbles such as these
are regions of space in which the laws of physics are in a different "phase",
just as water and ice are the same material in different phases. A small bubble
of space with a lower energy can be created spontaneously and then rapidly
expand. Bubble formation plays a central role in a number of cosmological
models, including the theory of inflation (under which the universe is believed
to have expanded very rapidly at initial times), but some aspects of this
process are still poorly understood. Professor Vilenkin will develop new methods
for calculating the probability of bubble creation. This research is in the
national interest in that it furthers the development of basic science in the
United States. Professor Vilenkin will also continue his efforts to communicate
these ideas to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical
level, Professor Vilenkin will study the interaction of cosmic strings with
black holes. An oscillating loop of string can be captured by a black hole. The
loop can then grow in size by extracting the black hole's rotational energy. It
may also self-intersect and split, ejecting a smaller loop. A large number of
string loops may be produced as this cycle continues. The probability of loop
capture significantly depends on how loops are distributed in space, in
particular on the extent to which they are clustered in galaxies. Professor
Vilenkin will use numerical simulations to study the gravitational clustering of
strings and the interaction of string loops with rotating black holes. The
results will be used to derive predictions for observational signatures of
strings, especially for the gravitational wave background. The bubble nucleation
probability is usually calculated using the standard instanton approach, but
this method fails in many relevant situations. Professor Vilenkin will use the
Wigner distribution and numerical simulations to study the alternative
stochastic method and to determine its limits of
applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.