* 2110416
* Numerical Relativity Framework for Strong-Field Tests of Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Helvi Witek, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 140,000.00

General relativity and quantum physics have revolutionized science in the last
century, and laid the foundations for every-day gadgets from the GPS systems to
the microchips in our mobile phones. Yet, a consistent theory of quantum gravity
has remained elusive. The quest for a such a "theory of everything" typically
yields extensions of general relativity that impact the strong gravity regime
unfolding during the collision of black holes and neutron stars. LIGO's Nobel-
prize winning discoveries of gravitational waves emitted during their inspiral
and merger have opened new discovery channels to probe the very nature of
gravity. The key objective of this award is to enable new observational tests of
gravity in its most extreme, nonlinear regime and thus promote the progress of
science of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The research will be
integrated with the creation of an annual, international "Gravitational Wave
Day." This series of broader impact activities aims at promoting the latest
discovery in Gravity and Gravitational Wave physics to the general public as
well as high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
mathematical and computational development of well-posed time evolution
formulations of beyond-GR theories, beyond the weak field approximation, for
numerical relativity. The derivation will adapt recent results in viscous
hydrodynamics and relativity for the four-dimensional theory, which will be cast
as a Cauchy problem with a BSSN or Z4 type reformulation and using an adapted
moving puncture gauge. The award furthermore supports the implementation in the
PI's end-to-end, open-source numerical relativity framework Canuda. It is
designed highly modular and, thus, adaptable to a large class of theories to
enable the largest possible discovery space. The second part of the award
focuses on extensive simulations of compact binaries in quadratic gravity, the
investigation of their nonlinear dynamics, including new effects like dynamical
(de-) scalarization, and the construction of numerical gravitational waveforms
in quadratic gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.