* 2110250
* Theoretical AMO Studies of Non-Equilibrium and Emergent Many-Body Quantum Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Erich Mueller, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

Future technology, such as quantum computation or advanced electronics, is
predicated on gaining control and understanding of quantum mechanical systems
with large numbers of interacting degrees of freedom. High precision experiments
involving lasers, optical cavities and cold atoms have become the ideal setting
to demonstrate this control and uncover the principles which can be exploited.
This project involves using the tools of theoretical physics to model these
experiments, seek organizing principles, explore novel phenomena, and enable
future progress. The intellectual merit of this research lies in developing a
deeper understanding and better control of the natural world, which may have
associated broader impacts in quantum technology. The scientific projects
address both long-standing challenges such as exotic "strange metal" behavior in
transition metal oxides as well as novel developments in dissipation
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will model non-equilibrium and
emergent many body physics in ultracold atoms and Rydberg polaritons. The
research is organized around three interconnected themes: transport in strongly
correlated many-body systems, control of open and out-of-equilibrium quantum
systems, and modeling 1D quantum systems. The first direction involves modeling
experiments in which ultracold atoms emulate the behavior of electrons in “high
temperature superconductors.” Through this modeling, it is hoped the mechanism
behind high temperature superconductivity may be constrained, providing progress
towards room temperature superconductivity. The second direction involves using
ideas developed in the quantum information community to control quantum many-
body systems. It is motivated by ongoing experimental challenges around
equilibration in atomic, molecular, and optical systems. The third direction
involves producing new numerical algorithms for exploring the behavior of
continuum one-dimensional systems. This will be key to answering fundamental
questions about equilibration, and modeling
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.