* 2110722
* Optimization Methods for Nonconvex Structured Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Hongchao Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This project will advance fundamental algorithmic theory and software tools for
solving optimization problems with wide applications in science, engineering and
industry. Specifically, the project will be in the area of structured nonconvex
nonlinear optimization, a critical component in many modern applications ranging
from signal/image processing, real-time optimal control to stochastic learning.
The project aims to develop algorithms with focus on the following features:
speed, problem dependence, and ease of use for researchers in both optimization
and computational data science community. Students will be involved and will
have opportunities for interdisciplinary research. Software will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop theoretically strong
and numerically efficient algorithms as well as the software for solving
nonconvex structured optimization. These algorithms will solve the subproblems
inexactly with guaranteed global convergence as well as feature an optimal
computational complexity when the problem features convexity structure. The
algorithms will be based on recent work on proximal and stochastic gradient
methods for structured composite minimization, inexact alternating direction
multiplier methods (ADMM) for separable convex/nonconvex optimization and active
set methods for polyhedral constrained optimization. In addition, second-order
techniques for accelerating the convergence will be also
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.