* 2110797
* RUI-Meson Spectroscopy with GlueX and CLAS12 at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Carlos Salgado, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 170,068.00

In spite of the overall great success of the current theory of nuclear and
particle physics, some sectors of this model lack quantitative understanding.
One such sector is the way the strong force produces the wide variety of
particles called “hadrons” (protons, neutrons,…and the less massive “mesons”).
The strong force, described by what is called Quantum-Chromodynamics (QCD), is
also responsible for most of nuclear structure and reactions. This award
supports a professor and two undergraduate students from Norfolk State
University (NSU) to participate in the study of the strong force as members of
the GlueX and MesonEx (CLAS12) experiments at the Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility located in Newport News, Virginia. The research program
aims to identify new forms of sub-atomic particles (“exotics”), predicted by
QCD, that can greatly contribute to the understanding of the strong force. These
“exotics” are a manifestation of the strong force that otherwise is hidden and
confined inside the hadrons. NSU faculty and undergraduate students have
developed software and hardware to perform these studies. More recently they
have developed new software for the analysis of big data sets obtained by those
experiments. This award will continue those developments by including the latest
advances in machine learning techniques, exploring new statistical techniques,
computer hardware options and software programing languages. They will also
participate in the analysis of data already collected by both experiments. The
NSU campus is close to Jefferson Lab, providing NSU students opportunities to
participate in research all year around. A goal of this project is to strengthen
the participation of underrepresented minorities in nuclear and particle physics
research. Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), such as NSU, have
been very successful in retaining minority students at the undergraduate level
and introducing them to graduate programs in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meson spectroscopy is of fundamental importance for the
understanding of the strong interaction at intermediate energies with the goal
of finding details about QCD confinement. This project proposes to continue
Norfolk State University’s (NSU) participation on Meson Spectroscopy at the
GlueX (Hall D) and MesonEx (CLAS12-Hall B) experiments at Jefferson Lab. NSU had
been involved in hardware construction and software development for both
experiments, and in the data analysis of previous CLAS6 (JLab-Hall B)
experiments related to meson photo-production. The NSU group will be involved in
the analyses of the meson’s final states from data already collected by GlueX
and CLAS12 (MesonEx). They will also continue software development, in
particular, the necessary software to perform full Partial Wave Analysis (PWA)
of few body final states. The next couple of years will be the time to bring to
a conclusion the analysis of data from GlueX and MesonEx runs, both exploring
the production of exotic hadrons and expanding on current meson spectroscopy.
The PI and NSU students have been involved in the development of a software
framework for PWA, called PyPWA, for the last several years. They have been
working in collaboration with members of the theory group at JLab (JPAC),
collaborators from CLAS12 and GlueX to produce a more efficient, user friendly
and fast analysis code for the study of meson spectroscopy. GlueX and MesonEx
have obtained data with much better systematic and statistical uncertainties
then previous spectroscopy experiments and exposed the limitations of the
previously existing methods of analysis. New refinements are required with a
close collaboration between theorists (models) and experimentalists (software)
and between baryon and meson spectroscopy groups. Specifically, studies of the
final states Δ++𝛈𝛑 (search for exotics) and p𝜑𝛈 (strangeonia) will be performed
by NSU’s students under the PI’s supervision. Software developments will include
the utilization of new hardware (i.e. GPUs using CUDA) and software (i.e.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) methods of pattern recognition, as Bayesian Neural
Networks - BNN). This project will allow NSU’s faculty and undergraduate
students the opportunity to participate in the analysis of data from experiments
at the forefront of nuclear physics research. NSU is one of the leading HBCU’s
in the country and its main campus is conveniently located at a short distance
from Jefferson Lab. The PI has a long record of involving minority students at
Jefferson Lab. This award will continue to provide opportunities to
underrepresented minorities and strengthen diversity in nuclear physics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.