* 2110360
* Instrumentation and Simulation for Advanced LIGO Upgrades and Future Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Paul Fulda, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 449,999.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
impact of the field of gravitational wave detection in recent years is difficult
to overstate. Results from the Advanced LIGO detectors have regularly captured
the imagination of the public, making headline news while providing vital new
data to enable studies at the forefront of scientific knowledge. Regular
detections of binary black hole systems have allowed scientists to compile a
catalog of previously unknowable celestial objects. Precise measurements of the
gravitational waveforms from the detected events allow us to probe the details
of fundamental theories underpinning our understanding of the universe. The work
supported by this award is directly aimed at improving the LIGO detector
sensitivity in the future, as well as developing technology for and informing
the design of the next generation of gravitational wave detectors. These goals
will have a direct payoff in the form of continued discoveries and better
science products. The USA has long been recognized as a leader in the field of
gravitational wave astronomy. Continued research to push the boundaries of what
is possible with gravitational wave detectors is necessary to maintain this
position over the next decades. The majority of the work supported by this award
will be performed by graduate students and undergraduate students, providing
them with excellent training opportunities to develop their skills, therefore
enriching the future American scientific workforce. The subject of the research
is also a very fertile ground for outreach to the wider public, which is one of
the best ways to broaden participation in science across
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports both simulation and
experimental project components. The simulation component is aimed at
characterizing the low frequency (&lt;30Hz) noise of the Advanced LIGO
interferometers, and using the knowledge gained to inform the design of future
upgrades. Characterizing the low frequency detector noise is very challenging
because it is a combination of many individual noise sources, and because even
these individual noise sources are cross-coupled and difficult to model and
estimate. However, new simulation tools are being developed that have the
capability to untangle these noise contributions, and this project will apply
these tools to tackle this problem. The same tools will also be used to support
commissioning of the Advanced LIGO detectors in the lead up to the next two
observing runs, both of which will include new hardware and configuration
upgrades to the interferometers. The experimental component of this project
includes the development of a new method for sensing misalignment and other
optical imperfections in laser interferometers, which has some practical
advantages over the currently used schemes. Detailed comparisons will be made
between the different methods in tabletop laser interferometry experiments, in
order to inform design choices for the gravitational wave detectors of the
future. Also supported is a project to experimentally demonstrate the
interferometric performance of new beam shapes (higher-order Hermite-Gauss
modes), which have the potential to reduce the impact of one of the fundamental
noise sources in laser interferometers: thermal noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.