* 2110483
* Non-Equilibrium Interfaces in Strongly Interacting Fermi Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ariel Sommer, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 407,186.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation technologies, ranging from
magnetically levitated high-speed trains and near-lossless power transmission,
to higher-performance devices for quantum computing and computer memory, will
depend on materials that, at the microscopic level, achieve higher performance
through strong interactions between electrons in the material. However, the
strong interactions and correlations between electrons that give rise to
advantageous properties, such as more robust superconductivity, also present new
challenges in our understanding of these materials. In particular, when strongly
correlated materials are driven out of equilibrium and interfaced with other
materials, conventional theories often break down, necessitating more powerful
theories to handle strong interactions. In this work, the researchers will
measure non-equilibrium and transport properties in a quantum gas of strongly
interacting lithium atoms that models the quantum behavior of strongly
interacting electrons. The project aims to elucidate the fundamental physics of
transport in strongly correlated materials out of equilibrium, where existing
theories face the greatest challenges. Undergraduate and graduate students
contributing to the research will gain skills in planning, conducting, and
communicating about scientific work, in preparation for careers in the
scientific and technological workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This research program will investigate transport and non-
equilibrium dynamics at normal-superfluid interfaces and in strongly interacting
Fermi gases. The team will implement a multi-region trap for lithium-6 atoms
that will allow the preparation of well-defined non-equilibrium initial states.
The researchers will employ controllable barrier potentials between the regions
to initiate evolution towards equilibrium. Initializing separate normal and
superfluid regions will enable the team to characterize transport at the normal-
superfluid interface and to observe the dynamics of the interface. These
measurements will provide benchmarks to test theories of transport at normal-
superfluid and normal-superconductor interfaces for strongly interacting
systems. Preparing a sample region in contact with two highly polarized
reservoir regions will enable the researchers to measure local spin-transport
properties across the superfluid transition. Such measurements will illuminate
the relationship between superfluidity and spin transport, the role of pairing
correlations in the low-temperature normal phase, and the effect of theorized
quantum limits on transport. The approach introduced in this work will lay the
foundation for a wide range of novel non-equilibrium measurements in quantum
many-body systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.