* 2110218
* Windows on the Universe: Nuclear Astrophysics Observables of Supernovae and Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Famiano, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 548,264.00

The origin of the elements remains one of the most important questions in
science today. Closely tied to this are questions of stellar burning and the
characteristics of dense nuclear matter. This award will support research that
addresses these questions directly. Specifically, this work addresses how heavy
elements were formed and the dense nuclear environment involved in those
processes. The experimental work of this program will help determine the density
and momentum dependence of how neutrons and protons bind together to form nuclei
beyond normal nuclear density and should help to resolve discrepancies between
various theoretical calculations. Data collected will also help constrain what
we know about the formation of heavy elements and heating of neutron star
crusts. The measurements of the fission barriers of lead isotopes will initiate
a larger program to measure the fission barriers of exotic nuclei far from
stability. The PIs will provide direct training to both undergraduate and
graduate students in a wide range of skills and techniques, which will prepare
the students for challenging and important careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives addressed by the
proposed work are: (1) Continue research to improve constraints on the momentum
and density dependence of the equation of state of neutron stars at FRIB, (2)
Establish a program to measure fission barriers of exotic nuclei using a newly
developed method of identifying exotic beams, (3) Continue the group’s ongoing
mass measurement program in the FRIB era to explore the evolution of nuclear
masses relevant to the r-process near the N∼70 subshell with new experiments and
detector enhancements, (4) Pursue a student-run experiment to measure radiative
capture cross sections of the heaviest p nucleus, 196Hg, (5) Improve the
scientific outreach program through public talks on nuclear astrophysics to Jr.
High students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award addresses and advances the goals
of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.