* 2110138
* NSF-BSF: Selective Transport of Divalent Cations through Polymeric Membranes Using Host-Guest Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 413,158.00

Producing drinking water from unconventional water sources, such as seawater,
brackish water, and municipal wastewater effluent, is crucial for alleviating
global water scarcity. Polymeric membranes, such as thin-film composite reverse
osmosis (RO) membranes, have been at the forefront of water purification and
desalination processes since their advent in the early 1980s. While RO systems
are energy efficient and consume only ~25% more than the practical minimum
theoretical energy of desalination, RO membranes are susceptible to inorganic
scaling caused by scale-forming ions such as sulfate and divalent calcium,
magnesium, or barium. Source waters that have high concentrations of these ions
and/or require high recovery rates, such as in inland desalination, have an
exceptionally high propensity to produce inorganic scale on membranes. Inorganic
scaling is known to drastically lower membrane water flux, limit membrane
lifetime, increase treatment costs, and increase the energy consumption of
membrane processes. Economic and environmental effects of membrane scaling have
led to various mitigation approaches, including adjusting solution pH and adding
polymeric antiscalants to block crystal growth sites. However, the primary
limitation of established techniques is they require the addition of chemicals,
such as polymers or strong acids/bases, that are environmentally unfriendly and
costly. In collaboration with researchers at Ben-Gurion University, this project
will address the imminent need for an alternative, chemical-free method to
selectively remove scale-forming ions to mitigate scaling on RO membrane
surfaces and improve the economics of desalination
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the research is to translate
selectivity mechanisms of biological channels into polymeric membranes for the
purpose of selectively removing scale-forming species in a continuous
electrodialysis process. The investigators hypothesize that molecular binding
sites that can selectively remove water shells from ions (as seen in some
biological channels) will enable highly specific adsorption and transport
through membranes. To test this hypothesis, a selective membrane will be created
by modifying the surface of conventional membranes with polymers comprising
pendant groups with a high chemical affinity for target ions (Task 1). These
functional groups are expected to yield unprecedented selectivity because they
provide favorable host-guest complexes to selectively remove water shells of
target ions (Task 2). This functional prototype will then be used to elucidate
selectivity mechanisms for membranes with host-guest chemistry (Task 3), as well
as to assess the relationship between the structural properties of those
membranes and their selective transport (Task 4). Finally, the insights from
Tasks 1-4 will be used to develop a homogenous membrane (Task 5), which will
then be tested in electrodialysis for selective removal of scale-forming ions
(Task 6). The specific objectives of the project include: (i) investigating the
role of ion affinity to chemically tailored polymers in achieving selective
transport, (ii) assessing how intrinsic membrane structural properties affect
solute transport and selectivity, and (iii) fabricating robust membranes to
reduce scaling potential using electrodialysis. The outcome of the project will
be a new membrane technology capable of removing scale-forming ions prior to
desalination to mitigate scaling on RO membranes. This technology would be the
first continuous approach for separating divalent ions from monovalent ions
without requiring periodic use of chemicals, overcoming the limitations of
existing approaches. This study will also advance the fundamental understanding
of selective transport processes by applying transition-state theory to describe
solute transport phenomena in terms of entropy and enthalpy. These insights,
along with design principles established from this study, will be relevant for
separations of other solutes as well, which may later find application in
reclaiming valuable resources or removing contaminants of concern from water.
This research is jointly funded by NSF and The US-Israel Binational Science
foundation through the special submission opportunity NSF
20-094.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.