* 2110074
* RoL:NSF-BSF: IMAGiNE: Temperature acclimation through RNA editing
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Joshua Rosenthal, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,140,080.00

All the information required to create an organism, and for the organism to
sustain its life, is encoded in its DNA. The portion of the information required
at any given moment is temporarily copied into RNA before being decoded into the
proteins that execute required functions. Molecular systems that manipulate this
flow of information have led to some of the most consequential tools for modern
biology, from gene cloning technologies to CRISPR genome engineering. All
multicellular animals can edit genetic information as it passes through RNA,
however the extent to which they do so varies widely. The coleoid cephalopods
(squid, octopus, and cuttlefish) edit RNA at exceptionally high levels, and thus
provide ideal models to study the process. Because RNA is a transient molecule,
RNA editing is a good tool to create temporary changes that help with
environmental acclimation. The work in this grant seeks to better understand how
cephalopod RNA editing is used for temperature acclimation. Using recently
developed cephalopod gene knockout technologies, the enzyme(s) that generate
high-level RNA editing will be uncovered. In addition, how individual RNA edits
affect proteins will be studied. Finally, the evolutionary underpinnings of RNA
editing will be compared between similar squid species that inhabit different
thermal environments. This project will enhance STEM education for
underrepresented minorities through hands-on workshops on genome editing given
to students from the University of Puerto Rico. Outreach on cephalopod biology
and RNA editing will be extended to science journalists, and rabbinic leaders
from Jewish community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most organisms are confronted by a
variable thermal environment and temperatures fluctuations are particularly
acute for aquatic ectotherms due to the high thermal conductivity of water. All
enzymatic reactions are governed by temperature, but the degree of sensitivity
varies. Coordinating multiple enzymatic reactions across temperatures is a
fundamental physiological challenge. This proposal focuses on RNA editing
through adenosine deamination and how it is used for temperature acclimation.
All multicellular metazoans use this process, however the coleoid cephalopods
use it most extensively. Transcriptome-wide screens have uncovered tens of
thousands of RNA editing sites, and these large data sets provide a unique
opportunity to examine how editing is used to fine-tune physiology, and how it
evolves. Taking advantage of recently developed gene knockout methods for
cephalopods, the enzymatic underpinnings of high-level recoding will be
explored, as well as the molecular basis of its temperature sensitivity. In
addition, the work will investigate how temperature sensitive editing sites
affect the function of key proteins in neurophysiology and examine how these
sites are selected in closely related species from different thermal
environments. This project will enhance STEM education for underrepresented
minorities, generate resources for cephalopod biology, and provide diverse
community outreach. Workshops on genome editing will be given to students from
the University of Puerto Rico. The PIs will create guidelines for the humane and
ethical use of cephalopods in research. Outreach on cephalopod biology and RNA
editing will be extended to science journalists, and rabbinic leaders from
Jewish community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was supported by the
Integrative Ecological Physiology Program within the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster within the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and Rules of Life Program within the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.