* 2110041
* DMRG Studies of Frustrated and Doped Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Steven White, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education to advance understanding of quantum mechanical systems
with many interacting particles, particularly electrons. The development of
novel algorithms and software for solving the equations of quantum mechanics
that describe systems of many interacting constituents remains one of the most
important theoretical techniques. The PI invented one of the most prominent of
these algorithms, the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG), and continues
developing ITensor, a widely used software library for carrying out these
calculations. Building on the PI's work, a large international group of
scientists has extended DMRG to tensor networks, a new area with applications
ranging from chemistry to the physics of black holes and to the quantum theory
of gravity. A focus of the PI's current work is understanding high-temperature
superconductivity and improving DMRG methods for quantum treatments of molecules
and solids. At sufficiently low temperatures, some materials exhibit
superconductivity, a cooperative quantum state of electrons with interesting and
technologically useful properties, the ability to conduct electricity without
loss among them. Most known superconductors exhibit superconductivity at
temperatures near the absolute zero of temperature. High temperature
superconductors exhibit superconductivity above the temperature at which
Nitrogen becomes a liquid. High-temperature superconductivity is important for
both fundamental reasons as well as for applications. Conceptually,
understanding how high-temperature superconductivity works is considered one of
the most important problems in condensed matter physics. High-temperature
superconductors are already used in a number of important applications, such as
wireless communications and power transmission. Unraveling how high-temperature
superconductivity emerges in certain materials might enable the creation of
long-sought materials that exhibit superconductivity at room-temperature and
under ordinary conditions. Improved quantum treatments of molecules is one of
the leading potential applications of quantum computers, potentially improving
drug design and materials for energy applications. The current work focuses on
the same developments but using current supercomputers rather than quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;This research provides excellent opportunities for training
the next generation of theoretical scientists. The further development of the
ITensor software library is making DMRG and tensor-network methods available and
useful for the scientific community to enable discoveries across many areas of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project supports
research and education aimed at understanding strongly interacting quantum
systems in condensed matter, cold atoms, and chemical systems. The work consists
primarily of simulating model systems and of developing new algorithms for
enabling these simulations. The primary application of the work is to doped
fermion systems (such as the high-temperature superconductors) and frustrated
spin systems, which suffer from the sign problem that makes quantum Monte Carlo
methods ineffective. The PI is the inventor of the density matrix
renormalization group (DMRG), one of the leading algorithms for simulating 1D
systems. Within the last two decades, DMRG has become part of a larger field,
tensor networks, and has become closely associated with quantum information
science. The PI's work in algorithms now incorporates many of the ideas of
tensor networks. This group is also the creator of ITensor, a widely used
software library for carrying out DMRG and tensor network calculations, and
development of ITensor will continue in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
simulation techniques have improved rapidly, and are now enabling a much better
and deeper understanding of the high-temperature superconductors, in particular
the competition between stripes and other inhomogeneities with
superconductivity, and the nature of the pseudogap phase. Of particular interest
is studying the effect of long-range Coulomb interactions between electrons and
their effect on the competition between stripes and superconductivity. Recent
improvments include better dynamics and better finite temperature treatments,
for example, using the minimally entangled typical thermal state algorithm. To
improve DMRG methods on molecules and realistic treatments of solids, this
project is continuing work on developing diagonal Hamiltonian representations
stemming from highly local basis sets. These diagonal representations
dramatically improve the efficiency of DMRG. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
provides excellent opportunities for training the next generation of theoretical
scientists. The further development of the ITensor software library is making
DMRG and tensor-network methods available and useful for the scientific
community to enable discoveries across many areas of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.