* 2110053
* Investigating chemosensory evolution in longhorned beetles using a comparative phylogenomic framework that integrates genomic, morphological, and biochemical data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2027
* Duane McKenna, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 08/31/2027
* USD 667,417.00

Longhorned beetles are a highly diverse insect group with over 30,000 species.
They feed on dead wood and also plants; in addition, they pollinate flowers.
Thus, they have an important positive ecological impact. However, sometimes they
can be serious pests of living trees and timber. In spite of the ecological
significance of the group and its rich diversity, the evolutionary relationship
of major groups of longhorned beetles remains a mystery. This research will
reconstruct the evolution of the group by sequencing genomes of key species and
comparing the differences. Simultaneously, the project will explore why
longhorned beetles have become so diverse and how this is linked to their
namesake long “horns,” or antennae. These horns are highly sensitive
chemosensory organs that are used to smell and taste the environment. The latest
techniques in microscopy, imaging, and genomics will be used to study longhorned
beetle antennae, identify the genes that detect odors and tastes, and
reconstruct how changes in these organs have contributed to the success of the
group. This information will help assist efforts to control the longhorned
beetles that are pests on trees and timber, while avoiding harm to species that
have positive ecological impacts. Moreover, the knowledge gained will help
improve our understanding of chemosensation in other groups of arthropods that
also include ecologically beneficial species and pests with major economic
impacts. Finally, this project will enable science mentoring, education, and
outreach, through training undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers, teaching K-12 students about insect biodiversity, and widely
sharing new data and educational materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will produce the first comprehensive, large-scale phylogeny of longhorned
beetles, which comprises a highly diverse radiation of primarily wood-feeding
animals, in order to obtain a detailed understanding of insect chemosensory
biology and evolution. Data from &gt; 500 nuclear genes obtained from &gt; 600
species via anchored hybrid enrichment sequencing will be considered, and
extensive new data on the genetics and morphology of the group will be gathered.
Scanning electron microscopy will be used to compare the diversity and variation
of antennal chemosensory organs across several longhorned beetle lineages. The
research will yield antennal transcriptomes and annotated chemoreceptor and
pheromone receptor gene repertoires, which will be used to conduct a comparative
analysis of receptor chemistry. In this manner, the evolution of longhorned
beetle chemical communication will be determined. The research will also help
reveal how ecological distinctions among longhorned beetles are related to
differences in chemosensory organs and chemoreceptor repertoires. This will
enhance understanding of the evolution of different modes of longhorned beetle
chemical communication and elucidate how the origins of these disparate modes
may have influenced diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.