* 2110052
* Harnessing Quantum Entanglement for Quantum-Enhanced Sensing through Interaction-Based Readout
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Robert Lewis-Swan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 119,959.00

Entanglement, a quantum phenomena whereby distinct parts of a system become
inextricably linked and cannot be physically described independently, is a key
resource in the development of new quantum-enhanced technologies that promise
astounding improvements in performance compared to current devices describable
by the classical physics of Newton and Galileo. Examples include quantum-
enhanced sensors that use entanglement to amplify small perturbations to quantum
systems due to weak changes in gravity, electromagnetic fields or the
surrounding environment, and which can have applications ranging from industry,
where they can be used in searches for natural resources, to fundamental
science, where they can enable ultra-precise searches for physics beyond the
standard model. Nevertheless, a key challenge in the frontier of quantum-
enhanced sensing is the development of simple and practical ways to characterize
these perturbations of entangled quantum systems. This research project seeks to
understand how to overcome this problem by using "interaction-based readout"
(IBR), wherein the complex dynamics induced by interactions between constituent
particles of a quantum system is used as an intrinsic internal probe. The work
conducted will promote the progress of basic science, as developing realistic
and robust IBR approaches which minimize technical challenges associated with
using entangled quantum systems can be important for the realization of state-
of-the-art sensors with real world applications. Moreover, the research provides
valuable technical training opportunities for participating students and a post-
doctoral researcher, contributing to the STEM workforce and
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to establish a
theoretical framework for optimal IBR schemes for quantum-enhanced sensing with
simple measurement probes. This core intellectual task will be approached by
investigation of IBR schemes in two inter-related topics: i) quantum sensing
using entangled ground-states, and iii) chaotic quantum sensors. The first topic
will seek to devise optimal IBR schemes to exploit entangled ground states
generated by quasi-adiabatic evolution for quantum-enhanced metrology, taking
into account realistic experimental limitations on control of measurements and
dynamics, and identifying optimal regimes of operation that lead to a practical
quantum advantage. The latter topic studies how IBR can serve as an enabling
tool to harness and characterize complex entangled states generated via many-
body quantum chaos, with a core focus on developing strategies to overcome
deleterious decoherence and technical noise that degrades entanglement.
Developing an improved understanding of IBR schemes in these scenarios will have
immediate impact by broadening the scope of non-equilibrium and quasi-
equilibrium systems that can be practically exploited for quantum-enhanced
sensing and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.