* 2110471
* Improving the Experimental Characterization of Dipole Matrix Elements in Rubidium
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Charles Sackett, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 378,194.00

An atom consists of electrons bound to a nucleus. This is sometimes depicted
with the electrons orbiting the nucleus like planets orbit the sun, but in
reality motion at the atomic scale is governed by the laws of quantum mechanics.
These say that even though the electron is a point-like particle, it is
impossible to say exactly where an electron is at any given time. Instead, the
location of an electron is spread out around the nucleus in a probabilistic way.
In order to understand an atom’s properties, it is necessary to know the nature
of this distribution. Unfortunately, the distribution is hard to observe
directly with high precision. Typically, the best approach is to measure
properties of the atom that depend on the electrons and use these values to
constrain the distribution. One useful set of properties are the dipole matrix
elements, which help describe how the electrons move when the atom is placed in
an electric field. Even the dipole matrix elements cannot be measured directly,
but they can be reliably inferred from several types of experiments. A
particularly precise method is called tune-out wavelength spectroscopy. In this
project, tune-out measurements will be used to obtain improved values for
several matrix elements of the rubidium atom. To give one example of why these
measurements are important, consider the question of whether an atom has
“handedness,” like a right-handed or left-handed glove. Theories and
measurements in nuclear physics indicate that the atomic nucleus does have a
handedness. The role of this handedness in nuclear physics is very important for
understanding how matter was created in the early universe, and why the universe
looks the way it does now. It can be studied in large particle accelerators, but
doing so is difficult and expensive. In an atom, a slight amount of the
handedness is transmitted from the nucleus to the electrons. Although the effect
is small, the atomic handedness can be measured very precisely and this has been
useful for improving nuclear physics theories. However, relating the atomic
measurement to nuclear physics requires accurate dipole matrix elements. The
improved values that will be provided by this project will be useful for this
purpose, and in this way help improve our understanding of why the universe is
as it is. In addition to these scientific results, the project will provide an
important training opportunity for both undergraduate and graduate students in
physics. The techniques used in this project are applicable to other important
research areas such as quantum computing and quantum communication, as well as
to nationally important technologies such as lasers and quantum sensing.
Participants in this project will be well prepared to contribute in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In tune-out wavelength spectroscopy, the atom is
illuminated by a laser beam that is tuned far from any atomic resonances. In
most cases, this causes the energy of the atom to change. The energy can either
increase or decrease, depending on the wavelength of the light. At specific
wavelengths, however, the energy change is exactly zero. The value of these
wavelengths depends on the dipole matrix elements of the atom, and by measuring
the wavelength accurately the ratios of various matrix elements can be
determined with high precision. The method used in this project to determine the
tune-out wavelength is atom interferometry. Here the overall wave function of
the atom is split into two branches that separate in space. One branch passes
through the laser, and any resulting energy change results in a phase shift of
the wave function. When the two branches are later recombined, this phase shift
can be detected. The tune-out wavelength is determined by adjusting the laser to
make the phase shift zero. There are multiple wavelengths at which tuneouts
occur, and the wavelengths also depend on the polarization of the light. This
project will result in a precise measurement of the polarization dependence for
Rb atoms at a wavelength near 790 nm, and also precise measurements near 420 nm.
By combining these measurements, it will be possible to determine a number of
small but important terms, such as the total contribution of the high-lying
atomic states, and also the impact of interactions between the valence electron
and the atomic core. In addition, spectroscopic measurements will be used to
measure the matrix elements from the 5P excited state of Rb to high-lying
states. Although this will not be a high-precision measurement, the results will
be useful for interpreting experiments like the handedness measurement described
above. Finally, the possibility of using Rb atoms for a handedness (or parity
violation) measurement will be explored. Although the effect is smaller in Rb
than in some other atoms, Rb atoms are very convenient to use with modern
cooling and trapping techniques. It may be that the benefits of these techniques
make a competitive option for improving precision, and the measurements would be
able to take direct advantage of the improved matrix elements which will be
obtained in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.