* 2110778
* I-Corps:  DNA-based kinase activity detection platform
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Gyeong Mee Yoon, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is to improve patient outcomes, lower
healthcare costs, aid pharmaceutical scientists in the development of new
therapies, and support ongoing efforts to elucidate kinase mechanisms of action.
Kinase enzymes are involved in the metabolism of glucose(sugar) in the body.
Currently available kinase activity assay systems lack high sensitivity, cost-
effectiveness, and the ability to make measurements in a complex media precisely
and accurately. Overdiagnosis and overtreatment of disease is a critical problem
that causes many patients to endure unnecessary side effects, such as infections
from biopsies and high healthcare costs. The proposed approach may offer a
critically needed innovation that will overcome multiple barriers facing
existing kinase assays and better equip clinicians and pharmaceutical scientists
in the treatment and development of next generation
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will address drawbacks of
current kinase activity assays. The goal of this project is to develop highly
sensitive and multiplexed kinase assays using an innovative DNA-based protein
activity detection system. DNA-based activity assays display multiple advantages
over current assays, including cost effectiveness, multiplexing ability, high
sensitivity, and specificity. This assay will be 10- to 100-fold cheaper than
current assays due to the low cost of DNA synthesis. The proposed approach
enables the detection of protein activities as low as 100 femtomolar (fM) in
proteins in clinically-relevant biological samples. Ultimately, this innovative
DNA-based kinase assay platform will address the limitations facing current
kinase assay systems with a new solution that offers high specificity,
sensitivity, and accuracy in terms of disease diagnostics and/or monitoring the
kinase targeted drug responsiveness of various
cancers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.