* 2110228
* RUI: Search for Non-Newtonian Gravity Using A High-Sensitivity Torsion Balance, A Continuation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Woo-Joong Kim, Seattle University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 107,099.00

Gravity represents one of the four fundamental interactions in nature. But
unlike the other three interactions (electromagnetism, weak, and strong forces),
its theoretical descriptions, based on Newton’s description of universal
gravitation, later expanded by Einstein’s General Relativity, are incompatible
with the Standard Model, a quantum-mechanical framework that unifies all of the
other three interactions. Faced with this dichotomy, some modern proposals in
theoretical physics have suggested a possible breakdown of the inverse-square-
law (ISL) pioneered by Newton at experimentally-accessible sub-millimeter
separations, thereby providing a tantalizing prospect for unifying gravity with
quantum theory. The proposed research will utilize one of the most sensitive
table-top instruments, a torsional balance, to directly probe the ISL below 50
micron. Specific results obtained from this research in collaboration with SU
students will thus increase basic knowledge in fundamental research and have
profound impacts across broad areas of physics ranging from astrophysics to
elementary particle and nuclear physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to test the inverse-square law of gravity in the parallel-plane configuration by
directly quantifying the contributions from non-gravitational interactions. The
proposed strategy allows for conducting a high-precision experiment below 70
micron for which the roughness and planarity of the interfacing surfaces are the
only limiting physical barriers. The approach will thus substantially improve
the current limits on the strength α-parameter of the Yukawa space at least by a
factor of four at the 10-μm range. Another novelty of the proposed research is
to probe gravity above 1 cm in the Yukawa space, a previously unexplored range.
From a technical perspective, with an electrostatic screen inserted between the
test bodies, probing gravity at this scale would significantly reduce the near-
field effects, such as the electric patch effect and the Casimir force. The
completed torsion balance experiment will provide an excellent experimental
platform for students to gain critical laboratory skills and make significant
contributions to the integration of teaching and research in the SU physics
department. The research will greatly benefit from technical resources and
expertise provided by the Eöt-Wash group at the University of Washington (UW), a
pioneering group renowned for their precise studies of the ISL for many
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.