* 2110421
* Molecular Ion Quantum Logic â€“ A New Frontier for Quantum Interactions and Fundamental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Hudson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 438,632.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development of
techniques for the production and study of ultracold polar molecular ions held
in an ion trap. It is expected that the ability to produce such samples could
lead to significant technological and fundamental scientific advancements. This
includes potentially learning how to control chemistry in the quantum regime,
which could aid novel materials and drug design; creating a platform that could
be useful in producing a robust and scalable quantum computer; allowing new
probes of quantum matter and charge transport; understanding the formation of
interstellar clouds; and precision measurement of molecular structure for tests
of fundamental physics. The main research objective of this project is to
ascertain if molecular ion qubits are a useful platform for quantum computing,
quantum sensing, and quantum communication. The project will also support an
effort to partner with local elementary schools to bring inquiry-based, active
learning laboratory-based experiments to their classroom. As such, this project
has the ability to aid the progress of science and in the longer-term bolster
national prosperity and security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Because molecular ions are easily trapped for many minutes
in radio-frequency ion traps, there are possibilities for cooling and
interrogation that are not applicable to neutral atoms and molecules. Further,
the rich structure of molecules provides opportunities for optimizing a given
quantum task, eg. decoherence free subspaces and long-range interactions are
readily available. Therefore, this team is employing a technique where molecular
ions are co-trapped with laser cooled atomic ions and optionally exposed to
ultracold neutral gas. The molecular ion qubits can be controlled with lasers or
microwave radiation. This team will work to answer three challenges facing the
field: developing quantum non-demolition measurements and quantum state
preparation and readout; exploring the limits to molecular ion qubit coherence
times in a Paul trap; and developing quantum gates for molecular ion
qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.