* 2110256
* Coherent Control of Cold Collision by Preparing Molecular Eigenstates Using Stark-Induced Adiabatic Passage
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 463,606.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing a
comprehensive understanding of the quantum mechanical processes that drive
molecular interactions including chemical reactions at the most fundamental
level. The main goal of this research is to explore the character of quantum
systems and improve our ability to manipulate them, which is of great importance
in various applications including realization of a quantum computer. The
research team will carry out low energy (cold) collision experiments with
molecules prepared in well-defined quantum states. By correlating the quantum
states of the incoming particles with those of the outgoing particles they will
explore the quantum mechanical interactions involved in making and breaking
chemical bonds. This research combines cutting edge quantum optical techniques
and expertise in laser spectroscopy with state-resolved collision dynamics using
a supersonically expanded molecular beam. The graduate students involved in this
project will learn the technical skills needed for multiphoton laser
spectroscopy using vacuum ultraviolet laser pulses, quantum state preparation
using sophisticated single-mode pulsed laser systems, and manipulation of a
supersonic beam. Additionally, the research team will design a high resolution
mass spectrometer to resolve the scattering angular distribution in cold
collisions. This comprehensive training in broad areas of quantum physics and
chemistry will help to prepare the students to be leaders in improving the
science and technology of tomorrow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;To understand the quantum mechanical processes involved in
chemical reactions, it is essential to find a direct correspondence between
experimental measurements and theoretical calculations. To achieve this goal,
experimentalists need to select theoretically tractable molecules like H2 (N2,
CO, etc.), which are also of relevance to current science. The researchers will
prepare diatomic molecules in high vibrational states using a coherent optical
technique called multi-step Stark-induced adiabatic Raman passage (multi-step
SARP). Multi-step SARP is a generalization of the SARP process developed earlier
by this research group, which can pump a large ensemble of H2 molecules to a
variety of vibrationally excited levels. Multi-step SARP will combine two or
more SARP processes to achieve near complete population transfer to a very
highly vibrationally excited level. The researchers have shown theoretically
that by combining several Stokes pulses on the wing of a stronger pump pulse it
is possible to reach very high vibrational states. Long term prospects for this
technique include preparing the highest vibrational level of H2 and even
reaching the vibrational dissociation continuum, generating a pair of entangled
loosely bound H atoms. These exotic quantum systems will allow the researchers
to overcome the reaction barrier in cold and ultracold collisions and test
fundamental quantum physics principles, such as interference in collision. The
first goal of the project is to set up the multi-step SARP experiment and
demonstrate the preparation of very high vibrationally excited levels of H2.
Selection of the laser polarization used in the multi-step SARP will permit
control of the alignment of the bond axis of the highly vibrationally excited
molecules. Excitation of very high vibrational states using a two-step SARP
process will be a major leap forward in the study of cold molecular collisions.
Once prepared the researchers will carry out cold scattering experiments on the
four-center reaction H2 + D2 →2HD in a supersonically expanded mixed beam of H2
and D2. The collision dynamics of highly vibrationally excited H2 molecules are
of immense interest for understanding and modelling the physics and chemistry of
the interstellar medium. Additionally, high-lying vibrational levels of H2 are
considered essential to the efficient generation of H- beams by dissociative
attachment of low energy electrons, which has important applications in igniting
a fusion reactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.