* 2110157
* Enabling Confident Burst Gravitational Wave Detections with LIGO Data Quality Investigations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amber Stuver, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

LIGO’s first direct detection of a gravitational wave has allowed humans to make
paradigm-shifting observations of a binary black hole system. Since then, there
have been tens of additional gravitational wave detections and all have been
from the same source class: binary coalescences. Much has been learned about our
Universe from these observations, but additional physical phenomena will be
explored through observations of new source classes such as burst gravitational
waves. Bursts are a class of gravitational waves that originate from sources
that can’t be modeled confidently or are unanticipated. Because of this, little
is known about them, yet they hold the potential to lead to new discoveries
about our Universe. The research conducted in this award will enable confident
burst gravitational wave detections by reducing the impact of glitches in the
search for burst gravitational waves with LIGO. This award focuses on training
undergraduate students to significantly contribute to this research, formally
instructing them in the responsible conduct of research, and communicating their
work to both professional scientists at professional meetings and the public
through a partnership with the nearby American Helicopter Museum and Education
Center (AHMEC). This award also includes tuition support for at least 9
disadvantaged girls and young women (3 each year) to participate in the Girls in
Science and Technology (GIST) program run by the AHMEC.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed will increase the confidence in candidate
detections of burst gravitational waves by decreasing the impact of transient
data artifacts (glitches) on their search algorithms. Searches for burst
gravitational waves cannot make assumptions about the waveforms they seek other
than they are transient and uncorrelated with the ambient detector noise.
Because of that, burst search algorithms are designed to detect statistical
excesses in the detector output and are particularly susceptible to the presence
of glitches originating from the instrument or its environment. An accidental
trigger is generated when the burst search algorithm identifies a glitch as a
potential detection candidate. By conducting careful studies on the accidental
trigger distribution, glitches with the most impact on the burst searches can be
mitigated through their direct removal (veto) from searches. This award will
involve the development of vetoes for burst searches, investigations into vetoes
that reduce the significance of candidate events based on the confidence that a
glitch is present (instead of simply excluding the time), automation of applying
results from existing veto tools to burst searches, measurement of the
detectable range for a burst search based on the current performance of the
search, and facilitating coordination between relevant working groups. This will
result in a lower false alarm probability and higher confidence of candidate
detections, improved sensitivity of the burst gravitational wave searches, and
increased observations for the growing fields of gravitational wave astronomy
and multi-messenger astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.