* 2110294
* PM: Precision Low-Energy Quantum Electroynamic Theory and Fundamental Processes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Ulrich Jentschura, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Seen from a general perspective, this research project deals with tiny, but
important, effects which influence the spectrum of bound atomic systems, where
two fundamental elementary particles circle around each other on quantum
trajectories. When one combines quantum theory with relativity and adds the
field quantization into the mix, then a complicated theory results, which is
called quantum electrodynamics. This theory has been tested against experiment
for decades, and confirmed. Recently, some interesting new effects, beyond
quantum electrodynamics, may have been seen in the form of a so-called X17
particle which only couples weakly to those particles that are described by the
widely-accepted Standard Model of particle physics. Effects mediated by the
hypothetical new particle, visible in the spectrum of bound systems, shall be
explored with high-precision calculations. This is but one of many fundamental
quantum-field theoretical effects which will be studied in the context of the
grant. Other effects pertain to the temperature-dependence of atom-surface
interactions where the effects of so-called thermal field theory may have been
seen in an experiment, and could be compared to theory for the first time. The
work will be supplemented by speculative and high-risk work on overcoming the
predictive limits of theoretical approaches that have set the standard for
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes the study of higher-order
corrections due to quantum electrodynamic effects in atoms and higher-order
corrections to the bound-electron g-factor, and the investigation of higher-
order quantum electrodynamic corrections in heavy bound systems, where the
orbiting particle is heavier than the electron. The latter system is of interest
due to the proton radius puzzle as well as the so-called ATOMKI anomaly (which
pertains to conceivable dark-photon additions to the Standard Model). The
effects due to the hypothetical X17 particle are drastically enhanced in heavy
as opposed to light bound systems. Complementing the quantum electrodynamic
calculations, and exploring quantum field theory at high precision, fundamental
temperature-dependent dynamic Casimir processes will be investigated, pertaining
to atom-surface interactions, and novel techniques will be explored for the
calculation of large-loop-order Feynman diagrams, conceivably overcoming current
predictive limits of perturbation theory. A 770-page book on quantum
electrodynamics should be completed during the award period, serving as a
reference for the community. All of the above mentioned subprojects have broader
significance and impacts beyond the original field of study, because of their
importance for the general understanding of fundamental quantum field theory in
the low-energy domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.