* 2110775
* Polar Explorer - A Virtual Learning Environment for Polar Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Ariel Anbar, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2026
* USD 644,692.00

Scientists at Northern Arizona University, Arizona State University, the
University of Arizona, and the University of Colorado at Boulder will
collaborate to develop a digital learning environment called Polar Explorer for
this Engaged Student Learning: Level III project. In this web-based, immersive
environment, students will explore inaccessible polar environments and learn
about polar science from their laptops, desktops, or mobile devices. The Arctic
is a remote, rapidly changing region with extreme variations in temperature and
sunlight. Much of the Arctic is underlain by permafrost, a layer of soil or
sediment that is perennially frozen. Over the past three decades, the Arctic has
warmed at twice the rate of the rest of the world and permafrost has started to
thaw. Thawing permafrost can release enormous amounts of previously frozen
greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, accelerating the pace of climate change. It
can also threaten the food security and clean water of local residents, lead to
the erosion of landscapes, the collapse of buildings and roads, and increased
risk of wildfires. Thus, climate warming is transforming the Arctic, and this
transformation threatens U.S. national security through its impacts on
infrastructure, global climate, and public health. It is therefore imperative
for the general public to understand how the Arctic is changing and why these
changes have significant consequences for the U.S. and the rest of the world.
However, teaching students about permafrost and its consequences is challenging
because of the remoteness and inaccessibility of the Arctic. Polar systems are
also complex and changes in polar environments occur on many different scales
that can be difficult for the mind to grasp. Polar Explorer’s interactive,
virtual field trips will leverage intelligent tutoring systems and virtual
reality technologies to allow students to do science, rather than just being
told about science. Using realistic, scientifically-accurate landscapes and
learning experiences, students will experience and learn about the Arctic
environment much like they would if they were physically there — regardless of a
student’s socioeconomic background, physical ability, or level of academic
preparation. Through innovative learning design and virtual reality
technologies, Polar Explorer provides a novel and transformative approach for
improving STEM education; one that will cultivate a sense of curiosity and
connection-to-place and will generate new knowledge about STEM teaching and
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design, build,
deploy, and evaluate the effectiveness of Polar Explorer at increasing student
conceptual knowledge of permafrost, its dynamics, and the consequences of
permafrost degradation on ecosystems, infrastructure, climate, and society.
Polar Explorer will consist of a suite of Learning Experiences (LXs) built
around interactive Virtual Field Trips (iVFTs), connected via a high-resolution
rendered landscape generated from real Arctic terrain data. Seven place-based
LXs will cover topics of Arctic exploration, permafrost dynamics, indigenous
perspectives on changing landscapes, and impacts of permafrost thaw on
infrastructure, carbon feedbacks, and human health. Students will have autonomy
in choosing their learning path through the LXs, which will leverage virtual
reality technology, an engaging narrative, a diverse population of real polar
scientists, and real-world data and places to provide context to student
learning. An intelligent tutoring system will individualize the student
experience and help address conceptual gaps in knowledge. Polar Explorer’s iVFTs
will effectively promote active, inquiry-based learning and resolve the
substantial accessibility challenges inherent to polar science. It is predicted
that students will: (1) increase their polar science disciplinary knowledge; (2)
examine and differentiate multiple scales; and (3) improve their comprehension
of transdisciplinary connections in polar science. Polar Explorer will run on
HTML5, which has ubiquitous support. The design of the student-driven
exploration will target students in critical undergraduate introductory STEM
courses, such as geology, earth science, climate, and biology. Overall the
project will be assessed by analyzing student learning outcomes, and by
formative and summative evaluations that measure the effectiveness of the iVFT-
based LXs in meeting project goals. This project will provide much needed
metrics on the degree to which iVFTs and adaptive digital learning environments,
and the associated approach to learning design, promote STEM learning. Specific
focus will be placed on how iVFT-based learning experiences help students work
across scales and understand connections across STEM concepts and disciplines.
This project, jointly supported by the Office of Polar Programs and the Division
of Undergraduate Education, responds to the Dear Colleague Letter (NSF 19-086)
calling for efforts that support the engagement of students and the public in
polar research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.