* 2110265
* Inverse Scattering Using Data-Driven Reduced-Order Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Joern Zimmerling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 09/30/2022
* USD 51,227.00

Waves are used to image in many applications like radar, ultrasound or
geophysical exploration. This project is concerned with developing a novel
reduced-order model based methodology for inverse scattering and for imaging of
periodic, dispersive structures in nano-photonics. Reduced-order models are
extensively used in the dynamical-systems community; however, their use in
inverse problems has been limited. The inverse scattering problems in this
project are formulated for typical setups, where data are gathered by arrays of
sensors that probe an unknown heterogeneous medium with waves and measure the
returns. Rather than asking the question "which scattering medium could have
caused the measured wave returns" directly, this novel methodology first
constructs a reduced-order model from the measured data. The reduced-order model
is defined to preserve the physics of wave propagation. The research is
motivated by applications in nondestructive evaluation of materials, estimation
of sea ice thickness using airborne radar, medical imaging, oil exploration and
nano-photonics. Open source software will be provided in the scope of this
project&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks new directions in inverse
scattering and reduced-order modeling. It shows how to view wave propagation as
a dynamical system driven by a linear operator that contains information about
the medium, modeled by unknown coefficients in the acoustic or electromagnetic
wave equation. The dynamical system framework allows the connection to reduced-
order modeling techniques, which need to be adapted in order to be useful in
inverse scattering. The project pursues this goal for the following specific
questions: (1) How can one control waves for improved focusing and subsequent
improved imaging, in a pixel scanning fashion? (2) How can one construct and use
a ROM for quantitative estimation of the coefficients in the governing wave
equations? (3) How can one invert in lossy media? The latter question is
connected to an important problem in reduced-order modeling, concerned with the
identification of port-Hamiltonian dynamical systems from measurements of their
transfer function. This project also seeks to develop model-driven ROMs for
dispersive, periodic nano-photonic structures, for speeding up design
optimization and parametric inversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.