* 2110204
* Collaborative Research: Engineering fractional photon transport for random laser devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Luca Dal Negro, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

The rapid development of miniaturized lasers enabled consumer applications of
optical technology that have radically transformed our information society
ranging from high-speed communication systems to integrated optical sensors,
scanners, and high-resolution imaging devices. Moreover, the emerging paradigm
of quantum information technology requires our ability to enhance the rate of
optical emission processes in miniaturized laser devices that can operate
efficiently over multiple frequency bands and release “photons on demand”.
Responding to these challenges, this research project advances the understanding
of novel laser devices that rely on engineered wave transport and localization
effects in structurally disordered media. The research team utilizes novel
computational methods in partnership with nanofabrication and device
characterization to design and develop a new class of laser structures with
broadband behavior for use as miniaturized light sources in the next generation
of power-efficient nanophotonics devices, such as on-chip miniaturized
spectrometers, optical sensors, imaging systems, and more robust quantum
sources. The project supports one graduate student at Boston University and at
the University of Utah and encourages the involvement of undergraduate students
in the research through a vibrant outreach program at both institutions. The
computational and experimental frameworks developed by the PIs will be
disseminated through course projects at both Boston University and the
University of Utah. An important component of this outreach plan is to attract
underrepresented minorities to a career in computational science and optical
engineering through participation in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project responds to the compelling challenges posed by the multi-scale modeling
of random laser devices with tailored photon transport properties by proposing a
combined theoretical and experimental approach based on the efficient numerical
solution of fractional differential operators in non-regular three-dimensional
domains. Fractional calculus operators exhibit non-local characteristics in
space and history-effects in time that naturally describe correlation effects in
the wave transport across non-homogenous, aperiodic media. These effects
typically provide significant discretization and computational challenges.
However, building on the initial success of fractional wave-diffusion equation
models for anomalous wave transport, this project develops a new methodology to
efficiently couple fractional transport equations to the electrodynamics
description of active photonic devices with complex non-periodic geometries. To
accomplish this task, we build on the success of the open-source spectral/hp
element library Nektar++ framework designed to support the development of high-
performance scalable solvers for partial differential equations using the
spectral/hp element method. The project uses novel mathematical techniques of
fractional operators in concert with the fabrication and experimental
characterization of random laser devices realized from sub-wavelength photonic
membranes. Based on this efficient platform, the project demonstrates lasing
behavior in tailored random structures and aperiodic media that exhibit ultra-
slow photon sub-diffusion phenomena by design. The primary intellectual merit of
the project is the development of a novel class of cost-effective, miniaturized,
disorder-engineered random lasers with tailored photon diffusion properties that
can find applications as more robust photon sources for classical and quantum
optical information processing. This project enables a substantial broader
impact by providing the foundation for the next generation of random laser
devices for optical imaging, sensing, and spectroscopy, and laying the
foundation for broader adoption of fractional operators in computational
photonic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.