* 2110441
* RUI: Neutron-Star Matter in the LIGO A+ Era and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jocelyn Read, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 224,468.00

Neutron stars are critical sites for learning about the unknown structure and
makeup of matter in its most extreme high-density form. Gravitational wave
emission traces the dynamics of dense matter in neutron-star interiors, and the
discovery of the binary neutron star merger GW170817 by the LIGO and Virgo
Scientific Collaborations inaugurated the era of dense matter studies with
gravitational waves. The research funded by this grant will support precision
neutron-star matter science using future observations with upgraded LIGO and
Virgo detectors, providing insight into forms of matter that cannot be recreated
on Earth. It will engage and support undergraduate and Masters students at
California State University Fullerton, a Hispanic-Serving Institution, in
cutting-edge research at the intersection of nuclear physics and gravitational-
wave astronomy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The phase evolution of the gravitational
waves from a neutron star merger carries an imprint of the stars' internal
structure. Currently, the only measurable matter signature is due to the
leading-order tidal deformability parameter. However, improvements to detector
sensitivities are poised to deliver louder and more numerous neutron star
observations in the near future, unlocking the information encoded in next-to-
leading-order tidal deformabilities and dynamical tides. In preparation for
these future measurements, state-of-the-art infrastructure will be developed to
connect gravitational-wave observables to the fundamental properties of dense
matter, including its equation of state. In particular, this comprehensive
Bayesian framework for inferring the equation of state will account for as-yet-
unmeasured matter signatures, for uncertainty in the neutron star population,
and for prior information from nuclear theory and electromagnetic observations
of pulsars. These tools will be deployed to analyze future gravitational wave
observations, helping to maximize the amount of dense matter knowledge they
impart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.