* 2110659
* SBIR Phase I:  Safer batteries to mitigate injuries from accidental ingestion in children
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Ravikumar Vasudevan, LANDSDOWNE LABS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a novel battery design which rapidly
deactivates in contact with aqueous environments. Every year, tens of thousands
of children suffer as a result of ingesting coin cell batteries. These children
may needlessly suffer debilitating and sometimes fatal consequences. Exposure to
unforeseen battery ingestions increases with the proliferation of Internet of
Things (IOT) and wearable devices that use compact, high energy density,
batteries replaceable by the consumer. Such batteries are increasingly required
to have higher potential or capacity (or both) and pose an ever-greater risk to
unsuspecting children. Worldwide, 10 billion coin cell batteries are sold
annually and this is one of the fastest growing, highest margin consumer battery
segments. These sales are expected to translate to nearly $2 billion in the
lithium battery primary market by 2024. Consumer use of coin cells is growing;
By 2030, 125 billion IOT devices are expected to be sold globally many powered
by coin cells. The magnitude of the potential child-ingestion problem is
significant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR phase I project seeks to reduce
children's injuries caused by injesting coin cell batteries by using a novel
material design to rapidly deactivate coin cell batteries when they come into
contact with aqueous environments. The research addresses the fundamental issue
of electrochemical burns. The solution will conform to established standards for
coin cell batteries in terms of electrical and other performance requirements.
Phase I research efforts will include identifying suitable materials for
specific component(s) of a coin cell battery, demonstrating that novel material
combinations can be manufactured using scalable process, and producing hand-
assembled lithium primary coin cell batteries that have an appropriate open
circuit potential and electrical discharge characteristics under continuous
ohmic load and pulsed discharge conditions. The teams also seeks to demonstrate
that fully-assembled cells deactivate rapidly when the cells come into contact
with aqueous environments. The tests include the use of highly sensitive source
measure unit(s) to apply potential and detect current in aqueous environments.
Additionally, material robustness will be tested for electrical, mechanical, and
processability parameters. Electrical discharge and battery performance testing
procedures will be used in accordance with current
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.