* 2110986
* Collaborative Research: Urban Goods Movements, Pricing, and Social Justice
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jose Holguin-Veras, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 341,000.00

This NSF grant will explore urban goods movements, pricing, and social justice
through numerical experiments. The experiments will be based on a new family of
urban freight models, in lieu of expensive field measurements. The models will
be used to investigate five primary hypotheses: (1) urban freight quality of
service may be enhanced through traffic network and route reconfiguration; (2)
urban neighborhoods with persistent, chronically inferior urban freight service
sometimes emerge spontaneously, but their impact may be substantially
ameliorated through incentivizing and subsidizing freight service providers; (3)
the present demand for goods provisioned by large, publicly traded electronic
retailers might not be sustainable because of their current use of internal
subsidies and hidden costs to fund extremely low shipping fees, creating an
unfunded liability through which investors sacrifice profits for market share;
(4) when subsidies are scaled down and hidden shipping costs are made explicit,
deleterious impacts on carriers, e-retailers and households may arise; and (5)
food underserved areas (FUAs) arise from the combination of relatively low
demand for and relatively high supply chain costs of healthy food items -
creating a food dessert that represents a serious social injustice to members of
society who cannot find alternative sources of affordable, quality
food.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intended family of urban freight models will be
explicitly dynamic and based on game theory. The models will depict the role
urban freight systems in electronic commerce at the household level, including
explicit recognition of food deliveries. A careful experimental design will be
followed in assessing the aforementioned hypotheses. Accordingly, the intended
family of models, as well as the experiments to assess hypotheses, will address
the following considerations: (1) urban freight carriers compete with one
another, not only for market share but also for urban routes and parking that
are also valued by commuters and hired ride services; (2) there is an undeniable
dynamic aspect to the flows of vehicles and consumption goods over metropolitan
road networks; moreover, those flows involve multiple time scales that make the
comparative statics paradigm nearly meaningless; (3) in an effort to be
competitive, electronic retailers (e-retailers) are drawn into pricing games
that purposely blur the distinction between delivery fees and the prices of
purchased goods, with the consequence that it is necessary to simultaneously
model both freight service and urban goods provisioning; (4) indirect evidence
exists that pricing strategies employed in e-commerce do not fully cover
delivery costs; (5) some electronic retailers offer discounted and promotional
shipping rates, creating unfunded liabilities that bring into doubt both the
medium- and long-term sustainability of their core transactions; and (6) there
is a gap between the demand for healthy foods and the minimum order size that
makes it worthwhile for food purveyors to deliver to certain neighborhoods,
thereby creating food underserved areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.