* 2110555
* LIGO Detector Characterization and Supernova Data Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michele Zanolin, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

LIGO and its sibling collaborations continue to push forward the young field of
gravitational wave astronomy. This grant focuses on Embry-Riddle's contributions
to two facets of LIGO science. The first is detector characterization, which
involves efforts to understand and mitigate the effects of Earth-based noise on
the interferometer in order to detect gravitational waves with better clarity.
The second is the search for gravitational waves from core-collapse supernovae,
a promising source of gravitational wave emission beyond binary coalescences.
Embry-Riddle is well positioned to advance the training of the next generation
of scientists due to its focus on undergraduate education with close faculty-
student interaction. Embry-Riddle's location, serving rural north-central
Arizona, helps attract first-generation college students. Given its proximity to
the Navajo nation, Embry-Riddle is also in a position to increase access to
scientific opportunities for underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for gravitational waves is made more difficult
by the presence of terrestrial background, resulting from a combination of
environmental disturbances and behavior of the interferometers themselves.
Understanding these disturbances and removing them from interferometric data
through detector characterization activities is critical in conducting sensitive
searches for gravitational waves, as it can mean the difference between a
statistically significant gravitational wave detection and a sub-threshold
event. The PI of this proposal is a co-chair of LIGO's detector characterization
working group, and will conduct a number of activities related to the continued
operation of that group. Core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) are an exciting target
for multi-messenger astronomy. Given the rate of about two CCSNe per century in
our galaxy, the signatures of the next Galactic CCSN are already traveling
toward us. The reconstruction of a gravitational wave from a CCSN would address
a number of open questions in astrophysics, including the mechanism of the
explosion itself as well as fundamental questions about neutrino interactions
and the neutron star equation of state. In the next few years, the improved
sensitivity of Advanced LIGO combined with more sophisticated algorithms for
detection and parameter estimation of supernova signals will greatly enhance
LIGO's opportunities for exploring supernova astrophysics, and future
interferometers carry even more promise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.