* 2110095
* EAGER: CFD-based Adjoint Methods for Design Applications with Unsteady Separated Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Brian Helenbrook, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 221,517.00

A computational method called adjoint based optimization is used in vehicle
design to find optimal shapes for desired performance, such enhanced lift or
reduced drag of aerodynamic shapes. Historically, this method has been used on
streamlined shapes in simple flow fields, but more recently it has been applied
to more complex shapes such as automobiles in complex, turbulent flow fields.
However, the accuracy of the flow simulations and the effectiveness of the
design process are unclear. An application where the accuracy of aerodynamic
optimization is critical is the Winter Olympic sport of Luge. History has shown
that Olympic medals have been determined by time differences of only a few
thousandths of a second. The aerodynamics are complicated because the geometry
itself is complex and the flow behind the rider/sled involves large scale
unsteady turbulent motion (similar to a vehicle). Traditionally luge equipment
has been developed by former athletes and was hand shaped based on hunches,
feel, and experience. The flow conditions, and historic lack of science based
design optimization, make luge sleds an ideal choice for investigation of the
effectiveness of adjoint based optimization to perform aerodynamic optimization
The successful design, build, and experimentally validating adjoint designs for
unsteady flows in this project can potentially have a significant benefit to
future designs of cars/trucks, boat/ships, and advanced air vehicles for drag
minimization, increased performance during turns/maneuvering, or the prevention
of flow separation while accelerating/decelerating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this work is to investigate the effectiveness of adjoint methods to
reach an optimal shape in turbulent, unsteady, separated flows using
experimental validation. An adjoint based method will be developed and applied
to a luge sled/rider model that targets modification of the sled shape to
minimize drag. Experimental testing will be performed to provide performance
data of the intermediate shapes throughout the process to ascertain if the
adjoint process is accurately predicting the actual performance and converging
towards an optimal solution. The experimental validation will be accomplished by
a combination of surface pressure measurement, drag measurement and measurement
of the flow fields around the model. Beyond these technical goals is the high-
level goal of transferring scientifically optimized race technology to the US
Luge Association for use in Olympic competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.