* 2110917
* Collaborative Research: Parallel Space-Time Solvers for Systems of Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jacob Schroder, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 152,476.00

Computer simulations and the mathematical methods supporting these are central
to the modern study of engineering, biology, chemistry, physics, and other
fields. Many simulations are computationally costly and require the large
resources of modern supercomputers. New mathematical methods are urgently needed
to efficiently utilize next generation supercomputers with millions to billions
of processors. This project will develop new parallel-in-time algebraic
multigrid methods for complex physical systems specifically designed for next
generation computers. These new methods will add a new dimension of parallel
scalability (time) and promise dramatically faster simulations in many important
application areas, such as the gas and fluid dynamics problems considered (e.g.,
with relevance to wind turbines and viscoelastic flow). Graduate students will
be involved and trained, and open source code will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop fast, parallel, and
flexible space-time solvers for systems of partial differential equations
(PDEs). The project will focus on algebraic multigrid (AMG) within block
preconditioning traditionally appropriate for large adaptively refined spatial
systems. These techniques will be extended to general space-time systems with a
flexible approach that allows for adaptive space-time refinement. This
adaptivity helps to accurately resolve lower dimensional features such as shocks
at a fraction of the cost and storage of uniform refinement. Furthermore, the
project will produce new practical AMG theory for non-SPD (symmetric positive
definite) problems as well as solvers for adaptively refined space-time
discretizations for a variety of parabolic and hyperbolic PDEs including the
Euler and Navier-Stokes equations and Cahn-Hilliard system. The project will
design, analyze, and tune parallel AMG solvers that are robust, efficient, and
fast over a wide range of PDEs and parameters and will contribute to the widely
used packages MFEM and hypre. The solvers will be developed and tested for
applications in wind turbines, as well the high Weissenberg number problem in
viscoelastic flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.