* 2110826
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Foundation of Learning with Information-Theoretic Criteria from Non-Gaussian Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Qiang Wu, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 114,999.00

This project is focused on developing the mathematical foundations for
information theory and specifically with information-theoretic criteria relevant
for tackling heavily contaminated data. Such criteria are widely applied to
machine learning tasks arising from real-world applications such as medical
imaging, face recognition, and weather forecasting. Their theoretical
understanding is lagging, and many fundamental problems remain open. The project
will deepen the understanding of information-theoretic criteria, explore their
cutting-edge applications, and help advance research in robust machine learning.
This project is integrated with educational and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves three dedicated
components towards information-theoretic criteria based learning; these are
theoretical assessments, computational methodologies, and application
explorations. Theoretical assessments aim at unveiling the mechanisms of
learning in the presence of non-Gaussian noise. Computational methodologies
integrate information-theoretic criteria and the involved non-convex
optimization with modern machine learning techniques such as distributed
learning and deep learning. The application component is dedicated to the
exploration of new application domains such as biological spectral imaging.
Theoretical and computational foundations of information-theoretic criteria
based learning and new applications will enrich and broaden the current
understanding of non-Gaussian data analysis. By introducing advanced learning
techniques into this area, this project has the potential to realize more
powerful and robust machine learning systems that are broadly applicable to a
variety of modern applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.