* 2110327
* Exploring Ultracold Matter Along the Complexity Axis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Bohn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 277,228.00

It is a fundamental notion that simple things can combine into more complex
things, and this complexity underlies the rich variety of phenomena that we see
in nature. It is therefore important to the progress of science to understand
this richness and complexity in as many environments as possible; from many
examples will come general ideas about the intricacies of how the world works.
This project relies on the recognition that things as seemingly simple as atoms
can present surprisingly complex behavior. Specifically, atoms held in the
gaseous state at temperatures one millionth of a degree above absolute zero can
be measured with high precision that reveal surprising complexity. For instance,
the atoms can be pointed in a certain direction, like little bar magnets, and
this direction can influence the thermodynamics of the gas as well as the
interactions of the atoms with each other, altering their trajectories in
sometimes unpredictable ways. On the other hand, the comparative simplicity of
the atoms lends hope that these intricacies can be understood in detail, sorting
out the parts that might have an underlying simplicity from those parts that are
truly chaotic. This work is therefore also an exercise in understanding the
capabilities and limits of engineering atoms to particular
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed will probe in detail new
aspects of ultracold collisions that have emerged in recent years. One is the
occurrence of an enormous density of resonant states in collisions of lanthanide
atoms such as dysprosium and erbium. This circumstance may lead to novel
phenomena in many-body gases on the one hand and to new insights into chaotic
behavior and dynamics of rethermalization of isolated systems on the other,
hence contribute to small-scale nonequilibrium dynamics. Part of this
development seeks to bring the techniques of information theory to bear on
questions of the structure of complex molecules. A second aspect is the
possibility of super-resonant scattering of ultracold molecules, with far higher
densities of states than lanthanide atoms. The occurrence of long-lived
collision complexes has been empirically verified, and their lifetimes measured.
The proposed work will seek to understand the properties of these unusual, four-
atom microdroplets, using statistical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.