* 2110777
* Teaching Practices with Multiplayer Mixed Reality Simulations and Virtual Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Xin Yuan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 598,943.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by preparing future secondary
mathematics and science teachers to employ effective teaching practices. This
IUSE Engaged Student Learning Level 2 project will advance preservice teacher
education by addressing two issues: (a) the difficulty in allowing for an
accessible and scalable practicum experience for preservice mathematics and
science teachers, and (b) the lack of interdisciplinary experiences in teacher
preparation programs. This project will develop and implement a virtual
environment for teaching practices that will support collaborative and
interdisciplinary teaching practices for mathematics and science preservice
teachers. This accessible virtual tool has potential to serve as an innovative
method for customizing, promoting, and testing a simulated classroom setup and
use of virtual students as part of instructional planning. Project activities,
including the use of technology to model realistic teaching experiences, will
prepare future mathematics and science teachers for effective and adaptive
teaching practices. The digital teaching simulations will address a limitation
of conventional classroom simulations by allowing preservice teachers to engage
in realistic classroom events without physically being in a K-12
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop and study
an open-source, multiplayer simulation-based learning platform for preservice
secondary mathematics and science teachers. This enactive virtual environment
for teaching practice (EVETeach) leverages the perspectives of reflective
practice and topic-specific professional knowledge, mixed-reality simulations
and virtual agent design, and real-time performance data mining. EVETeach will
engage preservice teachers in planning, conducting, and debriefing on core
teaching practices in an assembly of 3D-immersive teaching simulations, and
enable them to experience interdisciplinary collaboration in co-teaching and co-
designing crosscutting math-science instruction, with a focus on learner
autonomy and agency, culturally responsive teaching, and real-time performance
tracking. Through a mixed-method, design-based research approach, this 3-year
project will encompass iterative design experiments to study and refine the
intervention program in situ, and an evaluation study of the intervention's
impact on the development of professional knowledge of preservice teachers and
their conceptualization of interdisciplinary STEM education. The project will
generate a new design framework governing an effective, accessible, and
sustainable learning system that activates, assesses, and adaptively supports
the practice-oriented professional knowledge development of future STEM
teachers. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for this project to support
the project's preservice teacher preparation goals, which are well-aligned with
Noyce Program goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.