* 2110037
* SBIR Phase I:  Physiological Brain Measurement for Anxiety Assessment and Trending
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,12/31/2021
* David Yonce, COGWEAR LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 12/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will directly help enhance care for the 30-to-40
million adults in the U.S. that live with anxiety disorders. Mental health
widely impacts society, with the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI)
reporting one-in-five adults in the U.S. experiencing a mental illness annually.
This large group forms a vastly underserved patient population that is only
beginning to receive the attention needed to provide more effective solutions.
Further, the arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic has only exacerbated the
prevalence of these disorders and the need for improved care outcomes. Most
practicing mental health clinicians have experienced significant increases of
patients seeking care for anxiety, depression, and other disorders, taxing an
already overwhelmed segment of healthcare. The proposed technology addresses
needs for better methods to screen and triage patients, improve precision of
pharmaceutical selection, and provide remote monitoring of health states,
especially in at-risk sectors, to expand patient trending and ensure effective
treatment outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project builds upon successful human research studies and pilot
engineering to further the R&amp;D of a commercially viable behavioral health
vital sign. This vital sign measure utilizes a wearable electroencephalogram
(EEG) sensor in concert with a mobile device application that allows a high-
accuracy, physiological measurement of anxiety based upon brain biology. The
activities of the Phase I grant focus on one of the enabling technologies for
this new vital sign: the novel EEG sensor electrodes integrated into the
wearable, which allow clinical-grade brain measurements simply, in any location,
and at any time. These EEG sensor electrodes mimic the mechanical properties of
human skin and have been shown through several research studies to provide high-
quality signals over long durations without the use of inconvenient and messy
conductive gels. The Phase I activities will build upon this platform with a
series of design and fabrication experiments to make these electrodes field
replaceable by novice users and to reduce the cost to a point that is viable in
the market. Pilot wearable devices will be modified to accept these updated
electrodes and user testing conducted to confirm electrical, comfort, and
longevity performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.