* 2110113
* NSF-BSF: CIF: Small: From storage codes to recoverable systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexander Barg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Modern-day data centers store large volumes of information in distributed form,
placing parts of the same data file on different servers in the system wherein
server failures occur on a regular basis. Recovery of data located on servers
that become unavailable because of transient or permanent failures critically
depends on the methods of data encoding, and developing such methods is the main
directions in the design of large-scale storage systems. This project aims at
constructing methods of data encoding that account for low-cost data recovery
based on the nature of connections between the servers such as spatial proximity
or the availability of communication links. This represents a shift from the
broadly studied problems of data reconstruction that discount the varying cost
of moving data between the servers based on the topology of the system, and
opens a possibility of engaging new mathematical methods for the design of
efficient methods of data encoding and reconstruction. In the first part, this
project advances high-density storage systems based on recently discovered
applications of tools from computer science and applied mathematics to the code
design. In the second part, the project addresses large-size storage systems,
aiming to establish new statistical properties of methods of data encoding as
well as the limits on the volume of data that can be stored in the system while
maintaining the recovery functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
at developing new methods in the problems of data coding for large-scale
distributed storage. Since different parts of the codeword comprising a chunk of
data are stored on different servers, efficient recovery hinges on the ability
to reconstruct unavailable data from the servers that are in close proximity of
the failed storage node. In technical terms, the system is described by a graph
where coordinates of the codeword are stored on different vertices, and the
value of each vertex is a function of the values of its neighbors in the graph.
In the first part, this project aims at constructing efficient encoding methods
based on recently established connections between codes for storage, index
codes, and low-density quantum codes. The main goals are constructing codes of
the highest possible rate as well as developing iterative procedures for the
recovery of multiple nodes for various classes of graphs relying on their
algebraic properties and on methods from percolation theory on finite graphs.
The second part of the project is concerned with coding systems that support
data recovery on infinite graphs such as the graph of integers, the two-
dimensional integer lattice and the like, using methods from constrained
systems, symbolic dynamics, and entropy theory for the purpose of establishing
the maximum possible density of data stored in large-scale
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.