* 2110576
* RUI: WoU-MMA: Multi-Messenger Astronomy and Astrophysics with Gravitational-Wave Data
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Shaon Ghosh, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

More than a hundred years ago Albert Einstein in his general theory of
relativity predicted the existence of gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric
of spacetime that propagate at the speed of light. These waves are generated by
some of the most violent events in the universe, like colliding neutron stars
and coalescing black holes. When two neutron stars collide the matter inside the
neutron star is expelled out. Outside the extreme environment of the neutron
star this matter is unstable and decays rapidly, radiating electromagnetic waves
that can be detected billions of lightyears away. These electromagnetic events
are called Kilonova. A kilonova however is a very rare event (roughly happening
once per million years) in a Milky Way like galaxy. Thus, to have a reasonable
chance of detecting these events we need to be able to see deep into the
universe, giving us access to a large number of galaxies. This also means that
most of the kilonova that we will be detecting are going to be at the farthest
distances that we can reach, and hence will be very faintly observable from
Earth. To make matters more complicated, these events also rapidly fade away.
Thus, it is very important that observers are looking at the right part of the
sky immediately after two neutron stars have collided. Detection of
gravitational waves from a coalescing neutron star will allow us to localize the
region of the sky and calculate the probability of having an electromagnetic
emission as a result of these collisions. The PI will develop components of a
low-latency gravitational wave alert infrastructure that will use gravitational
wave detections to facilitate follow-up observations using telescopes around the
world and in space. Secondly, the structure of neutron stars itself continues to
remain a mystery in physics. This is primarily because there is no way of
emulating the extreme environment akin to the interior of a neutron star in a
laboratory. Gravitational waves reveal to us important clues about the matter
inside the neutron star that can be used to improve out understanding of their
structure. The PI will develop a technology that will allow combining
gravitational wave data from multiple binary neutron star coalescence events to
compare different theoretical models of neutron star matter. The tool will also
help the user to compare custom-made models, allowing exploratory studies on
models that are not currently predicted by any theory. The results of both these
projects will provide tools and data to physicists, astronomers, and
astrophysicists in the US and around the world to pursue further scientific
investigations. The PI, who is a professor at a regional public university, will
mentor undergraduate students at his institution, giving them the opportunity to
work on large volumes of data and learn statistical techniques. This will
prepare them as future scientists, engineers, and/or data analysts in an
increasingly data driven world. The PI will engage with the broader public
through lectures, outreach exhibits, teacher training programs to ensure
dissemination of knowledge acquired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIGO-Virgo
collaboration has organized three observing runs which have led to more than
fifty detection of gravitational waves from binaries of orbiting neutron stars
and black holes. With scheduled improvements in the detectors we expect to see
as many as ten times more astrophysical events in the next LIGO run (O4).
Furthermore, in O4 we expect to see the inauguration of the fourth gravitational
wave detector, KAGRA in Japan. Thus, an increased sensitivity of the detectors,
greater duty cycle and improved sky-sensitivity due to an extra detector in the
network are going to greatly increase the rate detection. The infrastructure
currently in place from the last observing run is inadequate to meet this high
throughput of events. The PI commits to deliver a low-latency alert
infrastructure that is capable of handling the expected increase of low-latency
triggers from the gravitational wave detectors. This infrastructure will address
the key issues of the last observing run that resulted in delays in the alert
process. The PI proposes to develop cyberinfrastructure to process alert streams
and provide source-classification and source-properties information to the
public in less 10 seconds after detection. Secondly, the PI will also develop a
technology that will rapidly combine information from multiple gravitational
wave observations of coalescing neutron star binaries to improve the
understanding of the internal structure neutron stars. This tool will leverages
upon a single parameter estimation study that is agnostic about the nature of
the matter inside the neutron star (equation of state). It will then employ a
series of valid approximations, to reduce the computational requirement enabling
the rapid calculation of the ratio of the evidences (Bayes-factor) of any two
models of the neutron star equation of state. This method can then be extended
to the computation of joint Bayes-factors of multiple events, giving us a
holistic picture about the neutron star equation of
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.