* 2110596
* Rydberg Synthetic Dimensions: A New Simulator for Quantum Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Thomas Killian, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 06/30/2024
* USD 588,816.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;“Quantum simulation” refers to the use of a
controllable and well-understood system to recreate the essential elements of a
more complex system that is challenging to probe experimentally and beyond the
capabilities of traditional computational techniques to model. This approach is
similar to the use of a wind-tunnel to optimize automobile or athletic
performance. Quantum simulators promise to improve our understanding of the
behavior of many, interacting particles in a regime dominated by the laws of
quantum mechanics, which is an outstanding problem in many areas of science. In
turn, this can unlock technological applications, such as the ability to design
materials showing new and advantageous electrical, magnetic, or mechanical
properties. Quantum simulation is a young field with many potential approaches
under investigation. This project will develop a promising new type of quantum
simulator based on the dynamics of an electron bound in an atom and manipulated
by tailored electric fields. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
in quantum science, an area of great national interest. Outreach programs will
expose middle and high school teachers and students to the excitement of
research with lasers and atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project will support construction of a large synthetic
lattice space based on coupling of multiple highly excited atomic states
(‘Rydberg states’) with millimeter waves. Atomic population moving between the
internal states will simulate particles tunneling between sites of a physical
lattice. This platform offers unprecedented control over all parameters of the
Hamiltonian and powerful population diagnostics with single-site resolution to
enable study of new classes of single-particle and many-body quantum systems,
including realization of spatial geometries not possible in real, three-
dimensional space. The specific goals of the work are to (1) develop the toolbox
for Rydberg synthetic dimensions, (2) characterize single-particle band
structure and dynamics in complex synthetic spaces such as the breathing Kagome
lattice and quantum states and dynamics in a Mobius strip, and (3) observe
signatures of interactions in few-body quantum
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.