* 2110426
* RAPID: The role of disturbance in climate-driven hybrid zone dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Marjorie Matocq, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 198,219.00

Climate change is one of the most pressing issues of our time, yet the cascading
effects of climate change on species and ecosystems remain unclear. Many species
may be forced to shift their geographic range to escape unsuitable climates and
pursue more favorable conditions. Range shifts may lead to novel interactions
with other species including competition for food or other resources, and even
interbreeding or hybridization. These new species interactions will play a
critical role in determining whether or not species are able to colonize
otherwise favorable habitats. Furthermore, punctuated disturbances such as fire
may change the competitive balance at range edges via altered habitat structure
and resource availability. In this project the PIs will examine the impact of a
recent fire on the range-edge interactions between two closely related species
of small mammals (woodrats). The PIs have previously documented how one species
is overtaking the range of the other in response to climate conditions,
especially drought. However, they predict the fire will substantially change how
the species interact with the environment (e.g., feeding, nest-building) and
with each other (e.g., competition and tendency to interbreed), dramatically
changing and perhaps reversing the direction of range-edge movement. The PIs and
their students will monitor the population using capture-mark-recapture to
quantify individual survival, reproduction, dispersal, and resource use,
especially dietary changes. This information will be used to build a predictive
model of how disturbance interacts with annual weather variation to forecast how
species’ distributional boundaries will shift under future conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting how species’ distributions will respond to
environmental change requires estimation of the mechanisms driving range edge
dynamics. When distributional edges are also parapatric range boundaries between
closely related species, a wide range of ecological and genomic interactions may
govern species’ responses to environmental change. The role of climate in
determining range edge boundaries and hybrid zone dynamics is only beginning to
be understood in a few terrestrial vertebrate systems; nearly nothing is known
of how punctuated disturbance may alter range edge and hybrid zone dynamics. In
this project the PIs leverage long-term data collection at a parapatric range
boundary between two closely related species to make informed predictions about
how a recent fire will alter range edge dynamics via changes in individual
fitness and competitive interactions. The PIs predict that the recent fire will
substantially alter fitness and dispersal patterns in the contact zone,
potentially leading to a reversal of the range edge movements they previously
documented. The PIs will test these predictions using intensive capture-mark-
recapture to quantify survival, reproduction, dispersal, and resource use. The
PIs will integrate these data into a predictive model of how ecological and
environmental processes interact to govern the shifting range margin between
these two closely-related species. More generally, this work will provide a
practical and conceptual framework for investigating and forecasting how climate
change and local disturbance can alter a fundamental species-level
characteristic (range-edge boundaries) via differential impacts on individual-
level characteristics such as survival, reproduction, resource use and
dispersal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.