* 2110895
* Models and Algorithms for Optimal Vision-Based Surveillance and Exploration of Complex Environments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Yen-Hsi Tsai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 409,550.00

The PI plans to develop the mathematics and corresponding algorithms to
determine optimal locations to observe and map out complex unknown domains with
moving obstacles. This project is motivated by the increasing number of sensor-
equipped mobile robotic devices and unmanned vehicles required to perform
surveillance missions. In many of these missions, efficiency is essential â€”
maximizing the information gain with minimal measurements by the sensors
(observations) reduces data transmission, power consumption and increases
robustness and capacity. Such optimization is the principal aim of the research
program. This grant will support 1 graduate student per year for the 3 year
duration of the grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop iterative
greedy algorithms that determine observation locations to optimize each step's
information gain. The "gain" is formulated as an integral operator on the domain
shape and is costly to compute. The PI proposes developing Deep Learning
approaches that make computations feasible, particularly when the domain shapes
are at best partially known. The proposed algorithms will require generating
training data by offline numerical simulations. This approach is crucial to
sample high-dimensional shape space in a manner consistent with the dynamical
processes dictated by the governing mathematical algorithms. This project
includes three main thrusts: 1) Development of non-myopic greedy algorithms and
study their properties and efficiency. 2) Development of Deep Learning models
and data generation for learning the gain functions. 3) Development of
mathematical understanding of U-net used the Deep Learning models used in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.