* 2110368
* Improving Undergraduates’ Motivation and Retention in STEM Through Classroom Interventions: A Meta-Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* David Miller, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by synthesizing empirical
evidence on how classroom interventions can increase motivational outcomes
(e.g., interests) and retention for undergraduates in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. The project focuses on approaches to
foster success for undergraduates who have been traditionally underrepresented
in STEM (e.g., women; Black, Hispanic, and American Indian students; students
from low-income families; first generation students). Low rates of STEM degree
completion for these groups continue to hinder institutional efforts for
educational equity and national efforts to address STEM workforce needs.
Encouragingly, growing research evidence suggests that malleable instructional
practices and light-touch motivational interventions can increase the
achievement, motivation, and retention for such students. This project aims to
build on and extend related prior syntheses in several critical ways by (a)
synthesizing a wider range of interventions that occur in undergraduate STEM
classrooms; (b) focusing on effects for motivational factors related to
retention and actual retention in STEM as primary outcomes (rather than academic
performance in STEM courses); and (c) identifying specific intervention
components that yield the strongest effects. The project’s focus on
interventions tested in undergraduate classrooms will help provide STEM
professors with actionable insights for designing their classes and changing
their instruction to increase undergraduates’ motivation and retention in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to contribute both theoretically and
practically to the field by synthesizing two largely separate bodies of
literature on undergraduate STEM classroom interventions: (a) motivational
interventions (e.g., values affirmation) and (b) instructional interventions
(e.g., active learning). The synthesis will include both experimental and quasi-
experimental evaluations of these interventions, focusing on effects for
retention (e.g., taking the next STEM course, graduating with a STEM degree) and
motivational factors related to retention (e.g., interests, self-efficacy, sense
of belonging). The project team will use rigorous systematic review and meta-
analytic methods to improve transparency of the review process, reduce reviewer
bias, and ensure the project’s findings are robust and comprehensive of existing
evidence. Statistical analyses will investigate how intervention design
features, student demographics, and the implementation context may help explain
why some studies show stronger effects than others. The project team will
leverage university partnerships, peer-reviewed journals, conferences, and media
outlets to broadly disseminate findings to researchers and practitioners,
promoting evidence based classroom practices at scale. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.