* 2110101
* Coatings for Next Generation Gravitational Wave Interferometers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Carmen Menoni, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,930.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
first detection of gravitational waves from the collision of two massive black
holes by the twin Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO)
detectors in Livingston, Louisiana, and Hanford, Washington in 2015 not only
confirmed Einstein's predictions of the existence of gravitational waves but
also ratified years of efforts in the development of gravitational wave
detectors (GWD). Gravitational wave detectors are interferometers in which an
intense laser beam bounces between two sets of mirrors in orthogonal arms.
Gravitational waves cause differences in the path length of the laser beam
between the two interferometer arms, giving rise to a distinct interference
pattern that when analyzed identifies the event that created them. The detection
sensitivity of GWD is determined by various noise sources, among which thermal
noise of the coatings in the mirrors of the interferometer is a main component.
Thermal noise in the high reflectance amorphous oxide coatings in the
interferometer's mirrors causes path length differences that can mask the
signals from gravitational waves. To increase the sensitivity of present GWD and
meet the demands of future GWD, a concerted effort to understand and control the
mechanisms that give rise to thermal noise in amorphous oxide coatings is
imperative. The projects will offer a diverse group of graduate students
opportunities to gain in-depth understanding of the physical mechanisms that
affect internal friction in amorphous materials and at the same time gain
valuable expertise in optical sciences. This interdisciplinary research project
will train students with valuable skills to contribute to advance science and
technology in academic, national laboratory and industrial
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's team has recently achieved a
breakthrough result. They have identified mixtures of titanium dioxide and
germanium dioxide that show internal dissipations at a level of 0.0001. Such a
low level of mechanical loss can provide for an almost a factor of two
improvement on the level of Brownian noise with respect to the state-of-the-art
materials. These results will make it possible to produce the mirrors that will
meet the thermal noise requirements for the planned upgrades of the Advanced
LIGO detectors. The team will investigate the fundamental mechanisms in TiO2
doped GeO2 that lead to such low mechanical loss and implement strategies to
further reduce it. It will also investigate the optical properties of thin films
to meet the stringent absorption loss requirements of the coatings for Advanced
LIGO detectors. Multilayer dielectric coatings based on these optimized
materials will be deposited by ion beam sputtering and characterized for their
Brownian noise, which reduction greatly impacts the sensitivity of gravitational
wave detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.