* 2110924
* Mechanosensitive ion transport through hexagonal boron nitride nanopores
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Aleksandr Noy, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,998.00

Biological nanopores are tiny channels embedded in cell membranes that shuttle
ions and small molecules in and out of cells with astonishing precision and
speed, serving as highly sensitive sieves that control fundamental life
processes. Human-made nanopores in thin solid-state membranes, inspired by
biology, promise to revolutionize applications such as DNA sensing and water
desalination. When the membrane material is just one atom thick (a so-called 2D
material), ultra-precise nanopores can be made by selectively removing atoms one
by one. In the case of the 2D material boron nitride, where atoms are arranged
in a hexagonal pattern in the single layer, triangular nanopores can be created
that are lined with nitrogen atoms and carry an overall negative charge. The
shape and chemical structure enables unique and precise interactions with ions
and small molecules inside the pore. It is also predicted that the passage of
ions through these nanopores can be precisely controlled by stretching the 2D
material to a strain level of just a few percent. This project will explore the
unique transport properties of these atomically precise nanopores in hexagonal
boron nitride under varying amounts of strain, laying the foundations for
advanced tunable filtration devices rivaling biological systems. Theory and
computer simulations will be used to model the transport processes, and
experiments will be conducted to investigate the predicted phenomena using a
specially designed fluid cell. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
provided opportunities to engage in cutting-edge research in nanoscience and
engineering. There will also be targeted outreach with K-12 STEM summer program
participants in the California Central Valley region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will explore mechanosensitive transport in crown ether-like nanopores in
monolayer hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN). These pores will be fabricated by
site-selective and dose-controlled electron and ion beam drilling in a
transmission electron microscope/ion microscope chamber. After drilling, the
pores will be mounted into a custom-built fluid cell that enables the controlled
application of membrane strain using hydrostatic pressure as well as
simultaneous voltage bias application and current measurements. This setup will
be used to characterize the nanopore baseline conductance, pore ion selectivity,
and ion transport activation energies, as well as the response of these
parameters to the applied membrane strain. These measurements will also
characterize pore differential selectivity as a function of applied strain and
will be coupled with analytical estimates and molecular dynamics simulations of
stress-induced ion selectivity in an integrated make-measure-model cycle. Theory
and simulations will account for the charge distribution on the nanopore as well
as polarization interactions of the ions with the pore. Theory and simulations
will also produce a model for predicting pore selectivity in binary mixtures,
which will be directly tested in the experiment. The main contributions of the
project will center on demonstrating mechanosensitive transport in hB-N
nanopores, exploring strain-tuned differential ion selectivity and ion transport
gating in these nanopores, and understanding the fundamental mechanisms of the
strain sensitivity of ion transport in 2D material nanopores. Overall, this
study will take the initial important steps toward engineering precise
interfacial systems with dynamically reconfigurable separation
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.