* 2110086
* EDGE FGT: NSF-BSF: Development of Viral Vectors for Amphibian Gene Delivery and Manipulation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Darcy Kelley, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Amphibians (frogs and salamanders) are key indicator species for environmental
change; many are threatened by habitat loss, rising sea levels and changing
temperatures as they are “cold-blooded” and do not regulate body temperature.
Some species, however, are resilient in the face of climate change both in
physiology (e.g., temperature regulation), developmental requirements, and
changes in behavior produced by the activity of nerve cells in the brain and
spinal cord. African clawed frogs (Xenopus), though they live in fresh-water
throughout life, can sequester in small chambers underground for very long
periods when their environment becomes dry and hot. Xenopus used these
resilience strategies to survive global extinction events. Spanish ribbed newts
(Pleurodeles) can regenerate their entire nervous system, even as adults. To
understand why these particular amphibians are so hardy, we need to find out how
particular parts of their bodies work under stressful conditions. This project
aims to develop “viral vectors”, non-infectious viruses that can be delivered
to, and manipulate, genes in different parts of the body. These vectors can help
test ideas about, for example, which parts of the brain are involved in
resilience in frogs and how newts and salamanders regenerate whole parts of the
body when they are injured. Also, the process of finding viruses that can infect
amphibians will help investigators using other species such as birds and may
reveal new ideas about how the ability of a virus to infect a different host
species evolves, leaping from bats, for example, to humans. The project also
includes training of undergraduate and graduate students, exposing them to
international team science, as well as conferences and workshops, and sharing of
protocols and non-infectious viruses on public databases to enable similar
research by other investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viruses - natural
multigene expression and delivery vehicles - evolved to target different species
and tissues. Engineering Adeno-Associated Viruses (AAVs) for cold-blooded
vertebrates (semi-aquatic or aquatic amphibians) is the focus of this EDGE
project. Recombinant AAVs production enables a directed evolution approach for
high-throughput selection and screening in two amphibians: the anuran Xenopus
and the newt Pleurodeles. This research characterizes the blood brain barrier in
both species to identify whether – or at what developmental stage – it forms.
Leveraging the NSF-supported CLOVER Center at CalTech, researchers intravenously
deliver an AAV serotype that transfects both species; they then harvest the
animals’ central nervous system to produce, sequence, and bioinformatically
analyze the resulting variants through two rounds of screening. Because of
limits in the carrying capacity of AAVs, the project is developing transgenic
cre lines that express specifically in neurons for both species. Using AAVs
carrying floxed-CRISPR constructs and validated gRNAs, investigators knock out
two native genes – rhodopsin and tyrosinase – in the eye via intraorbital
delivery. Knocks outs are verified immunohistochemically using validated
antibodies. AAVs are shared at cost with collaborators and deposited in Addgene.
Results are shared via a US-based virtual conference, a hands-on US workshop,
and an international conference. Protocols and validated results are rendered
available to the broader research community via organism-based websites (e.g.,
Xenbase). All data and protocols are deposited in a publicly available data base
and archived at Columbia University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.