* 2110017
* RESEARCH-PGR: Developing novel strategies to enhance the tolerance of crops to a combination of drought and heat stress.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Ron Mittler, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2025
* USD 849,563.00

Heat waves occurring during periods of drought stress have a devastating impact
on agricultural production and yield. A combination of drought and heat stress
occurring during the summers of 1980, 1988, 2000, 2003 and 2008, for example,
resulted in yield losses estimated in 33, 44, 7.6, 7 and 8.6 billion dollars,
respectively. Because episodes of drought and heat stress are expected to
increase in intensity and frequency in the coming years, due to the largely
unopposed process of global warming and its consequential impacts on climate
change, breeding crops for enhanced tolerance to a combination of drought and
heat stress is of the utmost importance for modern agriculture and food
sustainability. Crucial for yield loss during episodes of drought and heat
stress are processes such as flowering and fertilization that are especially
sensitive to these conditions, as well as highly important for yield production
in almost all cereals and legumes. In this project the focus is on the impact of
heat, drought, and drought and heat combination on flowering, fertilization, and
seed production of soybean. Using a combination of experimental tools, genes and
proteins that are essential for enhancing the tolerance of soybean to these
stressful conditions will be identified. These proteins and genes will enable
breeders to develop new genotypes that will resist the harsh conditions of our
current and future environment and ensure a secure and sustainable soybean seed
production for years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of drought and
heat stress occurring during the reproductive growth phase of many different
crops, such as soybean, corn, rice, and wheat, has a devastating impact on
yield. In soybean, a considerable effort has been made to develop genotypes with
enhanced yield production under conditions of drought or heat stress. However,
how these genotypes perform under conditions of drought and heat stress
combination is mostly unknown. Moreover, although past research has focused on
the impact of abiotic stress on pollen viability, recent findings reveal that
the combination of drought and heat stress has a unique impact on reproductive
processes that occur post pollen germination. Here, it is proposed to utilize a
unique collection of soybean genotypes with altered seed production under
conditions of drought or heat stress conditions to identify genes and gene
networks impacting seed production under a combination of drought and heat
stress. Using a combination of field and growth chamber studies focused on the
effect of drought and heat stress combination on reproductive tissues and yield
of different soybean genotypes, coupled with microdissection techniques, RNA
sequencing and machine learning-driven network analysis tools, genes and gene
networks that impact reproductive processes under conditions of stress
combination will be identified. The function of these genes/gene networks will
be validated by genetically modifying their expression in transgenic soybean
plants with the overall goal of enhancing yield of soybean plants grown under
conditions of drought and heat stress combination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.