* 2110860
* SBIR Phase I:  End-to-End Compilation of Quantum Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Pranav Gokhale, SUPER.TECH LABS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is relevant to US national priorities. For example, potential
applications of quantum computing include defense-related tasks such as aircraft
and flight maneuver identification. Other promising quantum applications are
prevalent in logistics problems and can impact American competitiveness in
manufacturing. In addition, longer term horizons of quantum computing such as
better fertilizer production would dramatically reduce global energy
expenditures. The efficiency gains from the proposed end-to-end compilation
techniques will address these objectives. The scientific advances funded by this
research will enable quantum computing to be applied to a wider range of
problems than previously envisioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project has the intellectual merit of
accelerating the timeline for practical quantum computing. By achieving
significant efficiency gains from cross-layer optimization spanning the full
quantum stack, practical applications will be executable sooner than otherwise
possible. The Phase I research will validate that three proposed quantum
techniques outperform the state-of-art found in prevailing quantum research.
This work will advance understanding of the ultimate potential and limits of
near-term quantum computing. To date, there is still no consensus whether non-
error-corrected quantum computers will ever outperform classical computers. To
address this overarching research question, the proposed R&amp;D will undertake
the technical challenge of end-to-end compilation, which tailors execution of
quantum applications to the underlying hardware. This requires eschewing
traditional abstraction barriers which are convenient but incur efficiency
losses due to indirection. Instead, the proposed work will take as direct a path
as possible from the end-user application down to the underlying quantum
hardware. Doing so will reveal the fundamental capacity of noisy quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.