* 2110273
* Quantum Aspects of Matter Fields and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ivan Agullo, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 319,492.00

Among the most important open questions in science is the way the force of
gravity interacts with quantum systems. This is an important question, not only
at a conceptual/fundamental level, but as a practical matter as well. Quantum
technologies are about to take over, and a precise understanding of the way they
behave in the presence of gravitational fields will be essential to make the
most of them in applications which range from communications to defense. This
research project aims to investigate different problems where quantum aspects of
light and other matter fields and gravitation both play an important role. The
proposed research includes three topics, aimed to explore complementary aspects
of the relation between quantum field theory and gravitation. Two of them are
related to the propagation of light in presence of strong gravitational fields,
and will help us to understand subtle effects which arise from this interaction,
such as the anomalous behavior of the polarization of light, or the phenomenon
of gravitational-induced quantum entanglement. A third topic has to do with the
way quantum fields propagated in the early universe, and the goal is to
investigate whether certain signals we have observed in the cosmic microwave
background, and which remain unexplained, are the results of the interaction
between quantum fields and gravity in the early universe. These investigations
will also shed light on the way gravitation works at the quantum level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects includes: (i) Investigations of the physics
of the early universe and their observational consequences. This is the main
part of the proposal. The central topic is to continue ongoing efforts by the PI
to evaluate the plausibility of bouncing cosmologies to describe the early
universe. More concretely: whether the family of features that have been
observed in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) and remain unexplained, known
as CMB anomalies, could be traces of a cosmic bounce; the stability of bouncing
cosmologies under anisotropies; and the investigation of the predictions of some
concrete theories of quantum cosmology, like loop quantum cosmology. (ii) The
exploration of the physical consequences of a quantum anomaly recently
introduced by the PI and his collaborators in the context of electrodynamics in
curved spacetimes, with special attention to its relation with infra-red charges
and the memory effect. (iii) The study of optical analogs of black holes and
Hawking radiation, with the goal of characterizing the entanglement structure
that the Hawking process produces in these systems, and the way this structure
can be used to enhance our ability to observe aspects of this
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.