* 2110535
* Collaborative Research: Quantum-Coherent Interactions between Free and Guided Electrons and Photons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Phillip Keathley, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 335,930.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;When a stream of electrons in free space
passes over a patterned surface, light is produced. Over the past century,
scientists and engineers have used this process to power applications ranging
from satellite communications to microwave ovens. Although these electron-driven
light sources have proven successful in numerous applications, some of the
microscopic, quantum physics underlying these sources has remained poorly
understood. As a result, we do not yet know the fundamental limits of this
technique. In this project, the detailed, quantum-mechanical nature of the
interactions between free-space electrons, patterned (or structured) surfaces,
and light waves will be uncovered. Specifically, in this work, single electrons,
traveling through vacuum over specially designed surfaces patterned at the
nanometer length scale, will be used to generate single photons; and the
resulting interconnected, so-called entangled, quantum states will be studied.
The findings from this work could impact emerging applications in quantum
computing, quantum communication, and quantum sensing by providing efficient,
low-noise, and tunable sources of single electrons and single photons, as well
as sources of unique quantum states of photons. Beyond the broader scientific
impact of this work, this program will also contribute to the training of
undergraduate and graduate researchers. Additionally, the effort will include
summer internships for high-school students and develop a student-led seminar
series that will improve the mentoring, organizational, and leadership skills of
the students supported by this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;When low-energy free electrons (few to tens of keV) interact
with nanostructured materials, electromagnetic radiation, from the terahertz to
the visible domain, can be produced. Recently, researchers have investigated the
quantum-coherent nature of free electrons after interacting with classical light
in the vicinity of nanoscale objects and surfaces. In this project the complete
quantum nature of the interactions between free electrons, light, and
nanostructured materials will be explored. Specifically single electrons will
generate single photons via an interaction mediated by tailormade
nanostructures, and the quantum-coherent properties of the electrons and photons
will be experimentally probed. The project will consist of four experimental
efforts: (1) The study of the coupling of single photons to a passing free
electron and the use of this coupling for the development of heralded single-
photon and single-electron sources; (2) The investigation of the quantum
coherence of this single-photon-single-electron coupling by using multiple
interaction structures for the generation of Bell states; (3) The extension of
the quantum-coherent electron-photon interaction via nanostructured electron-
beam waveguides in which quantum efficiencies approaching and exceeding unity
should be achievable; and (4) The study of multiple photon-generation
interactions in this high-efficiency regime within guided electron beam systems
to generate both isolated and entangled sets of large-photon-number Fock states.
This work will lead to advanced free-electron and photon sources for quantum
information science and technology and quantum-enhanced free-electron and
optical metrology. The ability to use photons to herald electron arrival would
enable shot-noise-free electron sources for low-dose electron microscopy,
improved electron beam lithography, and quantum-enhanced free-electron
metrology. Furthermore, the quantum-coherent electron-photon interactions
studied in this work may additionally provide a viable path for the compact
generation of highly-entangled photon states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.