* 2110922
* Collaborative Research: Implicit Solvent Modeling and Fast Algorithm Development for Simulating Solutes with Atomic Polarizable Multipoles
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Weihua Geng, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,216.00

This collaborative research project aims to improve the implicit solvent
modeling for studying electrostatic interaction between solutes, such as
proteins, DNA, and RNA, and their surrounding solvent environment. The research
will improve on current approaches and will formulate a new polarizable
multipole implicit solvent model with improved and enhanced modeling accuracy.
Furthermore, efficient and accurate numerical algorithms will be developed to
meet computational challenges of the new model. This research will provide
biophysicists a new tool for analyzing electrostatic interactions of solvated
biomolecules in the form of models and algorithms implemented in a freely
available software package. In addition, this project will offer
interdisciplinary research and training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students in biological modeling, computation, and mathematical
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address limitations in the
existing implicit solvent models for studying electrostatic interaction between
solutes. These include the facts that the solute charge sources are often
modeled as point charges located at atomic centers, and this rough approximation
to the quantum mechanical charge density is known to be a major source of the
modeling errors. Moreover, polarization, an important physical phenomenon
account for the redistribution of the electron density in the presence of an
external electric field is missing in this point charge model. The project will
develop a novel nonlinear Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) model associated with an atomic
polarizable multipole (PM) force field to describe the self-consistent
polarization process and study electrostatic interactions among permanent
multipoles, induced dipoles, and reaction-field potential. The coupling of PM
source with the nonlinear PB (NPB) equation, as opposed to the linearized PB, is
challenging in many aspects involving modeling and numerical difficulties such
as charge singularities, geometric complexity, interface jumps, nonlinearity,
polarization, as well as high computational cost. To overcome such difficulties,
a set of efficient, accurate, and seamlessly coupled numerical methods will be
developed to resolve numerical challenges associated with the PM-NPB model. In
particular, multipole charge singularities are regularized using Greenâ€™s
function based decomposition; self-consistent polarization, which involves
repeatedly solving an NPB equation across the molecular interface, is
efficiently realized by a linearized iterative algorithm coupled with a fast 3D
Augmented Matched Interface and Boundary (AMIB) method. Finally, model
benchmarking and biological applications will be carried out to ensure that the
research results provide a robust tool for simulating electrostatic
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.