* 2110147
* SBIR Phase I:  Creation of a virtual population of older, black patients with hypertension and comorbidities for improved treatment development
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,11/30/2022
* William Pruett, HC Simulation, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 11/30/2022
* USD 236,969.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a tool that will streamline the clinical
trial process, reducing time and money spent without sacrificing safety or an
understanding of a treatment’s efficacy. Medical treatments do not work equally
well on all patients. Finding a responsive population on which to perform a
study directly impacts the likelihood of a new therapy’s success while
minimizing risk to patients who would see little or no benefit. The tool will
allow clinical trials to be run virtually as computer programs in software that
simulates human physiology. This technology will be valuable at all stages of
treatment development: suggesting new therapies, testing for adverse effect,
planning clinical trials, interpreting trial results, and predicting results
when a new therapy is introduced outside of the clinical trial. This project is
focused initially on the development of a critical under-represented population:
older black men with hypertension and associated diseases, including heart
disease and diabetes. Simulations of specific populations will allow researchers
and clinicians to anticipate issues, enabling more effective treatment
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will develop a virtual population of 50-70 year old hypertensive
African-American men with and without common cardiovascular comorbidities
including congestive heart failure and type II diabetes. The virtual patients
will be instantiations of a differential-algebraic model of human physiology,
reflecting interactions between factors such as hormone concentrations,
electrolytes, and more. The virtual population will be generated from clinical
data collected from other studies and the approach can be used for other
specific populations who may be historically under-represented in trials. This
model can be used to estimate responses to clinical interventions (device and
pharmaceutical therapies) to inform treatment development and further
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.