* 2110234
* Dynamics and Symmetry in Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Engle, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 194,998.00

An important question facing fundamental physics is how the well-tested laws of
Einstein's theory of gravity and quantum mechanics are consistent - the question
of quantum gravity. This question is central for understanding the very origin
of our universe, the big bang, as well as for understanding the final fate of
black holes. The award seeks to bridge the gap between the full theory of loop
quantum gravity (LQG) and simplified models of cosmology and black holes based
on LQG that have been recently successful in making potential observational
predictions. Such a bridge would allow future comparisons of such models with
data to tell us exact details about the fundamental laws of quantum gravity. By
enabling graduate students to participate in frontier physics, and to interact
with other research groups, this award will have a broad and long-term impact on
the development of future scientists. The results of the research will be
disseminated to the scientific community through peer reviewed publication and
scientific lectures, as well as to the general public through public lectures
and other means. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observational consequences, for both
cosmology and black holes, of different proposals for dynamics in LQG will be
determined. To accomplish this, the PI will first find an embedding of states
from the simplified quantum cosmological model - Loop Quantum Cosmology (LQC) -
into diffeomorphism invariant LQG states that satisfy the diffeomorphism
invariant, quantum criterion for homogeneity and isotropy recently established
by the PI’s group. This embedding will enable different proposals for dynamics
in LQG to be translated into LQC, and thereby to distinguish their observational
consequences using established methods. The task of finding the corresponding
LQC dynamics is simplified by the severe restriction on the resulting
possibilities proven recently by the PI’s group from diffeomorphism invariance.
An analogous strategy will be carried out for black holes. The PI additionally
plans to further develop the sum over histories approach to LQG, known as spin-
foams. In prior work of the PI, the prevailing EPRL model of spin-foams was
modified to correct its semiclassical limit, yielding the `proper spin-foam
model’. Efficient numerical methods will be developed to perform calculations
using this model. Possibilities for solving long-standing issues in spin-foams
will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.