* 2110376
* Non-Adiabatic Dynamics in Molecules Driven by Strong Laser Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Thomas Weinacht, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 628,393.00

Professor Weinacht and his research team of graduate and undergraduate students
will develop and use ultrafast-pulse high-power lasers to study the motion of
electrons and nuclei in molecules. Observing such motion will advance our
understanding of many natural processes in which the electrons and nucleus act
in concert, including vision, energy storage, energy conversion, and chemical
transformation. Understanding these dynamics is also important for the
development of new technologies such as solar cells, ultrafast molecular
switches, and quantum computers. While lasers are natural tools for manipulating
and measuring electrons in molecules, one requires very short laser pulses in
order to manipulate electrons in real time. The investigators in this project
will use intense ultrashort laser pulses (with intensities far greater than at
the surface of the sun, and durations of less than a hundredth of a trillionth
of a second!) in order to ionize molecules, removing one of the many electrons
bound to the molecule. They will take pictures of the electrons as they come off
the molecules, making use of a technique called 'velocity map imaging'. These
pictures can be used to understand the coupled dynamics of electrons and nuclei
during ionization, which is important for understanding chemical dynamics and
for developing high speed electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental
work will develop pulse shape spectroscopy in order to follow nonadiabatic
dynamics in molecules. The work will compare measurements of strong field
molecular ionization using shaped ultrafast laser pulses with more traditional
pump probe measurements of excited state dynamics. The two approaches contain
complementary information on coupled electron nuclear dynamics, which can be
uncovered via detailed comparisons with calculations of the measurement
observables. The work will deepen our understanding of nonadiabatic dynamics in
molecules. Recent measurements from the group have highlighted the ability to
control internal conversion with shaped laser pulses. This allowed the group to
follow the evolution of electronic coherence through internal conversion and
measure the coherence time for a series of halogenated methane molecules. The
group will extend these measurements to a new family of organic ring molecules,
pyrrole, furan and thiophene, and compare the measurements with time resolved
photoelectron spectroscopy measurements made in the group's laboratory. This
will allow the group to develop pulse shape spectroscopy as a powerful tool for
following electronic and nuclear dynamics with a rigorous interpretation based
on comparison with theory and complementary
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.