* 2110532
* Collaborative Research: RoL: The intersection between cell fate decisions and phenotypic diversification in a rapidly radiating butterfly lineage
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* William McMillan, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 747,521.00

Animal structures are made of combinations and arrangements of distinct cell
types, the product of complex cell decision-making during development. But how
do cells, which contain identical genetic information, decide their fate? This
research addresses this fundamental biological question in a simple, yet
spectacularly diverse animal structure–the color patterns on the wings of
Heliconius butterflies. Although Heliconius wing patterns are highly diverse,
they are created by altering the distribution of just three cell types (red,
black and yellow wing scales) across the wing surface. Unlike in a complex
organ, the cell decisions that create these patterns unfold on a flat canvas of
non-migrating cells. This attribute greatly simplifies the process of
understanding the interactions among genes and how these interactions change
throughout development to create a specific pattern. This research capitalizes
on this fact and emerging genomic tools to characterize the molecular decisions
that determine how a developing wing cell becomes specified into one of the
three different scale cell types. The project is strengthened by a 6-month
internship program that targets traditionally underrepresented groups and offers
an in-depth research experience and hands-on professional development. Moreover,
through partnerships with science museums, this project will create bilingual
(English and Spanish) experiential learning resources that harness the potential
of butterflies to educate a variety of audiences (school children, teachers, and
life-long learners) about genes, development, natural selection, and the role
that interactions among them play in generating Earth’s
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary processes constantly generate
and rearrange specialized cell types, forging the morphological dimension of
biodiversity. Research is starting to connect changes in gene expression and
open chromatin to cell fate decisions. However, this research has mostly focused
on early embryonic development or on the developmental trajectories of complex
organs in a few species. Although powerful, these studies do not have an
explicit goal of linking changes in cell fate decisions to phenotypic change.
This research fills this important knowledge gap by characterizing the rules
governing cell specification– from signals, to reception, transduction,
transcriptional activation, and fate determination during the critical
developmental period when the wing patterns of Heliconius butterflies are
established. Here, extensive knowledge of the ecological and evolutionary
significance of wing color patterns, experimental tractability, and fantastic
diversity make Heliconius a powerful experimental system for understanding how
the processes of cell specification are modified by natural selection to produce
diversity. By casting single-cell transcriptomics, open chromatin profiling and
CRISPR loss-of-function experiments within an evolutionary framework that
includes replicated cases of the independent evolution of identical wing
patterns, this project will determine the rules that govern how cells
communicate and acquire a specialized fate during development, and how those
rules are applied to generate diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.