* 2110432
* Workshop: Quantum Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 12/31/2022
* USD 81,204.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In order to address the next needed steps in creating a
quantum information science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (QISMET)
workforce in the engineering disciplines, this workshop will be held, to be
attended by representatives of industry, national labs, and the full US
university ecosystem from flagship schools to four-year colleges. The workshop
will describe the community challenges, explore opportunities to address those
challenges, and map out a path forward for near-term progress. The workshop will
identify realistic deliverables: &lt;br/&gt;(a) recommendations for creating a
quantum engineering minor; and &lt;br/&gt;(b) recommendations for creating a
quantum engineering major and/or specialized track within engineering majors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop recommendations will be realizable over the
next 2-5 years in most US universities.&lt;br/&gt;Quantum engineering education
is required to create future quantum engineers in quantum computing,
communications, and sensing. These areas of fundamental science will not become
robust technologies without quantum engineering expertise. The workshop will
develop a clear vision for quantum engineering education at the undergraduate
level and beyond for the U.S. workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
recommendations provided by this workshop on best ways to create a quantum
engineering discipline at the undergraduate level will help guide educational
development and investment in US universities and government agencies such as
NSF. Students reading the web site and/or roadmap paper where these
recommendations are presented will have a quick and clear understanding of the
scope of quantum engineering and the educational innovation needed to support
its development. At the present time, digital quantum computers are often in the
press while the quantum workforce education to support their development is
mostly not in place. This workshop will help expand the understanding of quantum
engineering education and quantum information science more generally to students
and professionals from many engineering subfields, to STEM professionals, and to
the wider public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.