* 2110964
* Elementary Particle Physics with the ATLAS Experiment at CERN's Large Hadron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Joshua Moss, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

This project is devoted to research using ATLAS, a multi-purpose particle
physics detector situated around the 27 km ring of the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) located at CERN, the European particle physics laboratory near Geneva,
Switzerland. The goal of the project is to explore the fundamental nature of the
universe in order to understand its evolution from the hot, dense soup of energy
and matter existing soon after the Big Bang to the cool, diffuse universe we see
today. The interactions and evolution of the fundamental constituents of the
universe are well described by the Standard Model (SM) of Particle Physics that
has been very successful in predicting the behavior of nature in the currently
available energy regimes. The search for physics Beyond the SM (BSM) has been
the focus of physicists since the discovery of the Higgs boson. The work of this
award will contribute to the BSM search by exploring production mechanisms of
the Higgs boson. In addition, the award will help construct the ongoing upgrade
to the ATLAS detector as it prepares for the High-Luminosity upgrade to the LHC
accelerator itself (HL-HLC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research award the
California State University group will probe the SM by examining events which
produce pairs of Higgs bosons. The aim is to measure the self-coupling of the
Higgs boson, thought to be a sensitive probe of BSM. Technically, the CSU ATLAS
group will work as members of the ATLAS Inner Tracker Upgrade (ITk) as part of
the HL-LHC project. The ITk will be a crucial component of future ATLAS
discoveries in the Higgs sector when the LHC upgrade is complete around 2026.
This award will continue the CalState program of building the future workforce
by providing training to the diverse students of the system, with hands-on work
on the cutting-edge high energy physics program of
ATLAS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.