* 2110497
* Wou-MMA: Understanding Cosmic Particle Accelerators with the VERITAS and CTA Gamma-Ray Observatories
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Reshmi Mukherjee, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 830,000.00

Very-high-energy gamma-ray observations at energies above a hundred billion
electron-Volts offer indirect methods for studying the highest-energy cosmic
rays in our Universe. They help address some of the outstanding and important
questions in particle astrophysics, such as the efficiency of cosmic ray
acceleration, and provide evidence on sites of cosmic ray accelerators. A large
number of astrophysical sources, both within the Milky Way Galaxy, and in the
distant universe, are known to emit high-energy radiation in the form of gamma
rays, which are the highest energy form of the electromagnetic spectrum. The
astrophysical environments that accelerate particles to such tremendous gamma-
ray energies must have extreme conditions of electromagnetic or gravitational
potential energy. This award supports the group of Barnard Collage researchers
to conduct operations and observing campaigns at the VERITAS Observatory to
explore the physics of cosmic accelerators and multimessenger sources. The
program sustains high undergraduate research impact, and aids in preparing
students for a future in the fields of science and technology, or even a career
in the next generation of astrophysics. Graduate students and postdocs in the
group are actively engaged in mentoring activities and the group is deeply
committed to involving undergraduate students in high energy astrophysics
research in an equitable manner, including students from the Science Pathways
Scholars Program serving underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
nature of intense astrophysical sources is an outstanding open question in
astroparticle physics, and studies in this field will impact our understanding
of fundamental physics and the origin of our universe. Observing campaigns at
the VERITAS Observatory facilitate data analyses with a focus on the physics of
extragalactic objects such as blazar jets powered by supermassive black holes,
and to search for gamma-ray counterparts of transient sources such as neutrino
events and gravitational waves. Within our own galaxy, the VERITAS observations
search for accelerators at the peta-electron-Volt range, for gamma rays outside
the shells of supernova remnants, and to study sources in the Milky Way Galaxy
detected by ground-based water-Cherenkov observatories. In addition, the
research program includes scientific studies with a prototype novel dual-mirror
telescope, with a focus on morphological studies of sources in the Galaxy. This
new telescope allows the construction of a high-resolution camera, with a factor
of ten more imaging pixels than in current telescopes, while keeping the camera
diameter about a factor of three smaller. These improvements are fundamentally
important to key science topics that include sky surveys. This project advances
the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.