* 2110537
* Mechanistic Machine Learning and Digital Twins for Computational Science, Engineering and Technology (MMLDT-CSET) Conference 2021; San Diego, California; September 26-29, 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Kenneth Loh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 02/28/2022
* USD 99,550.00

This 3-day conference is organized into fourteen technical tracks and two short
courses in a hybrid format. This conference will provide a forum to exchange new
ideas among students, researchers, high school teachers, and practitioners in
the fields of mechanistic machine learning, artificial intelligence, and digital
twins. Application areas include civil infrastructures, natural hazards
engineering, geosystems and petroleum engineering, reliability-based engineering
and design, material systems, manufacturing, mathematical and scientific
computing, natural and life sciences, and healthcare. A short course called
“Mechanistic Data Science” (MDS) targeted at high school students and teachers,
and STEM undergraduates is designed to provide participants with a big-picture
perspective related to machine learning and digital twins, and to demonstrate
how to apply MDS to combine data science tools with mathematical scientific
principles to solve intractable problems through daily-life examples. A short
course called “Mechanistic Machine Learning for Physics and Mechanics” will be
offered for graduate students and researchers to introduce machine learning
techniques for the participants with a background in physics and mechanics.
These courses will also be integrated with the mentoring and networking
activities under a Technical Track “Education, Outreach, and Funding
Opportunities”, and with a panel and Q&amp;A sessions for each of the three
days. NSF Fellowship will be used to support undergraduate and graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, high school teachers and students, as well as
students from underprivileged schools to attend the conference and short course
activities. Undergraduate and graduate students from historically black colleges
and universities and minority-serving institutions as well as underprivileged
high schools will be recruited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference introduces
“Mechanistic” Machine Learning and Digital Twins (MMLDT) as an integrated
methodology for coupling data with mathematics and scientific principles to
solve otherwise intractable problems. This conference also identifies “Digital
Twins” as important machine learning applications for improved product designs
via computational science, engineering, and technology (CSET). The main
objective of MMLDT-CSET is to bring together these diverse communities that are
interested in learning, developing, and applying machine learning and digital
twins via mechanistic methods and computational science and engineering tools
for a broad range of engineering and scientific problems, while promoting
transdisciplinary collaborations among engineers, physical and biological
scientists, data and computer scientists, and mathematicians from federal
agencies, academia, and industry. The discussion of future MMLDT research and
technology developments will be driven by societal needs and grand challenges
presented by practicing engineers, technology firms, and computer/software
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.