* 2110027
* RUI: Laser-Zone Drawing and Annealing of High Strength Polymer Nanofibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Vincent Beachley, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 554,865.00

This work generates new knowledge associated with laser heating of polymers to
engineer and manufacture high strength nanofibers. The scientific knowledge and
technological advances generated in the areas of polymer materials science,
engineering and manufacturing promote economic growth and benefit society.
Polymer nanofibers have widespread applications in a variety of critical
industries including energy, transportation, aerospace, healthcare, electronics
and sensing. Theoretically, nanofibers are expected to be stronger than larger
conventional fibers, but in practice nanofibers are usually much weaker. This
discrepancy arises because the manufacturing processes required to engineer
ordered internal structures are difficult to apply to tiny, delicate nanofibers.
This grant supports the investigation of fundamental scientific relationships
associated with laser heating during polymer nanofiber stretching for
exceptional control over the internal structure and resulting enhanced strength.
Furthermore, the research uses a unique automated track continuous fiber-drawing
system that ensures scale up and a clear path to commercialization. The project
provides advanced training in materials science, advanced manufacturing and
nanotechnology to numerous undergraduate and graduate students and establishes
the Path to BS Research Training Program that supports underrepresented,
economically disadvantaged students seeking BS degrees in
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser zone drawing has demonstrated the
potential to produce polymer fibers with high tensile strengths that exceed what
is possible using conventional fiber manufacturing methods. However, the
fundamental thermodynamic and material processing relationships governing laser
zone fiber drawing have not been studied under tightly controlled conditions,
especially for polymer nanofibers. This work fills that knowledge gap by using
computational models and experimental investigation of polymer fibers subject to
laser heating while the mechanical properties are continuously monitored. To
process entire fibers, the laser beam is sequentially scanned to rapidly heat
each small portion or zone of a fiber to make it pliable so it can be stretched.
Macromolecular structure development during laser zone drawing is investigated
with known fiber tension and temporal zone temperature. This approach is
expected to facilitate remarkable control over the final internal structure of
the processed fiber and result in exceptional mechanical strength. The
utilization of automated tracks allows for controlled laser zone drawing of the
delicate nanofibers. The hypothesis to be tested is that the rapid heating and
cooling of nanofibers, due to their high surface area-to-volume ratio,
facilitates alignment of polymer chains at elevated temperatures that are locked
in place during rapid cooling before chain relaxation can occur, thereby
enhancing mechanical behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.