* 2110611
* NSF-BSF: Interfacial freezing and shape transformations in surfactant/particle-co-stabilized emulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daeyeon Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 369,499.00

Emulsions are made of droplets of one liquid suspended in another, immiscible,
liquid such as oil droplets suspended in water. Liquid droplets adopt spherical
shapes due to surface tension. It was recently discovered that, for over 60
different chemical combinations, the surface of droplets, which is covered with
molecules called surfactants, can undergo freezing, which induces drastic
changes in the shape of the droplets. This interfacial freezing (IF) phenomenon
leads to the formation of faceted liquid droplets, thin platelets or rod/hair-
like emulsion droplets. On one hand, these shape transformations may lead to
major complications in industrial processes, such as pipe clogging by hair-like
droplets. On the other hand, these shape transformations provide a powerful
method of synthesizing particles with complex shapes for advanced applications.
In numerous industrial and natural settings, the interfaces of emulsion droplets
are covered by mixtures of surfantants and solid microparticles, known as
colloids. However, the influence of surface-adsorbing colloids on the IF and
droplet faceting phenomena has not been extensively investigated, although such
colloids are present in many real-world emulsions. The proposed work aims to
understand the effect of colloids on the shape transformation of emulsion
droplets undergoing IF. Developing a deep understanding of the effect of
particle size, concentration, shape and surface chemistry on the shape
transformation of emulsions will enable strategies to prevent deleterious
impacts of such phenomena in the food, oil and gas, pharmaceutical and cosmetic
industries and lead to novel synthesis techniques to create new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The composition, structure and elasticity of the
droplet interface play a crucial role in determining the stability,
encapsulation capability and processability of emulsions in industry and in
common chemical and biological systems. In many emulsions, the interfacial
molecular layer can undergo a freezing transition, dramatically modifying the
emulsion properties. This interfacial freezing (IF) transition drastically
changes the shape of the emulsion droplets for sizes spanning 13 orders of
magnitude in volume, and for over 60 different oil-surfactant combinations. Such
shape transitions may lead to the formation of faceted liquid objects, high
aspect ratio platelets or rod/hair-like emulsion droplets, changing the flow
properties of the emulsions and potentially causing gelation leading to process
complications. Engineering shape transformations of droplets also provides a
powerful method of synthesizing highly shape-anisotropic particles with unique
functionality. In numerous industrial and natural settings, the interfaces of
the emulsions are decorated by mixtures of particles and surfactants, with the
particles either added intentionally for emulsion stabilization, or being
present as a contaminant. This project aims at understanding the interplay
between the surface-adsorbed particles and the IF phenomena, with a particular
focus on the effect of isotropic and Janus particles on the shape
transformations. Using particle tracking and recently developed microfluidic
methods, this project will investigate the effect of wetting properties, size,
shape and interfacial concentration of particles on IF-driven shape
transformations of droplets. While conventional isotropic colloids may be easily
expelled from a droplet interface undergoing IF due to extremely low interfacial
tension, Janus particles will strongly adsorb to such an interface due to their
intrinsic surface activity, potentially enabling control over the shape
transformation. New methods to control the IF-driven self-shaping of droplets
will have a potentially transformative impact for oil and gas, pharmaceutical,
food, agricultural and cosmetics industries, where emulsions are frequently
exposed to surfactant- and particle-containing media. A new demonstration
illustrating the interplay between the interfacial curvature and crystallization
will be developed by undergraduate and graduate students for local high school
teachers and students. To broaden participation of students from
underrepresented groups, students with diverse backgrounds will be recruited by
hosting students from the University of Puerto Rico-Humacao and by collaborating
with Advancing Women in Engineering and Louise-Stoke Alliance for Minority
Participation programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.