* 2110809
* WoP-MMA: Multi-TeV, Multi-Messenger, and Multi-Wavelength Particle Astrophysics with HAWC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Miguel Mostafa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2025
* USD 738,777.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra Negra in Mexico, is a ground-
based facility designed with unique capabilities to observe very high-energy
gamma-rays. This award supports scientists at Pennsylvania State University
doing research with data collected with the HAWC observatory. The most
significant result from the Penn State group is the identification of the
highest-energy sources ever observed in our Galaxy. These objects can accelerate
cosmic rays to energies about ten times higher than any particles produced using
man-made particle colliders on Earth. The Penn State group is also actively
engaged in education and outreach activities. As part of this program, an online
data repository and display has been developed that makes the HAWC data
accessible to the broad public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Two very distinctive
features of the HAWC Observatory are the continuous observations and the large
field of view, which are vital to multi-messenger astrophysics of the northern
sky. These make HAWC particularly important for the detection of very high
energy gamma rays from extended regions and for the continuously survey of 2/3
of the sky. As an example of these capabilities, HAWC captured the first wide-
angle view of very-high-energy light emanating from two rapidly spinning stars.
The fresh perspective on these stellar neighbors casts serious doubt on one
possible origin for a mysterious excess of particles near Earth whose origin has
tantalized scientists in the last decade. These measurements demonstrate the
capability of the HAWC observatory to detect such very extended objects.
Relatively close galactic objects, like these two pulsars, appear so extended
that one can only see them with an instrument with a wide field-of-view. Data
from the HAWC observatory provides a unique and complementary view of these very
extended sources that is not possible with the more pointed gamma-ray
telescopes. Another important example of HAWC’s capabilities in the awarded
program is the continued search for the first galactic PeVatrons, a cosmic-ray
accelerator capable of accelerating protons to PeV energies. Recent observations
of the gamma-ray emission from the supernova remnant G106.3+2.7, Galactic
microquasar SS 433 and HAWC discovered a gamma-ray source- HAWC J1825-134 –
indicate spectra that continue well past 100 TeV. This implies production by
relativistic protons with energies up to at least 800 TeV, or by relativistic
electrons with energies up to at least 270 TeV. The data collected with the HAWC
observatory bring us significantly closer to finding the first cosmic PeVatrons
and understanding their nature. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.