* 2110357
* RUI: Microwave to Optical Frequency Conversion Through Six-wave Mixing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Erik Brekke, St. Norbert College
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 187,717.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computation and optical
communication require coherent light sources over a wide range of frequencies.
The ability to convert between the “telecom” wavelengths used in optical fiber
networks and those used for atomic systems in quantum computation is an
important part of furthering communications technology, and would allow more
effective information sharing throughout society. This work focuses on the
fundamental quantitative interactions between atoms and light, and how these
interactions can be used to generate coherent sources at novel wavelengths.
Atoms in highly energetic quantum states have been shown to be extremely
sensitive to microwaves, providing the impetus for their use in microwave to
optical frequency conversion. Many promising quantum computation schemes use
microwave transitions to control quantum states, while optical fiber technology
makes use of high transmission in the infrared. As a result, this frequency
conversion could be an essential part of coupling quantum computation systems to
telecom systems. Additionally, as a Research in Undergraduate Institutions
project, this work will have a significant effect on the further development of
the experimental physics workforce, helping to prepare and motivate
undergraduate students for careers in science by developing their skills in
experimental technique, data analysis, computation, and scientific
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Using
four lasers which are readily attainable, hot rubidium atoms can be used to
generate a coherent infrared source dependent on the application of microwaves
or vice-versa. The process makes use of rubidium atoms excited to Rydberg levels
with n&gt;50, such that transitions between nearby states are resonant with
microwave frequencies. The primary objective of this work is to demonstrate the
feasibility of using six-wave mixing in hot rubidium atoms as a microwave-
infrared frequency conversion method. Through the simultaneous application of
multiple lasers connecting atomic states in a process called wave mixing, new
directional and coherent light sources, both optical and microwave, will be
produced and the process of their generation optimized. Power and frequency
characteristics of their output will be explored as a function of the power,
polarization and frequency of the input sources, as well as the Rydberg state
used. This research will provide analysis of wave mixing in rubidium atoms,
which has the potential to greatly advance the scientific community's
understanding of six-wave mixing. While four-wave mixing has been extensively
investigated and used, higher wave-mixing remains relatively unexplored. The use
of higher wave-mixing allows the exploration of novel wavelengths for coherent
light while still using common and convenient atomic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.