* 2110227
* Stereodynamic Control of Cold Molecular Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Balakrishnan Naduvalath, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 308,160.00

Chemists have long sought to control the outcome of chemical reactions. This
control requires a molecular level understanding of the underlying mechanisms
and reaction pathways. One approach to control the outcome of chemical reactions
and molecular collisions is through stereodynamics, i.e., controlling their
relative orientations and alignments as they approach each other. This control
is even more effective at temperatures close to a kelvin and below where quantum
effects become significant due to the wave behavior of matter. Such control of
molecular interactions is paramount to emerging quantum technologies such as
quantum information processing and quantum computing that use cold and ultracold
molecules in controlled environments and whose interactions are manipulated by
external fields. The proposed research explores how molecular interactions can
be controlled through stereodynamics and how such control can be extended to
chemical reactions, thus benefitting emerging quantum technologies that use cold
trapped molecules. This work transcends disciplinary boundaries and the
computational algorithms developed as part of this research are applicable to
molecular processes in diverse areas of chemistry, physics, and astrophysics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cold and ultracold molecules are rapidly
emerging as new paradigm for controlled studies of molecular collisions and
chemical reactions. The ability to create them in selected motional, internal
and orientational quantum states allows “chemistry-on-demand” experiments in the
deep quantum regime where the reaction outcomes are strongly influenced by
external fields, geometric phase, and quantum interference effects. Novel
techniques such as co-expansion of the colliding species in a supersonic
molecular beam (intra-beam scattering) combined with the Stark-induced adiabatic
Raman Passage (SARP) allow cold stereochemistry with molecules like H2 and HD
initially prepared in a specific or a coherent superposition of magnetic
projection quantum numbers, opening up an entirely new regime of cold controlled
chemistry without using external trapping fields. Since the experiments lack
energy resolution, explicit calculations of energy resolved scattering
amplitudes are crucial to provide mechanistic insights into the collision
dynamics. The proposed studies include HCl+HD and CO+HD collisions in full six-
dimensions and atom-molecule chemical reactions with vibrationally and
rotationally excited molecules prepared using the SARP method. The proposed
studies may additionally reveal how stereodynamic preparation and non-adiabatic
quantum interference effects influence reactivity in cold and ultracold
collisions. The project will train a postdoc, provide opportunities for students
from traditionally underrepresented communities to engage in STEM related
research, and contribute to future workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.