* 2110817
* Conference: SAI: Strengthening Coastal Infrastructure through the Improvement of Science Communication
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Philippe Tissot, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2024
* USD 49,685.00

In this project, training in science communication is enabled for
infrastructure-oriented researchers in a highly diverse region to promote
effective two-way communication between researchers, local communities, and
decision-making entities. This coastal region is at the junction of unique
vulnerabilities, including an important border and the presence of several ports
where large quantities of chemicals and fossil fuels are handled. Sea level rise
and the associated ground's surface settling downward (subsidence) and extreme
weather such as hurricanes are further challenges to infrastructure, whether
hard (built) or soft (natural, like oyster reefs or marshes). The vulnerability
of the regional infrastructure has been highlighted dramatically by recent
winter storms that brought down the power grid and access to potable drinking
water. This project’s focus is a conference that exposes infrastructure-oriented
researchers to their infrastructure-focused counterparts from the social,
behavioral and economic (SBE) fields. Broader impacts include the development of
a science communication kit for participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
evidence-informed communicative frameworks, the conference arms participants
with skills to better convey their specific knowledge to non-expert audiences in
their communities on decisions like understanding the impact of subsidence and
sea level rise on building zoning decisions. The project lays the groundwork for
infrastructure-focused scientists and engineers to better engage with community
stakeholders and understand what knowledge and values they bring to the
decision-making process. The conference fosters convergence in areas of the
built and soft infrastructure of coastal regions by bringing SBE scientists
alongside natural and physical scientists and engineers. The common foci (such
as flooding and groundwater quality, or hurricanes and extreme weather)
integrate human- and-social-centered approaches to the infrastructure by
concentrating on key issues, theories, and methodologies from SBE perspectives.
Situating the conference at a local Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) and
recruiting participants from regional HSIs enhance communications on critical
infrastructure issues between scientists and engineers and the coastal
communities. The enhanced science communication skills fortify the dissemination
of evidence-based policy to the region's industries, governments, and
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.