* 2110869
* Collaborative Research: Computational Tools for Biomolecular Electrostatics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Weihua Geng, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 109,999.00

Biological molecules are basic components of life and electrostatic forces play
a key role in determining their properties. In order to complement physical
experiments, computer simulation of these forces is critical to advance the
understanding of how biological molecules function. This project will contribute
new computational tools for electrostatics of solvated biomolecules. The
research will focus on charge transport in ion channel proteins with the goal of
assisting in the study of neuron-related autoimmune disease. The software
developed will be made available in open source format to the scientific
community and will be installed in public software packages. Elements of the
project research will be included in a mathematical biology course taught by one
of the PIs. The results will be disseminated at scientific conferences and
academic seminars, and will be published in scientific journals. The project
will contribute to the national scientific workforce by training a postdoctoral
scholar, as well as a graduate student and several undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research develops improved computational
tools for electrostatics of solvated biomolecules. The project has two
components, (1) improving existing computational tools for the Poisson-Boltzmann
(PB) and 3D-RISM (Reference Interaction Site Model) implicit solvent models, and
(2) developing a boundary element method for the Poisson-Nernst-Planck (PNP)
model. In the first component the PIs will upgrade their previous treecode-
accelerated boundary integral (TABI) PB solver with more efficient techniques
including node patch discretization, NanoShaper molecular surface triangulation,
a new preconditioning strategy, and the GPU-accelerated barycentric Lagrange
dual tree traversal (BLDTT) fast multipole method. The improved TABI-PB solver
will be applied to accelerate computation of the electrostatic free energy of
solvated viruses and the long-range asymptotic correlation functions in 3D-RISM.
In the second component, the PIs will develop a novel integral equation based
method for the PNP model applied to solvated ion channel proteins embedded in a
membrane. The method will combine a boundary/volume element approach for the
electrostatic potential with a particle method for the drift-diffusion of
dissolved ions. The goal is to apply the new computational PNP tool to study the
Acetylcholine receptor (AChR), an ion channel protein that plays a significant
role in neuron-related autoimmune diseases such as myasthenia gravis and
possibly also the Covid-19 coronavirus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.