* 2110446
* SBIR Phase I: Integration of Heterogeneous Device Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,08/31/2022
* James Buckwalter, PSEUDOLITHIC, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a new semiconductor manufacturing
process to work "beyond Moore's law". The broader impact and commercial
potential of the proposed activity is to reduce the barrier to manufacture
highly integrated components for 5G and future wireless technologies, including
base stations and satellite communication. This will enable new devices that
produce higher power and operate with better energy efficiency than current
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will commercialize a heterogeneous integration process to
combine electronic solutions greater than the capabilities of their constituent
parts. Incumbent silicon processes cannot produce transistors capable of the
power handling of III-V technologies such as Gallium Nitride (GaN). However,
III-V technologies, such as GaN, are niche devices for specialized market needs.
When products require both silicon and compound semiconductor components, chips
are arranged in multi-chip modules with large parasitics and interconnects that
prohibit high-frequency (RF and millimeter) applications. Affordable
heterogeneous integration of diverse material systems on a common substrate
remains an elusive capability in modern processes. The research objectives of
this project are to demonstrate heterogeneous integration of III-V devices on a
silicon substrate for a millimeter-wave product. The research will investigate
the large-scale manufacturing limitations of transistor integration. The project
would design, fabricate and test RF passive components and matching networks in
silicon interposers to be used in conjunction with III-V transistors. These
approaches will be demonstrated on a 28 GHz power amplifier product for emerging
5G radio applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.