* 2110177
* WoU-MMA: Core Collapse Supernova Gravitational Wave Signature Predictions Based on 3D Models with Increasing GR Realism
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Anthony Mezzacappa, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 449,172.00

Explosions of massive stars known as core collapse supernovae are responsible
directly or indirectly for the lion’s share of the elements in the periodic
table. A detailed understanding of how they occur is needed to understand our
cosmic origins. It is known that core collapse supernovae occur under severe
conditions. Very high densities of stellar material and very high velocities of
this material, relative to the speed of light, are the norm. Gravity in these
environments is not well described by Newton’s theory. Einstein’s theory, the
so-called general theory of relativity, is needed. In fact, all core collapse
supernova model components (the description of gravity, the description of the
stellar core as a fluid, and the description of the radiation present in the
star in the form of neutrinos, which drives these explosions) must be general
relativistic. During the time period of this project, the PI will complete the
development of the general relativistic descriptions of these three components.
But massive stars have magnetic fields, and they, too, aid in driving their
death throes. Thus, magnetic fields must be included as well. This project will
allow the PI and his collaborators to extend general relativistic core collapse
supernova models to include magnetic fields and, thereby, complete
them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Core collapse supernovae are general relativistic.
It is known, too, that magnetic fields can no longer be ignored. Models must
include general relativistic gravity, magnetohydrodynamics (MHD), and spectral
neutrino kinetics in the form of moments or a Boltzmann model. Under the current
award, the development of solvers for general relativistic gravity and
hydrodynamics in the Conformally Flat Approximation (CFA) will be completed. In
addition, magnetic fields will be included, and the CFA hydrodynamics solver
will be extended to MHD. One-, two-, and perhaps critical phases of three-
dimensional simulations will be performed, with and without magnetic fields.
Three-dimensional simulations spanning stellar mass, rotation, and metallicity
will be performed with the current production simulation capability, Chimera.
This project will support the analysis of the associated gravitational wave
emission. Predictions for both the temporal characteristics, such as the
gravitational wave strain in both polarizations, and the spectral
characteristics, such as the gravitational wave spectrum and heatmaps, of the
gravitational wave emission will be made. The gravitational wave data will be
made available to the gravitational wave astronomy community for its
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of "Windows on
the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas
for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.