* 2110455
* Quantum Optomechanics at the Standard Quantum Limit
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Thomas Corbitt, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
direct detection of gravitational waves (GW) was made possible by decades of
work developing the physics and experimental expertise needed to construct the
interferometers that made the detections. GW detectors are now limited in their
sensitivity by quantum noise in the forms of shot noise, associated with
counting error in the number of photons detected, and backaction in the form of
radiation pressure noise. This project will explore the interplay of these
quantum noises in a prototype system that uses micromechanical mirror
oscillators in a cryogenic system. The project will explore techniques to
mitigate the effects of these noises in a small system so that they may be
applied to large GW detectors in the future. The award will support and mentor
students and encourage participants from non-traditional backgrounds and
traditionally underrepresented groups. Participants in the research play a
strong role in disseminating exciting physics research, including in the areas
of quantum mechanics and GWs, through research talks, public talks, and lab
tours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Standard Quantum Limit (SQL) limits any
continuous position measurement in which the measurement imprecision (shot
noise) is uncorrelated with the quantum backaction (radiation pressure noise).
The SQL may be breached, in principle, by correlating the two noises. In the
proposed research, this will be experimentally demonstrated by using the optical
spring effect in a detuned cavity with a movable 50 nanogram mirror. This system
was previously used to observe quantum backaction at room temperature, and here
will be cooled to 20 degrees Kelvin to reach the required sensitivity. Other
methods to surpass the SQL, including the variational readout, will also be
explored. The results of these experiments will inform the design of future GW
detectors. The micromirror oscillators, with Brownian thermal noise below the
SQL, are also candidates for unstable optomechanical filter cavities. The
project will also develop techniques to measure the thermal noise at a level
below the SQL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.