* 2110112
* Louis Stokes B2B Alliance: C6: California Central Coast Community College Collaborative
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Dominic Dal Bello, Allan Hancock College
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,499,686.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
(URM) populations to successfully complete high-quality degree programs in STEM.
The California Central Coast Community College Collaborative (C6) LSAMP Bridge
to the Baccalaureate (B2B) is a new alliance consisting of the following eight
community colleges: Allan Hancock College (AHC), Cabrillo College, Monterey
Peninsula College (MPC), Moorpark College, Oxnard College, Santa Barbara City
College (SBCC) and Ventura College. The C6 Alliance will launch a model for how
community college STEM programs can collaborate and leverage existing support
structures and best practices across the partner institutions to address
inequities in STEM outcomes for students, particularly first-generation
Hispanic/Latinx and other URM students in rural areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
C6 Alliance will serve as a model to other California community colleges on
collaborations to increase STEM transfers in the fastest growing demographic –
Hispanic/Latinx students. The specific goals of the project are to (1) narrow
the Hispanic success rate gap in STEM gateway courses; (2) increase the number
of Hispanic STEM students transferring to universities (3) hold Fall Research
Symposia to celebrate community college student research and project
experiences; and (4) increase student awareness of their academic path and their
sense of belonging in STEM. In addition, the C6 Alliance’s industry partnerships
to increase industry awareness of community college URM student populations’
diverse and untapped potential and will aid the project’s sustainability.
Results and lessons learned will be disseminated via an alliance website,
presentations at national conferences, and to other community colleges and
potential collaboratives within the region and state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.