* 2110524
* PM: Measuring Gravity at the Micron-Scale with Laser-Cooled Trapped Microspheres: A Renewal Proposal
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Andrew Geraci, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Gravity is the least well understood of the four known fundamental forces in
Nature. Its weakness when compared to the other three Standard Model forces
makes gravity particularly challenging to measure precisely in experiments.
There have been several predictions from theories beyond the Standard Model of
particle physics, including string theory and supersymmetry, that the Newtonian
gravitational inverse square law will break down at some distance below the
millimeter scale. To put these theories to the test, a method using an
optically-trapped laser-cooled glass bead as a test mass and a microfabricated
silicon and gold device as a source mass has been developed. When surrounded by
a high-vacuum environment, the glass bead experiences very little friction and
becomes an ultraprecise force measurement instrument, needed to measure feeble
gravitational interactions between objects at such close ranges. At the same
time, scanning and screening methods are employed to eliminate systematic
effects from undesired electromagnetic background forces. It is estimated that
the method can improve the search for corrections to the gravitational inverse
square law at the micron length scale by more than three orders of magnitude.
One graduate student and one postdoctoral researcher will be broadly trained in
experimental physics and nanofabrication. By participating in this highly
interdisciplinary research project, students will be well equipped for
scientific careers, and efforts to include researchers from under-represented
minorities will be undertaken. The fundamental nature of this project can
instill a sense of wonder about the natural world in the general public. The
nation will benefit from an improved understanding of high-energy physics
related to gravitational physics at the micron length scale, at a fraction of
the cost of particle-collider experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, an experiment will continue to be developed which makes use of laser-
cooled trapped microspheres to test for Yukawa-type deviations from Newtonian
gravity at the micron length scale. This new technique can advance the
understanding of gravity at this length scale by over three orders of magnitude
and may lead to ground-breaking discoveries. Building on previous results,
including calibrated zeptonewton force sensitivity and the development of
techniques to reliably maneuver nanospheres in three-dimensions within micron-
distances from a source mass surface, the next phase of the project is
conceptually divided into two tasks: (1) investigation of systematic errors in
preliminary gravity measurements, with a goal of acquiring millions of
integrated data in a dedicated Yukawa-force search at the ∼ 1 μm-scale, and (2)
in-parallel development of novel methods for trapping and cooling the levitated
nanoparticles, including sympathetic cooling with cold
atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.