* 2110875
* Phylogenetic investigation of Asparagus L. trait evolution, phylogeography and diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* James Leebens-Mack, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 04/30/2024
* USD 451,611.00

Garden asparagus is one of more than two hundred species within the plant genus
Asparagus. Wild Asparagus species range from the southern tip of South Africa,
throughout Europe to the eastern reaches of Asia, and exhibit remarkable
variation in growth forms and modes of reproduction. Whereas garden asparagus is
a non-woody species with fleshy roots, many other species produce woody stems as
bushes or persistent vines, and still other species produce potato-like tuberous
root. The familiar garden asparagus has separate pollen-producing male and
fruit-bearing female plants, whereas most of its relatives are hermaphroditic -
meaning the flower has both male and female parts combined. Previous hypotheses
suggest that this high level of diversity is the result of adaptation to
geographic spread due to changing environmental conditions. The objective of
this research is to determine when, where and under what environmental
conditions this diversity of growth and reproduction strategies arose within
Asparagus. The researchers will use genomic methods to resolve the phylogenetic
relationships among all described Asparagus species and then determine how
changes in growth form and mode of reproduction correlate with environmental
changes and biogeographic spread. The findings will allow generalizations for
modeling how plants may adapt to changing environments in the future. This, in
turn, will be significant to cultivation and production of domestic Asparagus.
For example, the results will provide asparagus breeders information to help
develop new varieties that can thrive in the face of increasing droughts in
Southern California or fungal pathogens in the moist environments of the Midwest
and Northeastern U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art genomic, phenotyping
and modeling approaches will be utilized to develop a robust, comprehensive
phylogeny for the genus Asparagus, and to elucidate its dynamic biogeographic
history and adaptations to varied environmental conditions. Garden asparagus (A.
officinalis) is already a model for the evolution of dioecy. This project will
expand our understanding of the evolution of trait diversity in Asparagus to
include storage root form, shoot architecture and deciduousness, the development
of photosynthetic stems in place of leaves, and the transformation of leaves
into reduced, non-photosynthetic scales and thorns with diverse forms and
functions. Integrating species-level phylogenomics, environmental data, and
phenomics, we will test for interactions among the genetic, ecological and
evolutionary processes that have been driving diversification within Asparagus
over the last 5-10 million years. Novel methods of image analysis that have been
developed for intraspecific high-throughput phenotyping will be expanded to
model macroevolutionary changes in shoot and root architecture. These
developments will propel new lines of research on both within species and
interspecific biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.