* 2110838
* Dimensions of Care Giving and Eldercare Technology in an Aging Society
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Suma Ikeuchi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 75,788.00

The current speed and scale of global aging is unprecedented in human history.
By 2050, the proportion of those aged 65 or older within the estimated world
population will be nearly 17%, doubling the ratio in 2015 and tripling the
percentage back in 1975. Having so many live so long is a fundamentally new
phenomenon to humankind. Consequently, we need to reevaluate the infrastructures
of eldercare and healthcare. Such a reevaluation would benefit immensely from
empirical studies that compare different caregiving options. This project will
yield wide-ranging qualitative data by investigating the rapidly shifting
landscape of eldercare choices in aging society. Specifically, it focuses on (1)
non-familial caregivers while juxtaposing them with (2) the traditional familial
care and (3) the emerging care technology. The main questions are: How can the
care work provided by non-familial caregivers alter the boundaries of familial,
sociological, and national kinship? How do different parties involved in
eldercare understand the ramifications of care labor, vis-a-vis other options
such as familial care and care provided through artificial intelligence? Not
only will the findings of this research be important for the social scientific
theories of care, they will also have broader policy implications by advancing
our knowledge about the challenges facing social security in the aging world
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will conduct the research in Japan,
the country with the oldest population in the world that is projected to retain
this position through at least 2050. Japan is the most appropriate site for this
type of study that compares different care options because it has been
experimenting with migrant caregivers and care technology ever since the rapid
demographic changes destabilized the provision of familial care. For the
collection of data pertaining to foreign caregivers, the methods will consist of
participant observation, interviews, and demographic surveys. The investigator
will conduct additional interviews with family caretakers and carry out
participant observation and archival research about care technology to ensure
the comparative axis of the methodology. Data analysis will employ the grounded
theory approach to find out the culturally significant changes in the views
about kinship and eldercare. The existing works on aging and care tend to study
different care options separately, in particular familial care and paid care.
This study contributes to the anthropological theories of eldercare and kinship
by adopting a comparative approach that probes how foreign care workers fare in
relation to family caregivers and technological automation of care. The holistic
approach to the shifting landscape of eldercare can address the topical and
analytical limitations of the current scholarship. Moreover, due to the
prominent trend of global population aging today, the findings from the
pioneering aging of context of Japan can be extrapolated to countless other
countries that face similar demographic challenges, importantly the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.