* 2110684
* Catalyzing Transformative Change in STEM Education through an Institute for Inclusive Pedagogy
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chitra Javdekar, Massachusetts Bay Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 699,994.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing an
institutional change to broaden participation in STEM fields. A series of three
annual five-week STEM Summer Institutes at MassBay Community College will aim to
make significant, lasting, and positive changes in the way faculty teach
students who identify as Black, Indigenous and/or people of color (BIPOC). The
project will train a total of thirty STEM faculty and staff and include fifteen
high school faculty from two regional high schools in the institution’s
catchment area as well. Participants will learn how to better serve BIPOC STEM
students. MassBay faculty will be mentored through implementation of revised
classroom practices during the academic year. This project will help to address
the problem that MassBay is retaining and graduating BIPOC STEM students at
lower levels compared to their counterparts. The project will seek to impact
faculty through professional development at MassBay and at regional high
schools, thereby contributing, over time, to an increase in the diversity of
students in the STEM pipeline and workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the project will be to (1) educate STEM faculty regarding BIPOC needs; (2)
connect STEM faculty to resources to incorporate culturally inclusive pedagogy
into their courses; (3) mentor those faculty; and (4) monitor faculty progress
via professional, external evaluation. The method to be employed will be
professional development that will emphasize culturally responsive
pedagogy—pedagogy that requires faculty to understand how to incorporate
multiple methods of instruction that are based on students’ life experiences and
backgrounds. The project will focus on systemic institutional change in
attitudes toward teaching BIPOC students that will be measured at the
departmental and institutional levels, and across communities of STEM educators
and/or educational researchers. As a result, over time, MassBay will recruit,
support, and graduate more BIPOC students. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.