* 2110419
* SHF: Small: Research on Standard Cell Layout to Facilitate the VLSI Technology Scaling
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chung-Kuan Cheng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 547,894.00

Physical layout plays an essential role in the scaling of VLSI technology nodes.
As the whole VLSI industry tries to sustain technology scaling, the paradigm is
shifting from geometric scaling to design technology co-optimization, and soon
to system technology co-optimization. The paradigm shifts require the
advancement of physical-layout techniques to tackle the new problems related to
sustaining the scaling of the technology. The project works on the advancement
of standard cell layout in terms of analysis, synthesis, and optimization to
embrace the demand of the design technology and system technology co-
optimization. The objectives are to facilitate the scaling of VLSI technology
nodes. The approach is to perform system and design co-optimization in the
domain of physical layout. The outcome would benefit the whole VLSI ecosystem
including consumers, markets, and research and development. The project is
facilitating the advising of a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students including minority, female students, and students under adverse
circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of technology scaling is
focusing on four thrusts. (1) Routing analysis and unrouteable case diagnosis:
The study analyzes the VLSI routeability and diagnoses the cause of the
unrouteable cases to embrace the increasing complexity of the conditional design
rules. (2) Library cell layout synthesis: The research automates the library
standard cell layout to facilitate the technology scaling. (3) Design and system
technology co-optimization with pitch scaling: The research facilitates design
and system technology co-optimization with pitch scaling. (4) Extension of CMOS
technologies and beyond: The exploration studies 3D devices, new materials, and
novel architectures. The project outcomes include advanced methodology, theory,
and algorithms for VLSI physical layout, and software packages for a suite of
layout tools. The results are being disseminated for VLSI production via
collaboration with research laboratories and technology
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.