* 2110384
* Studies of Strong-Gravity Binaries and Their Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Scott Hughes, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 359,999.00

This award supports research on the dynamics of binary systems in general
relativity, and into characterizing the gravitational waves that such binaries
produce. The goal of this work is to improve our understanding of how black
holes in binary systems interact with one another, and how their interactions
affect the gravitational waves they produce. This work provides a foundation for
further observational probes of the dynamics of black holes and ultra-strong
gravity. This award also supports “sonifications” of gravitational wave signals,
using audio to illustrate how gravitational waves encode source information, as
well as online tools for studying the behavior of orbits of spinning black
holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the work supported under this award will use
black hole perturbation theory (BHPT), an approach that works well modeling
binaries in the large mass ratio limit, when a binary can be regarded as a
'small' object orbiting a large black hole. One planned project investigates how
the spectrum of modes excited by binary coalescence varies with the binary's
geometry. Substantial progress on this problem was made under prior NSF support;
further details including implications for measurement are studied with this
award. Other projects include continuing investigations of the dynamics of
spinning bodies orbiting black holes, and an analysis of event horizon dynamics
in tidally deformed black holes, and studies of the dissipative self force.
These projects grew from work that constituted major portions of the Ph.D.
theses of graduate students supported by a prior NSF award. Finally, this award
supports the development of an open-source version of the PI’s black hole
perturbation theory code. A reduced functionality version of this code
(restricted to perturbations arising from circular, equatorial orbits) was
released in 2018, and has been used by many researchers. The full version will
likely be an even more useful product for many
colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.