* 2110133
* Collaborative Research: Legible Co-Adaptation of Wearable Devices for As-Needed Assistance of Arm Motion
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Leia Stirling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2024
* USD 343,700.00

For people who have difficulties moving their arms or grasping objects, an
exoskeleton can be used to augment a person’s capabilities and, in some cases,
to provide rehabilitation. An arm exoskeleton can take the form of a brace worn
from the hand to above the elbow, with motors to assist movement and to provide
additional strength. Existing commercial exoskeleton systems have software with
control parameters that can be adjusted to an individual’s capabilities, needs,
and comfort, but these settings are not modified automatically while the device
is being used. In some cases, a person could fatigue over the course of a long
task, thus requiring the exoskeleton to help more at the end of a task than at
the beginning. In other cases, a person might gain more ability as they are
assisted in movements over days or weeks, allowing the exoskeleton to start
providing less assistance. The motivating objective of this research is to
enable co-adaptation of an arm-worn exoskeleton, where the control parameters of
the exoskeleton adapt over time to the person’s changing capabilities,
generating synergistic coordinated motion between the human-exoskeleton team.
This project promotes the progress of science and advances the national health,
prosperity and welfare through the development of an adaptive exoskeleton
controller designed to provide as-needed motion assistance based on the user's
changing level of muscular fatigue and capabilities. The research considers
augmenting the abilities of healthy participants, which aligns with reducing
musculoskeletal risk for an industrial or military application, as well as
motion assistance for older populations, which can aid with sensorimotor
deficits due to aging. The project addresses fatigue detection, legible
notifications, and device assistance to enable synergistic physical and
cognitive fit between the human and intelligent exoskeleton machine. This
convergent research brings together theories from computer science, human
factors, robotics, physical therapy, and kinesiology to advance a fundamental
understanding of human-robot interactions. The project also includes public
engagement through STEM activities for middle school girls, as well as through
activities for life-long learning for older adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
function of the co-adaptive algorithm can be expressed using principles
motivated by dynamical systems theory. The algorithm will adapt the exoskeleton
controller at the parameter dynamics level (a time scale describing parameters
associated with completing the task) for a specified graph dynamics (a longer
time scale describing the connectivity architecture representing the system).
The algorithm encourages stability of the graph dynamics using a legibility
scheme. The project team will use the commercially available Myomo MyoPro
powered orthosis as a platform to evaluate co-adaptation of a human-exoskeleton
team. The project team plans a control legibility scheme that will convey a
series of notifications to the user to inform her/him about what the MyoPro is
doing. The legibility scheme is designed to align with enabling a calibrated
trust of the user with respect to the device and to prevent bifurcations in the
graph dynamics. The specific objectives of the research are: (1) to incorporate
measures of muscle fatigue in a legible co-adaptive exoskeleton controller; (2)
to evaluate the hypothesis that a co-adaptive controller can improve human-
exoskeleton task performance in the presence of fatigue in a healthy young adult
population; and (3) to examine the generalizability of the co-adaptive
controller to an older adult population. The primary task across all studies is
a pick-and-place task where participants grasp an object (e.g., a book, pen,
basket, cup) from a table and place it on a bookshelf, then return the object to
the table. The use of different object sizes and weights increases the number of
grasp types in the dataset, as well as the motor control strategies required,
providing increased generalizability of the algorithms across grasping tasks.
Participants will perform concurrent cognitive tasks that will be used to assess
cognitive load during the primary pick-and-place task. To increase the rate of
fatigue, the primary task is alternated with a fatiguing task. Results from
these studies will advance the usability of exoskeleton systems by accounting
for natural forms of human adaptation within the exoskeleton control policy,
enabling exoskeletons to be applied for longer-duration applications that
support aging in place and the mitigation of injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.