* 2110297
* Acquisition of a high temperature elemental analyzer for hydrogen and oxygen isotope analysis of waters and solids for the University of Cincinnati Stable Isotope Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Aaron Diefendorf, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 108,503.00

This award will expand the analytical capabilities of the University of
Cincinnati (UC) UC Stable Isotope Laboratory by adding new instrumentation to
measure the stable hydrogen (H) and oxygen (O) isotopic compositions of waters
and solid organics. In the past few years, the research of the UC Stable Isotope
Laboratory has included more focus on the hydrologic cycle and tracking the
foraging habits and mobility patterns of animals over time. This work requires
measurements of H and O isotopes of waters and tissues containing proteins.
Expanded in-house analytical abilities made possible by this award will support
and strengthen the established research programs at our laboratory as well as
make possible anticipated research directions in the areas of paleoclimatology,
conservation biology, paleoecology, and organic geochemistry research. H and O
isotopes in water are commonly used to address a wide array of topics in the
geosciences, such as characterization of the hydrologic cycle, measuring
evaporation and transpiration in plants, as well as evaporation in surface
waters and soils, identifying water vapor and precipitation source, and
investigating groundwater infiltration and mixing. Past records of the
hydrologic cycle can be generated from proxies that indirectly record
precipitation and surface water H and O. Combined, these new analytical
directions will improve paleo-hydrologic reconstructions and future predictions
of hydrologic change. A more complete understanding of the hydrological cycle is
critical for safeguarding national health, prosperity, and welfare.
Additionally, H and O isotopes in organic animal tissues can be used to track
foraging behavior and movement patterns of both living and historic fauna. This
information complements that provided by other isotopes like carbon (C) and
nitrogen (N), as well as more traditional methods for obtaining geographical
information (e.g., banding or satellite-tracking individuals). Surprisingly
little is known about individual mobility or population connectivity for many
highly mobile and migratory animal species (e.g., birds, butterflies), and even
less is known about how stable these patterns are over time. Given the rate and
scale of anthropogenic changes to most of our planet’s surface, obtaining such
data is increasingly urgent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UC Stable Isotope
Laboratory currently houses two isotope ratio mass spectrometers with the
ability to analyze C and N of bulk organics, C and H of specific compounds
(e.g., leaf wax n-alkanes), C and O of carbonates, C and H of atmospheric
methane, and H and O of water, but with poor precision. However, there are no
capabilities to measure H and O of organic solids. This award will add a high
temperature elemental analyzer for the analysis of H and O of solids, including
organic tissues (e.g., chitin, keratin and cellulose), and provide analysis of H
and O of waters with high precision. This new instrumentation will also greatly
increase sample throughput and lower labor demands. It will also provide novel
hands-on analytical training in three established geology classes that serve
undergraduate and graduate students taught by the investigators, as well as
additional analytical opportunities to support undergraduate and graduate
student research. This instrument acquisition will continue to support the
strong record of mentoring students (particularly women) and providing research
opportunities to students both at UC and other institutions, including primarily
undergraduate institutions. Lastly, the requested instrumentation will play a
critical role in expanding undergraduate capstone experiences within the UC
Geology Department as part of current efforts to improve program equity and
inclusion. This award will support one female PhD student and the proposed work
will directly support two undergraduate student research projects to develop and
test standards and methods for the new equipment. The PIs will expand their
existing public engagement programs on climate change by developing a science
outreach program in collaboration with Geology graduate students. The initial
target venue will be a local Farmer’s Market that serves a diverse urban
community, but it is anticipated that the program will evolve and expand with
new cohorts of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.