* 2110974
* RUI: WoU-MMA: From Origin to Observation: Understanding Extragalactic Gamma-rays from Blazars
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amy Furniss, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 293,261.00

Blazars, one of the most extreme objects in the observed local Universe, occur
when the jet emitted from a supermassive black hole is aligned in the general
direction of the Earth. An anticipated astrophysical accelerator for cosmic rays
at the highest energies, very-high-energy (VHE) gamma-rays are observed
coincident with these objects and provide a means to study the underlying
processes. This award supports scientists at the California State University -
East Bay (CSUEB) to utilize observations of VHE gamma-rays with the VERITAS
telescope, located south of Tucson, Arizona, to study the behavior of the most
energetic galaxies within the local Universe. The program provides the
opportunity for hands-on experience in leading particle astrophysics research
for undergraduates at CSUEB. Using gamma-ray observations of extremely energetic
galaxies, the students will study the different processes that can occur to high
energy photons as they travel from the galaxy to the Earth and apply what they
learn to the large-scale structure of the Universe between Earth and the
energetic galaxy. Relatedly, the program will advance target-of-opportunity
real-time follow-ups of astrophysical events of interest for current and future
VHE gamma-ray observatories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Very high energy photons and
ultra-high-energy cosmic-rays (Energy &gt; 1 PeV) ejected by a blazar have the
potential to initiate a cascade process as they traverse the extragalactic
distance from source to observer. Due to these interactions, the observed gamma-
ray flux is not strictly that which is emitted at the source. Instead, the
observed flux may be a combination of the absorbed intrinsic gamma-ray flux
(primary emission) and the up-scattered gamma-rays that result from the cascade
process along the extragalactic path (secondary emission). The portion of the
gamma-ray flux resulting from cascade emission which continues to travel along
the original line of sight depends on the magnitude of the intergalactic
magnetic field. The proposed astrophysical mechanisms for generating large-scale
magnetic fields predict little magnetic flux inside regions of lower integrated
mass density, also known as voids. Studying the location of gamma-ray emitting
galaxies with respect to cosmic voids can provide insight on the strength of the
magnetic field inside of voids. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.