* 2110223
* RUI: Transcriptional regulation of host-pathogen viral symbiosis at single-cell resolution
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* JJ Miranda, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 412,747.00

Many viruses infect hosts for a lifetime. In order to do so, viruses must
balance opposing needs that affect timing of the life cycle. On one hand, active
replication is required to make more copies and propagate. On the other hand,
inactive dormancy is required to avoid host detection and immune responses that
could clear the virus. These oscillations in viral growth involve changes in
viral gene expression. The infected host cell counters with subsequent changes
in its own gene expression to perturb the viral life cycle. This competition
between host and pathogen has been well studied at the population level.
Emerging data in the field, however, argues that individual viruses in a
population do not act in unison. To balance the risk of active replication with
the safety of inactive dormancy, subpopulations may express different genes.
This project aims to study how viruses generate diverse subpopulations during
both active replication and inactivate dormancy. Data obtained by a research
team will then be analyzed by an undergraduate computational biology class
specifically designed to write code for this project. Barnard College, a liberal
arts school for women, will support this effort through collaboration with
established program cohorts that recruit underrepresented minorities. The
integrated goals of the project are to advance knowledge of fundamental
questions at the interface of virology and computer science while simultaneously
increasing participation of underrepresented women in computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) is a double stranded
DNA virus that persists in the host by establishing a lifelong symbiotic
infection. Persistence over years strongly depends on the ability of the virus
to shut down transcription to a quiescent latent state not detectable by the
host. Equally important is also the ability to spontaneously replicate in
response to cellular stress and generate new virions to replenish a depleted
reservoir. While much work has been done to understand the molecular basis of
this lytic reactivation in a bulk population, studies at single-cell resolution
have been lacking. Preliminary data demonstrates that HHV-8 populations display
clear heterogeneity with multiple subpopulations. HHV-8 reactivation is also
enriched in one specific subpopulation with a distinct host transcriptional
signature. Specific Aim 1 will test the effect of identified candidate host
genes on HHV-8 reactivation. Specific Aim 2 will identify which subpopulations
respond most readily to different stimuli of reactivation. Both aims build on a
wide body of literature in the microbial world demonstrating a transcriptional
basis to bet-hedging within a heterogeneous population. The sum of experiments
will advance our knowledge of the single-cell transcriptomes that control HHV-8
reactivation. The Department of Biology at Barnard College is establishing a new
major in computational biology. This project will specifically contribute
through the establishment of a new course-based undergraduate research
experience, “Computational ViroSystOmics,” based on the experiments performed.
The course will integrate strategies mindful of pedagogical studies of gender in
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.