* 2110293
* Using Muons and Protons to Probe the Structure of the Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Renee Fatemi, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This award supports two separate experimental programs, each aimed at exploring
the structure of our universe at the most fundamental level. One program will
investigate how the quarks and gluons that are produced in high energy proton-
proton collisions spawn new quarks and gluons and eventually combine to form the
particles that make up the visible universe. These studies will shed light on
the nature of Quantum Chromodynamics, a theory that describes the strong force,
one of the three fundamental forces that comprise the Standard Model of Particle
Physics. The other program aims to discover signals of new forces and particles
that are not yet included in the Standard Model. The g-2 experiment at Fermi
National Laboratory aims to precisely measure the magnetic properties of the
muon, a fundamental particle with characteristics very similar to the electron,
but with 200 times the mass. This experiment is a second generation of an
earlier measurement made at Brookhaven National Lab nearly twenty years ago that
differs somewhat from the Standard Model theoretical calculations. The first
result from the Fermilab measurement has been announced and it agrees with the
earlier measurement but with better precision. The discrepancy between the
experiments and the Standard Model points to possible contributions to the
muon's magnetic moment from Beyond the Standard Model forces and/or particles.
The Fermilab g-2 collaboration is in the process of analyzing and collecting
additional datasets with the goal of further reducing the uncertainties on the
measurement and pushing towards a discovery level discrepancy with the Standard
Model predictions. The experiments supported by this grant will provide
undergraduate and graduate students with the necessary tools and experience to
either continue their work in basic research or to enter the technical workforce
and lend their problem-solving expertise to a myriad of fields, including
finance, big data analysis, patent law and medical physics. Undergraduate
students funded by this award will continue to have the rare opportunity to
experience the scientific culture and basic research performed at U.S. National
Laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the PI and two
graduate students in using high energy pp and pA collisions at the Relativistic
Heavy Ion Collider to extract longitudinal and transverse momentum dependent jet
fragmentation functions from distributions of identified pions, kaons and
protons inside of fully reconstructed jets. Measurements in pp collisions will
provide significant constraints on the gluon fragmentation functions,
particularly in the case when the pion, kaon or proton assume a large fraction
of the parent gluon's momentum. Comparisons of these same fragmentation yields
in pp and pA will provide new insights on how the quark and gluon hadronization
process is modified by a nuclear environment. Looking at this fragmentation in
yet another dimension, as a function of particle momentum relative to the jet
axis, provides access to the transverse momentum distributions (TMD) in the
proton. Information about unpolarized TMD fragmentation functions is sparse,
largely because the interpretation of the existing data is complicated by the
limited energy of the lepton-proton collisions used to make the measurements.
Investigation of TMD fragmentation functions is an essential piece of a
worldwide effort to advance our current picture of Quantum Chromodynamics, the
formal theory of strong interactions within the Standard Model of particle
physics. This grant will also allow the PI, a postdoctoral associate and a
graduate student to maintain their current efforts in the muon g-2 experiment at
Fermilab. Contributions will include the development and tuning of the g-2 GEANT
based simulation software package, the evaluation of beam dynamics systematic
errors that require simulation and the Q-method precession analysis of data
taken in Runs 2 &amp; 3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.