* 2110287
* Stars, Black Holes, and Disks:  Dense Matter Phenomena in 2D Numerical Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Matthew Duez, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 204,718.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. A
great deal can be learned about the extremes of strong gravity, about denser-
than-nuclei matter, and even about the origin of heavy elements, by studying the
collisions of neutron stars with each other or with black holes. Such a binary
system emits gravitational waves as the neutron star and its companion spiral
together and electromagnetic waves (visible light, infrared, gamma rays, etc.)
after the merger. Both signals are sometimes detectable and in some cases have
been detected. Numerical simulations that include general relativity are the
only way to predict how merger processes unfold, and they've gotten pretty good
at modeling the merger and the first few hundredths of a second afterward. The
post-merger evolution lasts around a couple of seconds. Although this does not
sound long, it is too long to be accessible to 3D numerical simulations,
especially because the presence of small-scale turbulent flows makes the grids
needed large and the simulations expensive. This project will probe these later
times with numerical relativity, following the story of the merger through to
completion, when nothing but a stable, quiescent black hole or neutron star
remains. The problems of large grid and long time requirements will be dealt
with by carrying out 2D simulations (using the rough symmetry about a rotation
axis) and carefully-designed models of the effect of turbulent flows on scales
to small to be directly captured on the 2D grids. These simulations will include
a high degree of realism in the treatment of magnetic fields and neutrino
radiation. The techniques and code developed to carry them out will be
applicable to other interesting systems with near-axisymmetry, such as
collapsing stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports long-time (multi-
second) studies of these strong-gravity, dense-matter systems using the Spectral
Einstein Code (SpEC), a high-accuracy numerical relativity code that includes
magnetohydrodynamics, nuclear microphysics, and neutrino transport. SpEC's 2D
radiation magnetohydrodynamics code will be improved to include 2D spacetime
evolution, Monte Carlo neutrino transport, and a mean-field/large-eddy
incorporation of the effects of turbulence in the azimuthal direction. Long-time
2D simulations will extend existing compact binary merger simulations for
multiple seconds, yielding accurate predictions about disk winds, winds from and
possible delayed collapse of a stellar remnant, and GRB energetics. Finally,
these numerical techniques will be applied to the first SpEC simulations of
black hole formation and growth in a post-collapse, long-duration GRB
scenario.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.