* 2110731
* Theory and Algorithms for Eigenvector-Dependent Nonlinear Eigenvalue Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ding Lu, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 324,815.00

The mathematical questions in this project arise in electronic structure
calculations in computational materials science, signal processing of
brain–computer interfaces in neuroscience and biomedical engineering, among
other applications. The questions come in a variety of forms and pose intriguing
challenges for mathematical analysis and numerical solutions. This project seeks
to advance the state-of-the-art of the analysis and computation. The project's
outcome will advance understanding of the mathematical problems and provide
tools for researchers and practitioners to perform simulations in less time
using advanced models that were previously unavailable. This project will
integrate research into teaching and education and will engage students at
various levels in computational mathematics and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support one graduate per year
in each of the three years of the grant. Technically, this project will focus on
an important class of Eigenvector-dependent Nonlinear Eigenvalue Problems NEPv,
called affine-linear NEPv (al-NEPv). In an al-NEPv, the coefficient matrix of
NEPv poses an affine-linear structure. Origins of al-NEPv include trace-related
optimizations such as the trace-ratio optimization for dimension reduction and
robust Rayleigh-quotient optimization for handling data uncertainties, among
others. The PI plans to conduct systematic analysis and algorithmic development
for al-NEPv. The main components of the proposed research are threefold:
analysis of al-NEPv, such as a novel geometric description and a variational
characterization; new geometric interpretation of the self-consistent field
(SCF) iteration for solving al-NEPv, and variants of SCF for handling the local
optimal issue and for accelerating the convergence of SCF; availability of a
public-domain repository for the collection of NEPv from real-life
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.