* 2110162
* 2021 Association of Environmental Engineering and Science Professors (AEESP) Research and Education Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Daniel Giammar, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,252.00

This award from the CBET Environmental Engineering program with co-funding from
the CBET Environmental Sustainability and the EEC Broadening Participation in
Engineering programs supports the 2021 Association of Environmental Engineering
and Science Professors (AEESP) Research and Education Conference. The theme of
the conference is “Environmental Engineering and Science at the Confluence”. Due
to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the 2021 AEESP Research and Education
Conference was restructured around two events: 1) a virtual conference to be
held on July 13-14, 2021 and 2) an in-person conference to be held on June
28-30, 2022 in St. Louis. The AEESP 2021 virtual conference will feature various
workshops and training events for environmental engineers/scientists at various
stages of their careers including 1) an NSF CAREER proposal writing workshop for
junior faculty, 2) a workshop on DEI (Diversity, Equity and Inclusion) to
summarize and discuss the lessons learned from a series of webinars on
“Converging COVID-19, environment, health, and equity” funded by the NSF CBET
Environmental Engineering program, and 3) a technical workshop on aerosol
science/engineering and public health with a focus on the COVID-19 pandemic. The
AEESP 2022 in-person conference will also feature various workshops and training
events organized around four areas of convergence: convergence of education and
research, convergence of research in air, water, and soil, convergence of
research and action, and convergence of research, practice, and
entrepreneurship. Both the virtual and in-person AEESP conferences will provide
numerous opportunities for the participants to exchange ideas and build new
partnerships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2021/2022 AEESP Research and Education
Conferences will be hosted by a group of academic institutions including
Washington University in St. Louis (Lead Institution), Missouri University of
Science &amp; Technology, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, and the
University of Missouri-Columbia. The biannual AEESP Research and Education
Conference is the premier event for AEESP members to exchange information on
novel research, educational activities, and develop professional competencies.
Key goals of the 2021/2022 AEESP conferences are to empower current and future
environmental engineering and science (EES) professors to pursue the relevant
“NSF Big Ideas”, catalyze convergence research and provide a forum for new
perspectives and collaborations that will allow environmental
engineers/scientists to apply their expertise and skills to address global and
emerging societal Grand Challenges such as pandemic preparedness/prevention and
climate change mitigation/adaptation. Both the 2021 virtual and 2022 in-person
AEESP conferences seek to 1) broaden the participation of members of
underrepresented groups in environmental engineering and science research and
education; 2) empower the EES academic community to combat systemic racism; and
3) highlight research progress and identify new priority research directions.
The 2021/2022 AEESP conferences will also provide speaking and networking
opportunities for undergraduate/graduate students, and postdoctoral research
fellows to inform the EES community of their research. Junior and prospective
faculty members attending the conference will benefit from workshops devoted to
NSF CAREER proposal writing, navigating the academic job search, and mentorship
to broaden the participation of the EES community in NSF and federally-funded
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.