* 2110247
* Winter Instrumentation Limnology Lab at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Trout Lake Station
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Olaf Jensen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 594,000.00

Researchers at the University of Wisconsin Trout Lake Station conduct year-round
research on lakes in northern Wisconsin, sampling frozen or near freezing
waterbodies for at least six months out of the year. Trout Lake Station is a
long-time contributor and leader of winter lake research efforts internationally
and prides itself on providing an inclusive size selection of high-quality
winter safety gear and hands-on training to researchers entering the field.
While the expertise and equipment at Trout Lake Station can accommodate
additional winter research, training, and outreach; the station lacks a heated
workspace where people can escape the freezing temperatures, work to develop new
lake sampling technologies, and where existing gear can be properly stored and
serviced. Through the construction of a heated year-round research workshop,
Trout Lake Station will increase its research and outreach capacity both
seasonally and spatially. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Winter Instrumentation
Limnology Laboratory (WILL) is a ~3,600 sq ft heated multifunctional research
outbuilding composed of three main sections: 1) an active gear staging area, 2)
a large workshop/toolshop, and 3) a sensor, buoy platform, and limnological gear
makerspace. The building will be a stick and frame design with shop heating that
maintains workable temperatures throughout all seasons in a north temperate
climate. The WILL is proposed to replace an existing 1,200 sqft non-heated tool
workshop. It will triple the outbuilding research workspace and complement the
existing 11,200 sqft laboratory and conference building. The winter research
user base for TLS stretches beyond the UW-Madison campus, and includes the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR), the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) staff and scientists, Global Lakes Ecological
Observatory Network (GLEON) researchers, Lake Superior National Estuary Research
Reserve (LSNERR), and regional universities. Trout Lake Station aims to become a
hub that connects water interest groups in the region. Increasing year-round
capacity and providing heated workshop space will strengthen links and
collaborations between regional partners. For more information, see
https://limnology.wisc.edu/trout-lake-station-
welcome/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.