* 2110229
* Studies of Nucleons at Fermilab and PSI
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Wolfgang Lorenzon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,006,788.00

The main physics program supported by this award is the study of the spin
structure of nucleons and solving a 10-year old puzzle about the real size of
the proton. Research will be carried out at two places: one at the Fermi
National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) near Chicago as part of a
collaboration called SpinQuest, and the other at the Paul Scherrer Institute
near Zurich, Switzerland, as part of a collaboration called MUSE. The experiment
at Fermilab is focused on a special process in proton-proton scattering, called
the Drell-Yan process, which can identify light antiquarks in the nucleon and
determine how those antiquarks contribute to the spin of the proton. The
experiment in Switzerland aims to resolve the unexplained large discrepancy of
the size of the proton measured with electron and muon scattering, where the
muon is a heavy cousin of the electron. This discrepancy was entirely
unexpected, as the proton's size should not depend on whether it is measured
with electrons or muons. This research program will train postdoctoral fellows
and graduate and undergraduate students on cryogenic techniques and targets. The
involvement of junior researchers in this effort is important to ensure that
there will be sufficient expertise in the nuclear physics community and beyond
to support the future need for cryogenic instrumentation. Every group member has
the opportunity to get involved in hardware, simulation and analysis projects
and learn valuable skills in several programming languages and in the analysis
of large data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SpinQuest experiment at Fermilab
near Chicago will perform the first Sivers function measurement on sea quarks
using the Drell-Yan process in proton-proton scattering to determine the sign
and magnitude of the u-bar and d-bar Sivers distributions. These studies may
shed light on the contribution of orbital angular momentum from sea quarks to
the proton spin and enable measurements of a fundamental prediction of Quantum
Chromodynamics that goes to the heart of the gauge formulation of QCD, known as
the "sign change" of the Sivers function. The studies of the Michigan group at
PSI aim to reassess the proton charge radius and the discrepancies that remain
by performing the first simultaneous measurement of elastic electron and muon
scattering off the proton, which is afforded by a beam that contains positively
and negatively charged electrons, muons and pions. This approach has never been
attempted before and carries high promise to resolve the proton radius puzzle.
Due to their specific expertise in building and running cryogenic targets, the
Michigan group will lead the unpolarized target effort at MUSE and support the
polarized target effort at Fermilab. This program builds on the expertise the
group has gained and is a natural extension of the group's work over the past
years. It provides a balanced mix of hardware, simulation and analysis projects,
which will benefit students and postdocs, and it will allow the U-M group to
play a key role in the MUSE experiment at PSI and have a strong presence in the
Drell-Yan program at Fermilab. Education and training of undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, as well as outreach aimed at the
general public, is an important aspect of this research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.