* 2110396
* SBIR Phase II:  A  Plasma Heat Engine for Efficient Production of Fusion Energy
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Richard Nebel, TIBBAR PLASMA TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2023
* USD 995,712.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to produce a fusion-based engine in a system that is
small, simple and inexpensive. The ultimate system will produce power that is as
clean as renewable energy. Since the system is small and has low radiation, it
also has applications for manned space flight. This new engine could enable more
direct and shorter flights to other planets, which minimizes the exposure of
astronauts to the radiation encountered in outer
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to continue the
companies research on using a harmonic well to produce fusion by particle
kinetic energy, rather than general thermal energy. The proposed concept
utilizes a new heat engine technique that always maintains the plasma
distribution function in thermodynamic equilibrium. In the proposed fusion
system, a plasma is created in a specially designed harmonic well and then
induced to form into two counter-oscillating spinning rings. When the two rings
collide at the center of the well, the particle velocities are high enough to
cause fusion. This phase of the project will increase the energetics of the
device. The project will move up to deuterium, a fuel which is twice as heavy as
hydrogen (the current fuel) and has a much larger cross-section for fusion. The
proposed approach is expected to make the harmonic well sufficiently energetic
to produce deuterium-on-deuterium fusion by increasing the natural oscillation
frequency of the well to give ion collision speeds of about one million meters
per second. The project expects to be able to detect the neutrons produced by
the fusion, demonstrating aneutronic fusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.