* 2110972
* RUI: Digging Deep for New Physics with the CMS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Julie Hogan, Bethel University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2024
* USD 243,478.00

A major scientific achievement of the 20th century was the development of the
Standard Model of particle physics. The Standard Model is a successful theory,
agreeing with decades of experimental observations involving weak,
electromagnetic, and strong interactions. The Higgs boson discovery at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN completes the suite of predicted Standard Model
particles and provides a mechanism for generating elementary particle masses.
However, the current formulation of the Standard Model does not account for the
observed value of the Higgs boson mass, making discovery of physics beyond the
Standard Model a primary goal of the LHC experiments, including those being
carried out in this project involving the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will focus on searches for new physics, as well
as upgrade developments toward the silicon-based outer tracker for the CMS
experiment during the High-Luminosity LHC run in the mid-2020s. This research
will also engage undergraduate students in CMS data analysis and detector
hardware projects at Bethel University, Fermilab, and CERN. The primary analysis
goal is to search for vector-like quark (VLQ) pair production with the record-
breaking CMS dataset. Several deep machine learning algorithms will be developed
to identify hadronic decays of bottom quarks, top quarks, W, Z, and Higgs
bosons, which are all reconstructed as jets with unique internal structure. With
these deep learning techniques, VLQ pair production searches can be dramatically
improved to include identification and mass reconstruction. Specifically, this
work will use image recognition machine learning techniques to develop jet
identification algorithms for HL-LHC studies. Additionally, extensive
development will be made on design features and assembly procedures for upgraded
silicon tracker modules. The Bethel CMS group will characterize silicon sensors
with updates to an existing probe station and will participate in module
production tests at Fermilab. The Bethel group is also engaged with several
outreach and education activities, reaching high school students and the general
public through tours of detector exhibits and preparing new students and
collaborators for CMS analysis via an annual Data Analysis School and hands-on
summer tutorials. The Bethel group will also develop inquiry-based Open Data
analysis exercises appropriate for upper-level modern physics courses and/or
advanced laboratory courses to be shared with other
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.