* 2110585
* Collaborative Research: The Search for Light Dark Matter with DAMIC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alvaro Chavarria, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2024
* USD 556,000.00

Dark matter is a ubiquitous yet invisible presence in our universe that makes up
approximately 85% of the total mass. It plays a crucial role in how large-scale
structures like galaxies form and the observed motion of stars. Its true nature
remains elusive, and one compelling explanation is that is made of hitherto
unknown particles which interact weakly with ordinary matter. Very sensitive
experiments are required for their detection, installed deep underground to
shield the much larger flux of ordinary cosmic rays. The DAMIC experiment is
designed to detect nuclear and electronic recoils induced by dark matter in
charge coupled devices (CCDs). Scientific CCDs are commonly used in the focal
plane of astronomical telescopes for the digital imaging of faint astrophysical
objects. DAMIC has pioneered their unconventional use as dark matter detectors.
This award supports the participation in the DAMIC experiment of the groups at
University of Chicago and University of Washington. The groups will carry out
the development and testing of the CCD modules, and the installation and
commissioning of DAMIC detectors in the underground laboratories toward the
analysis of the first dark matter search data. As a part of the award, the
groups will provide immersive research experiences, engagement of the local
community and the general public, and innovative partnerships bringing science
to formal and informal audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of dark
matter constitutes one of the most fundamental questions in science and the
discovery of a yet unknown particle would have profound implications in our
understanding of the Universe. First DAMIC CCD detectors have successfully been
operated at the SNOLAB laboratory near Sudbury, Canada. A kg-size detector –
DAMIC-M – is now in development and will be uniquely sensitive to light dark
matter (with mass smaller than that of a proton) thanks to a novel type of CCD
that allows the detection of a single ionization charge. DAMIC-M will be
installed at Laboratoire Souterrain de Modane in France. In addition to the
development of the CCD detectors, the US groups supported in this award are also
responsible for the CCD controller electronics, and perform calibrations of
electronic and nuclear recoils in the CCDs down to a threshold of a few
ionization charges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.