* 2110462
* Molecular Dynamics in Ultrastrong Laser Fields.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Barry Walker, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 296,224.00

Frontier research in high intensity laser science is the basis of this work.
Both a high intensity laser laboratory capable of creating trillion-watt peak
powers and a theory effort to model the dynamics of the laser-matter interaction
will be conducted with the funding. Atoms and molecules form the building blocks
of matter; molecules by far comprise nearly every material we use on a daily
basis. Due to the extensive presence of molecules, this research will
specifically focus on understanding the interactions of high intensity lasers
with matter in the molecular form. An understanding of highly energetic
molecular states is expected as well as the connection between atoms and
molecules when interacting with lasers. The work involves intensive, hands-on
training and funding for the STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math)
disciplines at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate level. Training
will involve transferable abilities into highly skilled, global workforce areas
including: lasers and optics, electrical and mechanical engineering, computer
modeling, laboratory research, and management of research groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will quantify how the molecules are excited by
intense lasers well beyond traditional intensities of 1 PW/cm^2. The
experimental and theory studies will extend up to the ultrastrong fields and
intensities of 10,000 PW/cm^2. The ion fragments have charge states extending
beyond the electrons involved in molecular bonding, deep into the atomic
structure. The energies of the electrons from these interactions extend from
10,000 eV to 1,000,000 eV. The broad scientific question involves how
ultrastrong laser fields interact with molecules. The work bridges an important
gap between the physics of individual atoms and the many body collective effects
in plasmas and condensed matter. This proposed research will extend the molecule
â€“ laser interaction into ultrastrong fields. In this new regime forces and
energies are thousands of times greater than for current molecular studies. The
mechanisms for the formation of high charge states and the energetics of the
molecular fragments will be quantified experimentally and modeled theoretically.
Students from the group have secured employment into significant positions
across science and technology disciplines from national defense contracting to
medical physics to laser materials processing industry. The grant will fund a
post-graduate training position specifically designed to help train recent
graduates, especially underrepresented demographics, for challenges that can
occur in the scientific workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.