* 2110727
* Improving Students’ Sociotechnical Literacy in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ethan Danahy, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 05/31/2024
* USD 549,912.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by preparing engineering
students to develop, analyze, produce, and assess engineering processes,
products, and impacts through a lens of justice and equity. The project team
will develop, study, and share a novel approach to integrating social justice
topics alongside technical knowledge in a first-year engineering computation
course. In undergraduate engineering education, discussions about ethics in
engineering practice are typically addressed in stand-alone courses, late in the
course progression. This separation leads students to consider the technical and
social aspects of engineering as separate and unequal, with technical content
usually viewed as more important. To remove this technical-social divide, this
project will bring social, economic, and political considerations into a
technical first-year course, “Introduction to Computing in Engineering.” Course
instructors, education researchers, and STEM diversity experts will redesign the
course and develop new course materials that integrate topics of equity and
justice in engineering and data science into readings, discussions, in-class
exercises, and homework problems. To assist course instructors in implementing
this revised course content, a cohort of upper-level students will be hired and
trained via a weekly seminar to facilitate in-class discussions and activities.
Using surveys, classroom video recordings, and interviews, the project will
study the effectiveness of this approach and iteratively revise the course
content and implementation structure over three years. Online resources will be
created to distribute project materials to other engineering programs that are
interested in adopting this approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
redesign an existing computing course around justice-based activities, supported
by an Equity Learning Assistant (ELA) program that will train upper-level
students to facilitate in-class discussions. Through the justice-based
activities, students will learn the required computing technical skills by
analyzing real, ethically complex data sets and working on personally meaningful
equity-focused projects. This approach will provide students with opportunities
early in their education to practice integrating social, economic, and political
dimensions into their engineering work. Each section of the redesigned course
will be supported by two upper-level students who are part of the ELA program.
The ELAs will participate in a weekly equity pedagogy seminar to learn about
critical data science studies and related pedagogical approaches. The project’s
three-year mixed-methods research study will generate and disseminate evidence-
based practices to develop undergraduates’ sociotechnical literacy and sense of
belonging in engineering. In producing new knowledge around these practices,
this project will cultivate pedagogical change through a process-oriented
approach (ELAs) together with a product-oriented approach (the sociotechnical
course redesign). The project has potential benefits at both local and societal
levels: the revised course and ELA seminar will directly benefit 600 first-year
students and 30 ELAs; the development of the ELA Program will increase the
School of Engineering’s capacity to transform engineering courses throughout the
school to incorporate justice-based issues; the Tufts STEM Equity Group will
provide the institutional infrastructure necessary to incorporate ethics and
social justice in departments across Tufts’ multiple colleges and programs; and
dissemination efforts will enable engineering programs across the U.S. to adopt
this approach. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.