* 2110489
* NSF-BSF: Elucidating Interactions between Multiple Optical Cycling Centers in Hypermetallic Polyatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael McCarthy, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 490,503.00

Laser-cooled molecules are a powerful tool for exploring the frontiers of
quantum science and ultracold physics, provided their energy can be cooled in
all degrees of freedom to temperatures very close to absolute zero. Although
certain classes of molecules can be cooled with precisely engineered laser-
light, particularly those containing a single heavy atom, extending efficient
laser cooling to molecules more generally has proven challenging. This project
aims to understand the general design principles that affect the performance of
exotic, new classes of laser-coolable molecules containing multiple heavy atoms.
Through a collaborative National Science Foundation - US Israel Binational
Science Foundation experimental program, the investigators will explore how
light from radio to visible wavelengths interacts with such molecules. This
effort will broaden the diversity of cold molecule applications spanning quantum
computing and simulation to tabletop searches for new physics. Such cutting-edge
yet fundamental measurements are well suited to educating and training students
in STEM fields, and such mentorship is a core project
aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All demonstrations of direct laser-cooling
to date have used molecules containing a single heavy-atom photon-cycling
center. More complex species containing multiple optical centers have the
potential to greatly increase the versatility of laser-cooled molecules, but
have not been thoroughly explored experimentally. This program comprises a
systematic spectroscopic study of substituted hydrocarbons, including acetylene
chains and benzene rings, containing multiple alkaline earth or alkaline-earth-
like atoms. By combining broadband optical and microwave data, the investigators
will directly probe how the intricacies of electronic structure and chemical
bonding influence the molecular properties relevant to laser-cooling
applications, as well as the molecular physics of these exotic, biradical
species in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.