* 2110171
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Intelligent Data Harvesting for Multi-Scale Building Stock Classification and Energy Performance Prediction
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Wangda Zuo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2022
* USD 388,623.00

This joint trilateral project is in response to NSF Dear Colleague Letter:
United States- Ireland-Northern Ireland R&amp;D Partnership (NSF 20-064) in the
areas of energy and sustainability. Residential buildings account for 14%-27% of
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the three jurisdictions and cause significant
negative impact on the environment. Supported by NSF, the Science Foundation
Ireland in the Republic of Ireland (RoI), and the Department for the Economy in
Northern Ireland (NI), this joint research aims to reduce residential building
energy consumption and related GHG emissions and environmental impacts across
the three jurisdictions. The research will create decision support tools to
inform policy makers, planners, and other stakeholders about the most beneficial
residential retrofitting solutions at multiple scales (local to national). The
methodology employed will lie at the confluence of various expertise, including
green engineering of the NI team, building energy modeling and machine learning
of the U.S. team, and information theory of the RoI team. The aim is to
transform diverse public datasets in the three jurisdictions into actionable
information. Empowered by this information, the anticipation is that better
decisions can guide modern societies towards transformative green solutions for
the built environment that leverage sustainable engineering systems and enable
the creation of energy-efficient, healthy, and comfortable buildings for a
nation's citizens. The approach is cognizant of society's need to provide
ecological protection while maintaining favorable economic
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This joint research seeks to provide the
foundational science needed to design, optimize, and deploy green engineering
approaches that reduce residential building energy consumption and related GHG
emissions. The interdisciplinary research targets to yield three results: 1) A
methodology for data ingestion and an ontology and associated server that
provides both a means of accessing and subsequently homogenizing data for both
the data enrichment and the modeling processes. The intent is to enable
previously unused data sources to be utilized as a whole to significantly
improve the accuracy of modeling processes; 2) An advanced automated building
energy model generation method powered by physics-informed machine learning,
which can improve the efficiency of model generation, significantly reduce
computing demand for large scale building energy prediction and protect building
users' privacy. Algorithms will also be created to enable robust prediction with
incomplete datasets; 3) A new complementary solution for predicting the GHG
emissions reduction potential for stakeholders will be created to analyze
near/zero GHG buildings in terms of energy performance. It is anticipated that
these results will be beneficial both in terms of making buildings greener by
reducing GHG emissions and energy consumption as well as decreasing operational
costs. The plan is to seek the U.S. Department of Energy's Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory to adopt the research results in their national building
energy policy analysis for 139 million homes. The Northern Ireland Housing
Executive will utilize this work to help predict decarbonization pathways for
their housing stock of nearly 86,000 homes (10% of the housing stock in NI). The
research will also assist the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland for its
retrofit plan of 500,000 homes in the Republic of
Ireland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.