* 2110083
* Louis Stokes Renewal STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Northeast LSAMP 2021-2026
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Diandra Prescod, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations to successfully complete high quality degree programs in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the next five years, the University of
Connecticut (UConn), lead institution for the Northeast Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (NELSAMP), with partner institutions: Northeastern
University, Tufts University, University of Massachusetts-Amherst, University of
Rhode Island (URI), and Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) and the
Connecticut Community College System, will build upon its successes to increase
recruitment and STEM baccalaureate degree production to historically
underrepresented minority students with an emphasis on entry to STEM graduate
program. The alliance will also conduct a study that addresses non-cognitive
(interpersonal and intrapersonal) factors, as opposed to academic factors, that
lead to student success for this population of students pursuing STEM degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program evaluation incorporates continued assessment
of institutionalization and sustainability in addition to assessing the
effectiveness of NELSAMP's strategies. Project and evaluation findings will be
shared with the STEM education community to build the knowledge base and foster
implementation of new promising practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.