* 2110164
* Optical Lattice Engineering for Enhanced Interferometry and Sensing with Yb Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Subhadeep Gupta, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 366,506.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to
sensitively measure the interaction between light and matter. The experiments
will be performed on an atomic gas cooled to very low temperatures in the
laboratory, at which point it transforms into an exotic state called a Bose-
Einstein condensate (BEC). Like a laser beam, the BEC can be split into multiple
parts and then recombined. If the different parts interact differently with
light, then this shows up in the properties of the recombined BEC. The splitting
and recombination will be carried out with a particular type of light pulses
called standing waves, which the research team will specially prepare to enhance
the measurement sensitivity. By using light pulses to split, recombine, and then
observe BECs, the team will precisely measure the strength of the light-matter
interaction. The results will provide information regarding possible refinements
of the underlying theory of this fundamental process. The atom being used -
Ytterbium - has potential applications in the development of improved time
standards for the global positioning system (GPS) and in the development of
quantum computers; both of these efforts involve the sorts of laser-atom control
techniques that this project will help to advance. The students working on this
project will gain experience in experimental methods involving atoms, lasers,
and electronics, and also be involved in data analysis, modeling, and connecting
experimental results with theory. This will be good preparation for them to join
the work force in academia and industry as part of the next generation of
scientists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop techniques based on coherent
atom manipulation in optical standing waves to improve the precision of atom
interferometric sensors. In particular, the kinetic energy of an atom recoiling
due to absorption of a single photon will be precisely measured as a frequency,
by further development of the team’s previously demonstrated contrast
interferometry technique with Yb BECs. This recoil frequency, combined with
other measurements, will accurately determine the fine structure constant alpha,
and test the theory of quantum electrodynamics (QED). The fine structure
constant is ubiquitous in nature and QED theory extends across various physics
sub-fields. The contrast interferometer utilizes pulsed optical standing waves
to split, manipulate, and recombine BECs. The interferometer signal is obtained
by monitoring the contrast of the resultant interference pattern via reflection
of an optical traveling wave. The techniques that will be developed to enhance
measurement precision will be broadly applicable to a large class of atom
interferometric sensors including the acceleration due to gravity and its
gradient. Together with these fundamental goals, this project will also advance
BEC preparation, manipulation, and probing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.