* 2110988
* PM: Precision Measurements and Fundamental Symmetries: Measuring the Muon Magnetic Moment Anomaly and Electric Dipole Moments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Timothy Chupp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 703,144.00

A description of nature at its most fundamental level is comprised of a set of
fundamental pieces – elementary particles – and an explanation of the forces
between them that should describe all matter and phenomena in the physical
universe. The "Standard Model" encompasses everything we know about the normal
matter that surrounds us. The Standard Model does not, however, describe
everything that has been observed and, in particular, does not explain how the
universe evolved with more matter than anti-matter and what additional particles
and forces may exist. The muon, like the electron, is an elementary particle
which is prevalent in Nature. But the muon is radioactive and not part of normal
matter. Measuring the magnetic and electric properties of the muon with great
precision is one of the most promising ways to explore “new physics” and
requires developing technologies for controlling and detecting magnetic fields.
These technologies have broad applications to medicine, geological exploration,
and defense. This research will measure the fundamental properties of the muon
and the neutron as well as to provide exceptional training for a diverse cohort
of undergraduates, graduate students, and post-docs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will collaborate on the Fermilab Muon g-2 experiment. His primary role is to
lead the effort to measure the magnetic field because it connects the muon spin
precession frequency to the magnetic moment anomaly and the Standard Model. The
absolute He-3 magnetometer developed for the Fermilab Run-1 magnetic field
calibration chain will be improved and used for calibration of the NMR
magnetometer that transfers calibrations to all the probes in the magnetic
storage ring. The PI will collaborate on direct measurement of the magnetic
moment of the He-3 nucleus using Penning trap techniques, and will continue the
development of low-field absolute He-3 magnetometry in collaboration with
commercial partners. The electric dipole moment of the neutron will also be
measured using the world's leading ultra-cold neutron source at Los Alamos
National Laboratory. In particular, the PI will advance novel approaches to
monitoring the magnetic field using an array of magnetometers and technologies
and develop new approaches to study of systematic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.