* 2110238
* Searching for the Stochastic Gravitational Wave Background with Advanced Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Vuk Mandic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 441,973.00

This award supports research in gravitational waves data analysis and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Stochastic gravitational-wave background arises as an incoherent superposition
of many gravitational wave signals generated by uncorrelated astrophysical and
cosmological sources throughout the universe. Measuring the astrophysical
component of this background, for example due to mergers of black holes and/or
neutron stars, would provide information about how the structure in the universe
formed. Similarly, measuring the cosmological component of this background would
provide unique information about the universe when it was a fraction of a second
old, and about the physical laws that apply to very high energy scales that are
not reproducible in laboratories. This project aims to search and detect the
stochastic gravitational wave background using the upcoming Advanced LIGO,
Virgo, and Kagra data, as well as to characterize its composition and study
implications for different astrophysical and cosmological models. The project
will enable involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in frontier
research, and it will promote gravitational-wave science to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic gravitational-wave background (SGWB)
arises as an incoherent superposition of many gravitational wave signals
generated by uncorrelated astrophysical or cosmological sources throughout the
universe. This project aims to search for (and detect) the SGWB using the
upcoming aLIGO, aVirgo, and KAGRA data from the fourth observing run (O4) in
2022/23, leveraging the improved detector sensitivities expected for O4 and
deploying two search techniques. The traditional cross-correlation based search
is expected to be 10 times more sensitive than the most recent results based on
the first three observation runs, with another factor of 4 improvement expected
with the A+ detector sensitivities in 2024 and beyond. For the specific case of
the SGWB due to binary black hole mergers, the full Bayesian Search will be
developed with the potential to improve the sensitivity by ~1000 times relative
to the cross-correlation search. These searches will probe the high-redshift
distribution of the compact binary systems and provide information about their
formation and evolution. They will also constrain cosmological SGWB models, such
as inflationary, phase transitions, and cosmic (super)string models, and
therefore probe the physics of fundamental interactions at very high energies,
unachievable in laboratories. Both the cross-correlation and the Bayesian SGWB
searches will estimate the directional content of the SGWB, enabling future
studies correlating the SGWB with electromagnetic tracers of matter structure in
the universe, such as galaxy counts or gravitational lensing. In addition to
involving graduate and undergraduate students in frontier research, this project
includes a series of activities designed to bring the excitement of the
gravitational-wave science to broad communities in the Twin Cities and
Minnesota, including physics demonstrations and presentations in K-12 schools
and data analysis projects for implementation in K-12
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.