* 2110303
* NSF-BSF: Rotating Ultracold Fermi Gases in a Box
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nir Navon, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 358,114.00

The behavior of fluids in rotating containers has long been a crucial topic in
both fundamental and applied hydrodynamics, including in the study of
turbulence. When everyday – classical - fluids are slowly set in rotation, they
display a well-known progressive rotation motion. The response to rotation of
quantum fluids is strikingly different. Below a certain rotation frequency,
these fluids do not respond to the rotation of their container; if they are
rotated sufficiently fast, swirling eddies called vortices appear. Those
vortices have distinctly quantum properties, and are key to understanding the
hydrodynamics of quantum fluids. In particular, the turbulence of quantum fluids
is dominated by the interactions between vortices, and by the interactions
between excitations of vortices and sound waves. One of the main motivations in
studying turbulence in quantum fluids is that, because of the discrete well-
defined nature of quantum vortices, it is more fundamental than the more common
turbulence of classical fluids and could provide a blueprint for the
understanding of the latter. This project will tackle this topic by using gases
of ultracold atoms as quantum fluids. These gases will be trapped using boxes
made of light, carved using programmable electro-optic devices. Exploiting these
devices’ fast real-time characteristics, the ultracold gases will be set in
rotation and the nucleation of quantized vortices and the excitations of these
vortices will be studied. The ability to project nearly arbitrary “movies” on
quantum matter will herald a new stage in quantum control and provide an
additional step towards programmable quantum simulation. This project will
support the training of two graduate students to modern techniques in atomic
physics and the versatile control of quantum matter with
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uniform quantum gases have recently proven to be an
exciting new class of quantum fluids, with distinct advantages. This project
will combine these novel uniform gases and real-time control of the atom traps
to study aspects of superfluidity in textbook settings. This project will use
optical-box trapped gases to study the onset of superfluidity in strongly
interacting quantum fluids and the collective excitations of vortex filaments.
Despite extensive experimental and theoretical efforts, several fundamental
issues about superfluidity remain outstanding. One such equilibrium problem is
the relation between superfluid density, the order parameter and the condensed
fraction in a strongly interacting superfluid. A second, out of equilibrium,
example is the problem of the forces acting on a vortex. Those forces have
crucial consequences on the mutual friction between the superfluid and normal
components of quantum fluids and on the mass of a vortex. The calculation of
such forces is notably controversial. This project will investigate both the
regime of sub-critical and supercritical rotation. Off-equilibrium three-
dimensional single-vortex states will be produced and used to investigate
problems of the inertial mass of a vortex and the nature of various collective
excitations of vortex filaments. Numerical simulations of the Gross-Pitaveskii
and the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations will guide the experiments by testing
rotation protocols in optical boxes as well as mechanisms to excite and probe
the collective excitations of the vortices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.