* 2110494
* NSF RUI: Characterizing Adaptation to Heterogenous and Stressful Environments
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Karin Kram, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2025
* USD 753,010.00

This project takes advantage of experimental evolution in which organisms are
evolved in the laboratory under defined conditions. Experimental evolution has
been especially successful with microorganisms because they can grow quickly to
large population sizes, making the pace of evolution fast enough to study in
short periods of time. In this case, the bacteria are propagated under defined
but variable environmental conditions to mimic the stressors bacteria encounter
in nature. This project aims to characterize the role of gene expression in
adaptation and evolution by focusing on the role of genes that can affect
cellular behavior by regulating other genes. Mutations in regulatory genes may
be particularly advantageous for bacteria in changing environments. This work
will be performed in collaboration with undergraduate students at a Hispanic and
Minority Serving Institution where almost 90% of students are from groups
underrepresented in STEM. Further, the PI will integrate this project into an
upper-division microbiology course as an authentic research experience for 48
undergraduate students per year, and perform outreach activities related to this
project with K-12 educators. In these ways, the research will help to increase
the diversity of students entering the STEM pipeline and leave them better
prepared for roles in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in gene
regulation are a driving force for evolution. Cis regulatory elements are often
the cause of evolutionary change when comparing different species, whereas trans
regulatory elements are often altered when organisms need to adapt to changing
environments. Experimental evolution studies with microbes have begun to probe
the role of these factors, but often in unchanging environments where either
functional or cis regulatory changes would be favored. The PI will explore the
role trans regulatory elements play in adaptation to a heterogeneous environment
by first identifying each trans regulatory factor that affects survival of
Escherichia coli in long-term cultures in complex media. Then, the PI will
characterize the role of these trans regulatory factors in adaptation, by first
correlating the genotype with the transcriptome of the population to identify
gene expression changes, and determine which of those changes confer the growth
phenotype. The PI will then perform experimental evolution on mutant cells to
determine how these mutations may change the evolutionary pathways cells can use
to adapt to a heterogeneous environment. Understanding how these types of
regulatory changes affect adaptation will contribute to the fundamental
understanding of evolutionary principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
funded by the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.