* 2110263
* Algorithms and Numerical Methods for Optimization with Partial Differential Equation Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Harbir Antil, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 340,000.00

Optimization problems with constraints are ubiquitous in science and
engineering. Some examples include designing a drug delivery mechanism to
maximize the impact on cancerous cells, maximizing oil recovery from the wells,
designing new materials that can be manufactured using additive manufacturing,
and machine learning for solving inverse problems. Many of these problems are
inherently non-linear and non-smooth, which makes the development of algorithms
and their analysis extremely challenging. The project aims to create new
optimization algorithms that will overcome these challenges and that are widely
applicable. The precise target applications include, magnetic drug targeting,
quantum spin chains, harmonic maps, structure design, and solving inverse
problems using machine learning. Open-source software will be created and
collaborations with practitioners will be carried out to maximize the impact of
the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applications described above can be modeled
using partial differential equations (PDEs). These PDEs are geometric (harmonic
maps), nonlocal (fractional), multiphysics (magnetic drug delivery), multiscale
with an unknown domain, i.e., free boundary problems (FBPs). The goal of this
project is to study optimization problems with PDE constraints, i.e., PDE
constrained optimization. Specifically, it aims to create new optimization
methods based on Deep Learning and Augmented Lagrangian frameworks to solve
several currently intractable optimization problems, for instance, problems
constrained by advection dominated (also limiting transport equations) arising
in magnetic targeted drug delivery. All these problems are nonlinear, nonconvex,
and non-smooth in nature. Novel optimization algorithms will provide new
insights into nonconvex non-smooth problems. In particular for optimization
problems with state or gradient constraints, where concepts from set-valued
analysis are typically needed. The deep learning work will help create new
research directions. Cancerous cells absorb only a small amount of medicine,
magnetic drug targeting has shown to increase this absorption rate without
harming vital organs. This research will also improve our understanding of
magnetic fluids and will create mathematical understanding of control of
conservation laws. Nonlocal problems are increasingly important in science and
engineering. They lead, for instance, to better models for quantum spin chains,
cardiac electrical response, additive manufacturing (materials science), image
denoising and phase separation. Open-source software will be created. This will
not only benefit scientists in optimization, FBPs, and nonlocal problems but
also scientists in nonlinear PDEs and data science. The results will be
disseminated via a special topics course, research publications, and talks. Two
PhD students will get PhDs. Reading seminars for students will be
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.