* 2110070
* IMAGINE Collaborative Research: Linking individual variation in immunity and behavior to landscape patterns in disease risk using the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Lynn Martin, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 684,557.00

Understanding the factors that reduce infections in animals is an essential step
towards reducing human disease risk because an estimated 60% of pathogens that
infect humans can also infect animals (including the virus that causes
COVID-19). However, it is difficult to predict infectious disease risk in animal
populations because it is not understood how changes in the quality of an
animalâ€™s environment (e.g., temperature, abundance of food) may change disease
rates. This project will investigate how variation in habitat quality affects
the ecological dynamics of Lyme disease, the most common vector-borne disease in
the US, affecting the health and well-being of over 300,000 people annually.
Through a collaboration with the National Ecological Observatory Network, the
research team will measure the effects of habitat quality on the behavioral and
immune system traits of mice at 8 sites across the northeastern U.S. and develop
statistical models to link these animal data to Lyme disease risk. This project
will benefit society by improving our ability to identify the times and places
where risk of Lyme disease exposure can be minimized, directly benefitting
hundreds of thousands of people each year. Through outreach, the project will
educate the public about the factors that affect infectious disease and provide
significant opportunities for training of high-school students, undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdocs underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many behavioral and immune system traits are
sensitive to the environment. But the extent to which this variation drives
infectious disease risk in nature remains obscure. For example, although it is
known that particular rodent species are critical hosts of B. burgdorferi, the
causative agent of Lyme disease, it is unknown how the environment affects
traits that influence disease risk. This research project will leverage the
continental scale of the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) to
quantify behavioral and immunological traits of two keystone rodent hosts for B.
burgdorferi, a pathogen that affects over 300,000 people in the U.S. each year.
This project tests the hypothesis that variation in the environment couples and
decouples individual host traits, altering the abundance of competent hosts and
driving the emergence of disease hot and cold spots. This project will quantify
B. burgdorferi competence in two rodent species across 8 NEON sites over 3
years, and use statistical modeling to link individual variation in infection
susceptibility to variation in the abiotic and biotic environment and hence
variation in Lyme disease risk. The utility of this approach will be evaluated
by using these models to forecast disease prevalence as a function of current
climatic and habitat conditions at additional NEON sites in future years.
Ultimately, the project will identify how organism-environment interactions
drive the susceptibility of individual hosts to infection, and will also
identify the level(s) of biological organization (e.g., individuals,
populations, species) at which small changes have large consequences for
increased disease risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the
Symbiosis, Infection and Immunity Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and the Macrosystems Biology and NEON Enabled Science Program
in the Division of Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.