* 2110481
* Gravitational Wave Transient Astrophysics with LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Laura Cadonati, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

In the five years since the historic discovery of gravitational waves unlocked
the dawn of a new kind of astrophysics, gravitational waves have continued to
probe the cosmos and reveal some of the most obscure mysteries of the universe.
According to the theory of General Relativity, gravitational waves are tiny
oscillations of the curvature of space-time produced by the acceleration of
massive astrophysical objects, such as colliding black holes or neutron stars.
The information these waves carry is different and complementary to that of
photons, neutrinos and cosmic rays -- this is the era of multi-messenger
astrophysics. The NSF-funded Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
(LIGO) is currently the most sensitive gravitational wave-detector in the world.
Following its first discovery of gravitational waves in 2015, LIGO and its
sister project Virgo together have now detected dozens of binary black hole
collisions, and are exploring the origins and nature of black holes that were
once only theorized about. The landmark 2017 multi-messenger observation of
binary neutron star (BNS) merger GW170817 yielded a wealth of additional
discoveries, and has prompted the field to grow at an even more rapid pace. This
award supports LIGO science performed at the Georgia Institute of Technology for
the detection, characterization and astrophysical interpretation of
gravitational-wave transients in LIGO data, towards a new frontier in science
and a deeper understanding of the universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
supported by this award has a long record of contributing to mission-critical
tasks and publications of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, and will continue
to engage in core LIGO science through a combination of morphology-independent
techniques, template-based approaches, and multi-messenger strategies. The team
will enable LIGO science by developing data analysis infrastructure, studying
the impact of data quality and participating in the analysis of candidate events
using three algorithms in use by the LIGO Scientific Collaboration: BayesWave, a
model-independent code for waveform reconstruction and event characterization;
RIFT, a code for rapid parameter inference using template families and numerical
relativity waveforms; and PyGRB, for the detection of coincidences with
astrophysical events such as gamma-ray bursts. The team will also explore novel
approaches for understanding special astrophysical targets, such as neutron-star
post-merger events, black hole hyperbolic encounters, and coincidences with
neutrino events. The award will benefit from the collaboration of a synergistic
team at the Georgia Tech Center for Relativistic Astrophysics which includes
experts in computational astrophysics, cosmology, particle astrophysics,
astronomy, the college of computing, a strong outreach program in Atlanta
enhanced by the ties to the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, and a firm commitment
to diversity, equity and inclusion and the engagement of women in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.