* 2110335
* Research on Gravitational Waves and Compact Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Charles Evans, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

This award will support research on the dynamics and gravitational wave emission
of compact binary systems in general relativity. The numerous observations by
LIGO and Virgo of merging stellar mass black holes and neutron stars over the
last five years have opened up the era of gravitational wave astronomy. These
events reveal new astrophysics, including confirming the site of heavy element
formation, discovering a new class of intermediate mass black holes, and
providing novel tests of general relativity theory. These observations also
motivate development of the LISA space-based detector and raise prospects for
eventual gravitational wave observations of extreme-mass-ratio inspirals
(EMRIs). EMRIs involve a stellar-mass black hole (or neutron star or white
dwarf) spiraling into a supermassive black hole (which are known to exist in the
center of virtually all large galaxies). Surrounded by dense star clusters,
these supermassive black holes will frequently capture compact stars into highly
eccentric orbits. As these compact stars orbit, they radiate gravitational
waves, causing the orbit to decay and the compact object to eventually be
swallowed by the supermassive black hole (or potentially tidally disrupted in
the case of white dwarfs). The emitted gravitational radiation will be
observable with LISA. The theoretical work funded by this award will provide
improved predictions of the expected signals from highly-eccentric compact
merging binaries. The US is a leader in gravitational wave astronomy and these
theoretical activities support future extensions of such observations. Detection
of gravitational waves from EMRIs will provide unique strong field tests of
gravity and probe the nature of black holes, while also uncovering astrophysical
properties of the dense central regions of galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
pursue this effort, development will be made of new techniques in black hole
perturbation theory and gravitational self-force methods, along with writing
associated advanced computer codes. Symbolic mathematical calculations of black
hole perturbation theory and the gravitational self-force will be made to high
order in the post-Newtonian (PN) expansion for eccentric EMRIs. These
calculations will be extended to EMRIs with general orbits about a rotating
(Kerr) primary. These high PN order perturbation and self-force findings support
and reinforce broader efforts to advance PN theory and provide calibrations of
effective-one-body models of merging binaries. The PI's group draws upon their
experience in recent years with a fully symbolic code that was specialized to
Schwarzschild EMRIs to now write a fully symbolic code for Kerr EMRIs. Generated
gravitational wave flux and self-force data will be incorporated in adiabatic
and post-adiabatic inspiral calculations to provide accurate waveforms for much
of an EMRI's evolution. Some parts of this work will be conducted in
collaboration with former students and with colleagues at University College
Dublin. Results and some computer codes will be made available
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.