* 2110291
* Diffusion Dynamics in Disordered Quantum Lattices Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brian DeMarco, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 483,640.00

A key challenge to leveraging quantum phenomena as a foundation of next-
generation technologies is understanding how the interplay of strong inter-
particle interactions and disorder affects quantum behavior in materials. Strong
interactions are an important ingredient to a wide range of remarkable
phenomena, such as high-temperature superconductivity. Disorder is inescapable
in materials because of imperfections and contact with the environment. However,
how interactions and disorder compete or cooperate to give rise to new and
useful quantum states is not fully understood. This critical problem will be
studied by using ultracold atoms trapped in a crystal formed from light as a
model system. Controlled and precisely known disorder will be applied by
superimposing laser light consisting of randomly distributed bright and dark
regions. The influence of interactions and disorder on particle-flow quantum
dynamics will be studied. Knowledge gained from this work may lead to a better
understanding of quantum materials and new approaches to enhance their
performance. The next generation of engineers and scientists will be trained on
cutting-edge techniques in optical science, radio-frequency electronics, and
advanced computer control and signaling.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
builds on previous lattice experiments that discovered bosonic and fermionic
quantum quench dynamics and localization using Rb-87 atoms and K-40 atoms. Three
technical projects will be pursued. A modern computer control system robust to
hardware and software obsolescence will be developed in partnership with a
startup company, a high-resolution imaging system will be characterized and
deployed, and a method for isolating a plane of atoms will be implemented.
Together with stimulated Raman transitions driven by tightly focused laser
beams, these tools will be used to investigate diffusion dynamics in ultracold
lattice gases. The impact of interactions and disorder on the diffusion constant
for Rb-87 atoms will be measured for superfluid, Mott insulator, and Bose-glass
states. An open-source repository of code for generating and manipulating
ultracold lattice gases and to support external devices will be made available
to the research community. These studies will advance the state-of-the-art in
disordered quantum gases, thus enabling new methods for attacking outstanding
questions related to condensed matter physics and materials science and
enhancing knowledge of strongly correlated quantum
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.