* 2110148
* RAPID: Wintertime Hydrography of the Chukchi Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Robert Pickart, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 01/31/2022
* USD 117,429.00

Water from the Pacific Ocean enters the Arctic domain through the Bering Strait,
between the US and Russia, and subsequently flows northward across the wide and
shallow Chukchi Sea. During the winter months, the water is near the freezing
point and contains high concentrations of nutrients. As the sun returns in the
spring, these nutrients spur large phytoplankton blooms that in turn support
much of the marine life. It has recently been hypothesized that, in addition to
the remote source via the Bering Strait, nutrients can be mixed into the water
locally from the sediments of the Chukchi shelf. This happens when there are
small openings in the ice during winter that quickly re-freeze. This process
makes the surface water denser, which then sinks to the bottom and stirs up the
nutrients. From December 2020 to February 2021, the US Coast Guard Cutter Polar
Star will be conducting a mission in the Chukchi Sea, which offers a rare
opportunity to collect measurements of the water during this critical time of
the year. We propose to outfit the ship with an easy-to-use portable system
whereby expendable probes are launched twice daily to obtain profiles of
temperature and salt content. This study will reveal how and where the cold
water is being transformed. By comparing these winter data with measurements
collected the previous fall and following spring by other oceanographic
expeditions, we can better understand the role of the near-freezing winter water
in the Arctic ecosystem. The results from the Polar Star cruise will be
incorporated into an existing community outreach program that engages local
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pacific-origin winter water that flows
northward through the Bering Strait is the predominant source of nutrients that
spur the large productivity occurring each spring on the Chukchi Sea shelf.
During its transit across the shelf during the cold months of the year, the
winter water can undergo modification when subject to coastal polynyas. Recently
it has been argued that this water mass transformation also takes place in small
leads throughout the entire Chukchi shelf. If true, this has significant
consequences for the regional ecosystem, since the convective overturning can
readily reach the bottom and mix nitrate from the sediments into the water
column. The recent decision for the USCG Polar Star to conduct a mission in the
Chukchi Sea from December 2020 to February 2021 offers an extraordinary
opportunity to collect profiles during the very time that the water mass
transformation takes place. This proposal seeks funds to outfit the Polar Star
with two easy-to-use portable systems for launching temperature/salinity probes
twice daily. This will provide a rare view of winter water formation and
transformation, including the degree to which it occurs, the atmospheric
forcing, and the pathways of the newly ventilated water. Comparing the winter
data to measurements collected in the previous fall and following spring/summer
will enable us to determine the evolution and fate of the cold, high-nutrient
water and better understand its role in the regional ecosystem. The investigator
will be chief scientist on one of the summer cruises â€“ an NSF funded field
program in the Chukchi Sea in August 2021 that entails a broadscale hydrographic
survey of the shelf. As part of that effort, an outreach program will be carried
out including a PolarTREC teacher and visits to local communities. The results
from the Polar Star winter cruise will be incorporated into this outreach
program to provide a broader context for the summertime
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.