* 2111199
* Using Novel Instructional Materials to Improve Students' Detection of Pseudoscience in Decision-Making about Socially-relevant Real World Issues
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Asha Rao, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,870.00

As a result of their coursework, undergraduate students are in a unique position
to detect scientific misinformation or disinformation campaigns, often referred
to as pseudoscience. Many issues sit at the intersection of scientific knowledge
and everyday society, and these issues are particularly vulnerable to
pseudoscience. This project aims to serve the national interest of developing a
scientifically literate citizenry. It will do so by producing instructional
materials that aim to mitigate the growing influence of pseudoscience. The
instructional materials will (1) highlight the harmful impacts of pseudoscience
on decision-making, (2) promote accurate science content knowledge related to
the issue, (3) foster trust in the scientific community, and (4) improve
students' ability to detect pseudoscience. The project intends to improve the
functional scientific literacy of undergraduate students, thus preparing them to
effectively use scientific evidence and approaches in their lives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team at Texas A&amp;M University will develop
twelve sets of instructional materials that each focus on a different
socioscientific issue and contain three components: (1) a primer describing the
science that is relevant to the issue, (2) a story addressing the historical and
contemporary pseudoscience surrounding the issue, and (3) a sample case study.
The materials will be used by more than 20,000 undergraduate students in science
majors and non-majors courses at the University. The twelve socioscientific
topics have been identified by the project team to ensure a seamless fit into
existing courses in both face to face and online modalities. Knowledge generated
from this project will help to answer questions about the relationships between
student demographics, social factors, pseudoscientific views, science attitudes,
and their socioscientific related choices. The project team will explore how
exposure to the various components of the instructional materials affects
studentsâ€™ conceptions and attitudes regarding scientific evidence and
conclusions, the nature of science, and pseudoscience. Results from this project
will be freely disseminated through a newly developed website, as well as via
science education listservs and professional conferences. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.