* 2111831
* STTR Phase I:  Minimally Invasive Articulating Intubation Stylet
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Benn Horrisberger, TJB MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program (STTR) Phase I project is that it provides a critical
advancement in intubation devices and procedures, performed in both planned
surgeries and in emergency procedures. The benefits from the technology apply to
25 – 30 million annual planned and emergency intubations performed each year in
the USA alone. The technology advanced in this project will improve at least 10%
of all intubation procedures. The proposed end-product is low-cost, disposable,
and requires limited training. facilitating adoption. The technology aims to
greatly reduce the incidence of patient injuries, primarily due to loss of
airway. These improved outcomes are important to the clinics performing these
procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Program (STTR) Phase I project seeks to validate and further refine the design
of a new medical device featuring significant articulation of a
stylet/introducer. The device can quickly and intuitively maneuver through
complex anatomy into a patient’s trachea. The device design utilizes high-
precision, micro-components in a very small mechanism such that a small-diameter
endotracheal tube may pass over the device to be secured in the patient’s
trachea. This mechanism aims to reduce the total time needed for successful
intubation, to increase the rate of success on first-time attempts, to reduce
incidents of loss of oxygen, to assist in intubation in emergency settings, and
generally to reduce procedural injuries to patients. The project will entail
creating a significant number of production-quality devices for mannequin
testing. The simulation will measure reductions in procedure time and inform the
design for clinical use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.