* 2111686
* SBIR Phase I:  A mental health screening tool for youth using AI and game-based technology
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Wendy Ward, FUTURESTHRIVE LTD
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 11/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is improve pediatric mental health outcomes. An estimated twenty percent
of children suffer with a diagnosable mental health condition and half of those
will show signs and symptoms before the age of 14. Suicide is the second leading
cause of death among children aged 10+; affected children that do not receive
intervention or appropriate services grow into adults with adverse outcomes. The
proposed project develops a modern mental health screener to equip clinicians
and educate families by tracking mental health vital signs similar to height,
weight, hearing, vision and other signs of health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance a new
mental health screening tool. In a gamified, web-based platform, children aged
4-18 will engage in a dynamic question set designed to identify risk factors
known as indicators of mental health concerns. Using a novel combination of
artificial intelligence for voice and facial biomarkers, sentiment analysis and
machine learning, the screener will provide a first-of-its-kind mental health
baseline used by doctors and families to better understand the childâ€™s unique
mental health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.