* 2111424
* RAPID International Type I: Identifying Gaps, Interventions and Opportunities of International Collaboration During the Current COVID-19 Pandemic
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Manish Dixit, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,768.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has not just caused catastrophic disruptions at
the socio-economic levels but also adversely impacted international
collaboration through a complete disruption in travel, face-to-face
interactions, lab work, fieldwork, and hiring. Understanding how this pandemic
impacted international collaboration is essential to inform program
interventions and foster a more connected and resilient global research
community. This study will collect time sensitive information from domestic and
international researchers to understand major issues that may have disrupted
their research activities, changes they explored to address these issues, and
their perception on potential opportunities to facilitate international
partnerships in such adverse conditions. This data is essential to inform
current and future research programs to include international collaboration
components that strengthen the resilience, robustness, and sustainability of
international collaborations. By facilitating international research, this study
will ensure continued access to expertise, research sites, facilities and
equipment for researchers to maintain shared scientific progress to boost the
U.S. national economy, prosperity, and human health and well-being. Due to
facility shut-downs, safety issues and prescribed non-pharmaceutical
interventions, hundreds of students, mostly from underrepresented minority
groups are deprived of education and training opportunities embedded in
international research. By enabling robust and resilient global partnerships,
this study will benefit and influence a broader U.S. student population
including underrepresented minority students. The collected data will also
explain if existing technology infrastructure needs significant upgrades to
strengthen international research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;This study will
focus on three collaboration components: team dynamics, project logistics and
research operations that govern the success of international research. In a one-
year rapid response effort, we will conduct a series of virtual structured
interviews and online surveys of at least 90 active projects involving global
collaboration, identify and evaluate key issues and changes/interventions, and
create a summary matrix of gaps mapped to opportunities. The main goal is to
particularly explore the aspects of international collaboration that are
integral to its robustness, resilience, and sustainability. We will target
international collaboration projects funded by the National Science Foundation
(NSF) as well as other federal agencies and multi-country annexes of global
agencies such as the International Energy Agency (IEA). The results will offer
critical data to explain how such conditions may have impacted these components,
revealing key gaps and opportunities to provide directions for making current as
well as future international research programs more robust, resilient and
sustainable. It will also explain the changes made by the project teams and
their effectiveness to address these issues created by the pandemic. The data
analysis will further explain: (1) whether and to what extent the type of
project, geographic location and demographic attributes of project teams
moderated the impact on the robustness, resilience, and sustainability aspects
of the project; (2) if certain mechanisms inherent in research programs or
solicitations helped or worsened these aspects; and (3) whether certain project
activities were more conflicting or challenging than the others. The first-hand
data and answers to these questions will form a knowledge base for further
research and help identify the areas of improvement in international
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.