* 2111735
* STTR Phase II:  High-quality, Quick-apply Electroencephalography (EEG) for Improved Diagnosis of Brain Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Pulkit Grover, Precision Neuroscopics
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project
will produce a high‐quality, easily‐applied cap for non‐invasively measuring
brain signals from the scalp by electroencephalography (EEG). This cap will
reduce the setup time for an EEG procedure from 30 minutes to less than 5
minutes. This reduction in setup time will speed up procedures and reduce demand
on specialized EEG technicians. Many geographic regions have wait times for EEG
appointments of 4‐6 weeks; This wait will be alleviated by faster procedures and
higher throughput. Additionally, the EEG cap designed in this project will
increase accessibility of EEG to rural communities that don’t often have regular
access to these technicians. Economically, the hospitals and clinics that
perform EEG can reduce cost per procedure by reducing demand for EEG rooms and
technician time. This reduction in EEG procedure costs is a small step towards
controlling and reducing overall healthcare costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is developing EEG
platforms that will be used to explore new brain diagnostic algorithms. The
project is introducing a novel electrode material to EEG, specifically, a soft
sponge‐like material that holds water for a longer time than typical sponges,
yet conducts electricity when dry. This EEG system also uses miniature printed
circuit boards to hold amplifiers near each electrode. These circuit boards can
be reconfigured, removing electrodes over scalp regions of recent injury or
surgery. More importantly, the EEG cap resulting from this project can be scaled
up (simply by adding more electrodes) to explore very high‐density EEG and novel
algorithms for better diagnosing brain injuries and diseases. In particular,
this project will provide hardware that enables new ways of looking at epilepsy
and traumatic brain injuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.