* 2111097
* Collaborative Research: A Data-Driven Employer-Academia Partnership for Continual Computing Curricular Change
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Marisa Exter, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 632,615.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the supply of
well-prepared computer science professionals capable of addressing the needs of
American employers in the public and private sectors. This project intends to
build a national partnership between employers and academia to help identify and
mitigate gaps between the competencies of computing graduates and the
expectations of potential employers. The project will survey computer science
educators and practitioners to develop a model that defines the competencies
expected by potential employers. The project team then plans to test the model
at three institutions of higher education in Alabama â€“ the University of
Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Tuskegee University, and Shelton State Community College.
Finally, the project team intends to develop tools and methods for institutions
to identify and implement competency-based educational approaches for computer
science across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to use three
interconnected strands of evidence-based activities to institute
transformational change in the involved communities. First, a national strand
will engage U.S. faculty in developing competency-based curricula informed by
industry practitioner feedback. Second, a local pilot strand intends to create
transformative curricular change based on student competencies using an
evidence-based change model in the three Alabama institutions. Sociologists and
computing faculty on the team will help to understand, predict, and reduce
barriers to competency-based employment of computing graduates from marginalized
communities in the heart of the impoverished Alabama Black Belt. The unique
perspective relative to diversity, equity, and inclusion needs should serve as a
model for other computing departments. The third strand will develop competency-
based surveys for practitioners and academics to identify and refine specific
competencies that are hoped to drive continual curricular change. Outcomes,
including the change process, national workshops, and experiences from the local
process will help with transferability in the computing education community. In
addition to informing curricula, the project will provide valuable data for
educational researchers to help close the gap between employers and higher
education. Finally, as the competency approach to curricular design is
relatively new in computing and engineering disciplines, lessons from this
project will have the potential to transform curricular review and design in
other STEM disciplines. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.