* 2111943
* RUI:  Amplitudes in Gauge Theory and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stephen Naculich, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 135,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Stephen Naculich at
Bowdoin College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical elementary particle physics
seeks to develop mathematical models that can explain the nature and behavior of
the smallest constituents of matter (the so-called "elementary particles"). As
part of his research, Professor Naculich aims to develop more efficient
mathematical tools for calculating the predictions of existing models that
describe the behaviors of quarks and gluons, particles that are important for
understanding the strong interaction, and extending these methods to more
general theories. A second goal of this research is to explore links between
these sorts of theories and theories that describe the behavior of gravitons,
the particles responsible for the force of gravity. The insights gained through
this research will be disseminated through journal publications, seminars, and
conference proceedings. As a result, this research will advance the national
interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental
directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical laws. This project
is also expected to have significant broader impacts, since it integrally
involves participation by undergraduate students. It will therefore contribute
to their education by providing hands-on training in research methods in
theoretical physics. Such involvement will encourage and prepare highly-talented
students for graduate study and careers in critical scientific
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, this project will focus on
the structure of perturbative scattering amplitudes in gauge theories and
gravity, and the relations between them. In particular, the project will explore
the Regge (or very high energy) limit of scattering amplitudes in nonplanar
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory to all orders in the loop expansion, combining
group theory methods, explicit loop-level results, the known structure of
infrared divergences, and eikonal methods. It will also investigate, using
similar tools, the Regge limit of scattering amplitudes in gravity and
supergravity, and its connection with the two-body problem in general relativity
and gravitational wave generation. Finally, this research will involve the
continued exploration of the recently discovered "color-factor symmetry" of
tree- and loop-level gauge-theory amplitudes, and its relationship to color-
kinematic duality in general gauge theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.