* 2111625
* SBIR Phase I:  Endovascular Device for Treatment of IgG-Driven Pathological Conditions
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Neilu Golshanara, NAAMIRA BIOMEDICALS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will be a safe endovascular
detoxification device for treatment of numerous acute and chronic pathologies.
The proposed device could aid in the treatment of severe autoimmune disease
patients and organ transplant patients, and furthermore, would clear up a path
for safe use of viral gene therapy in the general population. It has the
potential to decrease mortality and reduce the burden on the global healthcare
expenditure for the widespread antibody-mediated pathological conditions. There
is a societal need for a safe, cost-effective, fast-acting, widely-accessible,
and easy-to-use system capable of rapid blood detoxification for treatment of
pathological conditions. The markets targeted by the proposed device include the
multibillion-dollar autoimmune disease, organ transplant rejection, and viral
gene therapy markets, with the largest market opportunity being the global
autoimmune disease therapeutics market that is expected to reach $153.3 billion
by 2025.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Program
(SBIR) Phase I project supports the development an endovascular blood IgG
detoxification platform for rapid elimination of IgG antibodies for treatment of
IgG-driven pathological conditions. Antibody-mediated immune response has been a
key factor responsible for numerous acute and chronic pathological conditions
including autoimmune diseases, transplant rejections, immune-mediated rejection
in viral gene therapy. Currently, therapeutic apheresis and potent systemic
immunosuppressives have been the main forms of management for IgG-driven
pathologies. However, these forms of treatments are not patient-friendly, and in
many cases do more harm than good. The proposed endovascular blood IgG
detoxification device could potentially provide safe and rapid elimination of
circulating IgGs, eliminating the need for unfavorable or in cases harmful
treatments such as therapeutic apheresis or potent systemic immunosuppressives.
The device will be comprehensively investigated in an ex vivo venous simulation
system, testing its hemocompatibility, IgG-elimination capacity, and the
influence of different parameters including rod material, rod diameter, rod
length, flow rate, and therapeutic protein concentration. Furthermore, the
safety, durability, immune response, and therapeutic efficacy of the device will
be investigated in a lethal IgG-induced immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
model in minipigs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.