* 2111634
* STTR Phase II:  Advanced Li-S Battery System for Unmanned Air Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Vilas Pol, VALGOTECH LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) project
includes reducing the US dependence on foreign-sourced materials for the
production and supply of battery systems. There are increased concerns about the
shortage of materials for lithium ion batteries (LIB) as the number of electric
vehicles increases. Lithium Sulfur (Li-S) batteries use sulfur which is more
readily available, lower cost, and environment-friendly. Li-S batteries do not
require the use of sulfuric acid or other more harmful chemicals, which allows
them to be disposed of easily or recycled. This project will advance knowledge
in addressing challenges to the development of practical and commercially viable
(Li-S) batteries. The Global Lithium-Sulfur (Li-S) Battery Market was valued at
$696 Million in 2019 and is anticipated to reach $6,686 Million by 2028, with a
CAGR of 29.6% during the forecast period. Li-S batteries are mainly used in
aviation, automotive, electronic device, and power &amp; energy sector due to
the growing demand for environmentally friendly energy with higher energy
density than other battery types. Li-S technology has potential to enhance safer
battery manufacturing in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase
II project proposes to address important technical challenges against the
development of practical Li-S batteries. These challenges include limited cycle
life, high self-discharge rates and over-heating at end of charge. These are
thought to be caused by the shuttle, where cathode species diffuse to the anode
and react directly with the metallic lithium. A system approach will be employed
to develop practical high performance Li-S Cells by focusing on: Performance
(high energy density, large temperature range, and considerable cycle life);
safety; and manufacturability. The project combines experimental and
electrochemical modeling approaches to achieve a Li-S cell with 400-600 Wh/kg;
≥200 cycles; - 20oC to 60oC @ 1C. The project will use advanced trilayer
multifunctional separator and lithium metal anode to solve the problems
associated with the shuttling effect. Simulation tools will be used to study and
optimize the design and performance of the Li-S cells. The technical objectives
for Phase 2 include the design, fabrication and characterization of
progressively larger pouch cells (from 50 mAh to 500 mAh/1000 mAh). The
development path will focus on achieving high energy density Li-S cells first
and increasing the temperature range at a reasonable number of
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.