* 2111885
* SBIR Phase II: Robotic Pavement Marking
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Samuel Bell, RoadPrintz, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,900.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to significantly reduce the number of
injuries or deaths suffered by pavement marking workers on public streets and
roads, while increasing the efficiency and lowering costs by using an operator-
driven, truck-mounted, mobile robotic pavement marking system. Robotic painting
allows workers to remain in the safety of the truck cab, protecting them from
traffic. Increased efficiency will help to minimize work zone congestion and
duration, while reduced costs will enable safer and more productive streetscapes
for the general public. Studies have repeatedly confirmed that streetscapes with
a high density of transverse marking features such as shared center turning
lanes, dedicated bike lanes with separation buffer zones, and pedestrian-
friendly crosswalks result in measurable public health benefits, enhanced
quality of life, increased commercial activity, and, counterintuitively, more
efficient traffic flow with fewer collisions. The project will also better
enable precise placement of new markings and precise overpainting of worn or
eroded markings, both important factors for connected and autonomous vehicles.
An earlier phase of the project has already resulted in enhancements to camera
calibration techniques for machine vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to build on a
successful Phase I effort to enable a commercially-viable robotic road painting
system that addresses the need to protect the lives of human workers engaged in
the dangerous task of stenciling roadway markings such as turn arrows or bike
symbols. The project may also improve the accuracy and ease of application of
markings needed to support autonomous vehicle-ready roadways. The research will
apply advanced software, machine vision, an augmented-reality user interface,
and proprietary robotic trajectory planning technologies to support
ultraprecision painting in the real-world environment while keeping human
workers safe in the cab of the operator-driven truck upon which the robot is
mounted. The solution will enable robots to paint previously unmarked pavement
and to repaint existing marks. The combined hardware and software solution will
be capable of recording all planned and completed markings in a cloud-hosted
database—an innovation that will streamline the processes. The technology will
also form a cloud-based standard for mapping and recording universal road
markings and support the ability of autonomous vehicles to operate safely. While
much of the research can initially be performed in simulation, significant real-
world testing and validation will be required as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.