* 2111638
* SBIR Phase I:  Agent-Based Identification of Constitutive Relationships from Large Manufacturing Datasets
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Branden Kappes, CONTEXTUALIZE, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,964.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve utilization of data resources. While data is an integral
part of contemporary business—used to inform strategic, technical, and financial
decisions—data collection remains federated in many fields, including
manufacturing, because logistical, practical, and strategic hurdles prevent
centralization. Consequently, these data resources quickly become isolated. No
longer FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable), the value of data
so expensive to collect is lost. The proposed technology addresses two major
concerns facing effective utilization of federated data. First, it develops a
unified interface to analyze and explore federated data, without sacrificing
control over data access. Second, it integrates machine learning with an
understanding of the physical system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
technology is a mathematically rigorous translation between neural networks and
the constitutive relationships describing the underlying physics. The two
approaches will leverage measurements of a process environment, including time,
temperature, and pressure, as well as mechanical strength or chemical
reactivity. Neural networks, which are general and easy to train, estimate
system behavior through statistical correlations, which is ideal for repetitive,
complex systems, such as manufacturing processes; but they require increasingly
large and diverse datasets to expand the conditions under which they are
reliable. In contrast, constitutive relationships, which often take years to
develop, can be used to predict how a system will behave under new conditions.
This system will integrate both approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.