* 2111063
* 3D Structure of Hadrons from Electromagnetic Probes Beyond the Leading Order of QED
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrei Afanasev, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 362,678.00

Key questions being addressed in modern nuclear science include, among others,
(i) the role of the quarks and gluons in forming nucleons (protons and neutrons)
and nuclei and (ii) fundamental symmetries governing interactions between
leptons (electrons and muons) and nucleons and nuclei. The US has made
significant investments into fundamental science and provided facilities for
nuclear research that are aimed toward finding answers to these questions. These
facilities include CEBAF at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility,
which will investigate the structure of hadrons, the set of heavy elementary
particles that includes the proton and neutron, and a future Electron-Ion
Collider planned at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The electrons used to probe
the nuclear structure are charged particles, and while scattering off nuclear
targets they inevitably emit photons or exchange extra virtual photons,
presenting a challenge in interpretation in terms of hadronic structure and
dynamics. This project aims to develop a unified approach that will consider
both high-order electromagnetic effects and the nucleon’s structure in a
theoretical description of electron scattering processes. In addition, the PI
will mentor students engaged in this research, provide public lectures, and
organize meeting with students in local high schools in Washington,
DC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance current understanding of
electromagnetic interactions of hadrons beyond the leading order in QED by
developing appropriate theoretical and modelling approaches. Novel effects will
be considered for elastic electron-nucleon scattering, deep-virtual
electroproduction of pions, semi-inclusive deep-inelastic scattering of leptons,
along with new topological states of relativistic electrons. The results of the
investigation will be discussed in relation to the physics programs at Jefferson
Lab and future Electron-Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Lab that aim to map
3D-structure of hadrons from precision electron scattering. Results of the
project will be disseminated through a user-friendly interface mirrored at
Jefferson Lab (Radiative Corrections Helpdesk) to assist nuclear physics
community in developing proper physics analysis tools. Novel solutions for
polarization-dependent cross sections of lepton scattering will be implemented
in GEANT4 toolkit through PI’s active membership in GEANT4
Collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.