* 2111511
* Experimental Studies Into The Nature of The Higgs Mechanism and Searches for New Physics with the ATLAS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kathryn Grimm, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This award will provide support to a single PI group working on the ATLAS
experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics
laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large particle
detector facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from NSF and
other agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to find the
Higgs Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model"
(SM) that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between, known
particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been successful.
The next step in the experiments is to look for evidence for physics Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the presence of the
mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of the universe. The
LHC is currently in the midst of analyzing data from Run 2, at almost twice the
energy explored earlier and with significantly increased event samples. It is
possible that evidence for BSM physics could emerge at this higher energy and
with the higher event statistics. Search for evidence of such physics is the
goal of this project along with preparation for the next data taking period
starting in late 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California State University East
Bay high energy physics group will use data collected by the ATLAS experiment to
probe the mechanism by which fundamental particles acquire mass through
electroweak symmetry breaking (EWSB) and to search for evidence of new physics.
The group will search for pairs of Higgs bosons and other exotic particles
decaying to pairs of b-quarks and pairs of tau leptons. Study of such rare
events has become more viable as the center-of-mass energy of the LHC is
increased to 13 TeV and the luminosity of the accelerator facility is steadily
increased. In parallel, upgrades of the ATLAS detector are underway which will
allow for further improvements in data recording. The Cal State East Bay group
will focus on reconstruction of particle tracks and their association with
primary collision vertices, important for the identification and measurement of
the b-quarks and tau leptons in complex particle interactions. Collaboration is
planned with the ATLAS group at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory to work
on the upgrade of the ATLAS tracking detector. This will include studies of
radiation damage to pixel detectors used close to the intense beam line at the
LHC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will bring the excitement and
study of high energy physics to Cal State East Bay, which is recognized as a
university with one of the most diverse undergraduate student enrollments in the
country. Students in the group will participate in collaborative science, data
analysis, and in instrumentation testing at the group's campus laboratories and
at SLAC and CERN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.