* 2111767
* SBIR Phase I:  Microbe-based scaffold for the generation of structured cell-based meat
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Michelle Lu, NOVEL FARMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to address challenges of animal farming through cell-based meat
production. Approximately 30% of the Earthâ€™s surface, 70% of all arable land,
and 29% of the global freshwater supply is dedicated to animal farming.
Livestock is responsible for 18% of global greenhouse gas emissions and is a
major threat to biodiversity. 70% of all antibiotics used in the United States
are used on farm animals and contributes to the emergence of antibiotic-
resistant bacteria. Cell-based meat development is estimated to generate
significant reductions in greenhouse gases and use of land, water, and energy,
as well as antibiotics in meat production. The proposed project aims to develop
novel technologies that will accelerate cell-based meat
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project develops a novel
scaffolding material for the generation of animal tissue, specifically skeletal
muscle. The proposed project will ultimately advance current scientific
knowledge on the mechanisms underlying tissue generation and elucidate the
molecular principles governing cell adhesion, differentiation, and growth of
animal cells during tissue development. Key technical objectives include
demonstrating that the proposed scaffold can be successfully customized to
harbor any cell adhesion molecule of interest, and proving that a novel
biomaterial can be adapted as a tissue-culture-grade reagent. Fluorescence
microscopy will be used to ascertain the extent of animal cell adhesion and
growth on the proposed scaffold. These studies will advance understanding of
animal cell interactions with their extracellular milieu, and how environmental
molecular properties and cues are tuned to influence de novo tissue development
in vitro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.