* 2111673
* Research in String Theory and Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sumit Das, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Sumit R. Das at the
University of Kentucky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Mechanics describes all
known phenomena in the microscopic world of atoms, nuclei, and elementary
particles. General Relativity is the theory of gravity: it describes
gravitational phenomena in the macroscopic world, all the way from terrestrial
to astronomical scales. To obtain a coherent all-encompassing physical theory it
is necessary to combine these two sets of laws in a logically consistent
fashion. However, construction of such a consistent framework remains one of the
most important unsolved foundational problems in contemporary physics. This
project aims to address several issues which arise when one tries to combine
Quantum Mechanics and General Relativity, using new insights which have been
recently gained in both these areas. One key ingredient which will be used is
"quantum entanglement" --- a property of quantum mechanics which explains why
measurements made at places which are far from each other can be correlated in a
precise fashion. Quantum entanglement is at the heart of a variety of physical
phenomena observed in nature and is one of the basic principles used in the
construction of quantum computers. Consequently, results of this research will
serve the national interest by advancing fundamental science in the US. This is
the main intellectual merit of this project. The PI will also involve graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars in this research, thus providing them
valuable training necessary to develop into independent scientists and
educators. In addition, the results of this research will be used to enhance
classroom education both at the graduate and undergraduate levels. The PI also
plans to give public talks about this subject in various forums, and to deliver
lectures at the “Osher Lifelong Learning Institute” which offers courses and
enrichment programs to members of the community. The PI also plans to engage in
“Science for Everyone, KY” which is an outreach program based in Lexington with
an aim to increase scientific awareness in the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Das will study
aspects of the Holographic Correspondence which relates gravitational theories
to non-gravitational theories in a lower number of space-time dimensions. This
implies that space itself is an emergent concept. Furthermore, it is becoming
increasingly clear that quantum entanglement plays a key role in this emergence.
The projects that will be pursued have three main goals. The first is to explore
recently developed notions of entanglement in the field space in quantum field
theories, and its relationship to notions of entanglement between spatial
regions in their gravitational duals. This will be done in known examples of the
holographic correspondence which appear in String Theory. The second goal is to
find the detailed holographic map in a class of exactly solvable models which
are dual descriptions of black holes. The third goal is to apply the concepts
and methods developed to learn about entanglement properties of many-body
systems which appear in diverse areas of physics. The results of this research
will throw light on the origins of the holographic correspondence and the
process in which the internal degrees of freedom of field theories metamorphose
into additional dimensions in space-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.