* 2111549
* Using Constructive Mathematics Pathways to Advance Preservice Elementary Teachers’ Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Jia He, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,999,918.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving mathematics
content courses for preservice elementary teachers (PSETs) to advance their 21st
Century workforce skills as future teachers. Through integrating an innovative
ACE (Apply, Connect, Experience) model, this IUSE Engaged Student Learning Level
3 project will engage PSETs in (1) applying learned knowledge and skills to the
practice of teaching; (2) connecting crosscutting concepts through STEM
inquiries and practices; and (3) experiencing community-based experiential
learning through facilitating STEM inquiries. This project will develop and
implement the ACE model in mathematics courses at four institutions which is
representative of a wide range of US institutions where advances in PSET
preparation is needed. The ACE model will offer the experiences that link PSETs’
mathematics learning, civic engagement, and professional skills for teaching.
This project will assess the impact of ACE mathematics courses on diverse PSETs,
elementary school students, and undergraduate mathematics course instructors.
New knowledge developed from the project will build research-based evidence
regarding effective course design that empowers diverse PSETs in applying
mathematics in STEM inquiries and developing pedagogical content knowledge in
contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage more than 900 PSETs in
STEM learning through implementing the ACE model into four PSET geometry and
measurement courses across four institutions, Boise State University, Augusta
University, University of Texas at San Antonio, and Kapi’olani Community
College, all minority-serving institutions. These PSETs will interact and impact
over 1800 diverse elementary school students attending afterschool programs. The
implementation of the ACE model will produce six integrated-mathematics enhanced
STEM modules and related co-curricular materials and build a sustainable
community of practices for teacher educators to promote elementary STEM
education. New knowledge developed from the project will build research-based
evidence regarding effective course design in engaging PSET learning. Data
collection will follow a mixed-methods approach while using online and paper
surveys, focus groups, structured interviews, and collection of other documents.
An important part of the research conducted throughout the project is the
feedback loop of data, analysis, and updates and implementation. The findings
will also help build a knowledge base for sustainable collaborations among STEM
disciplinary experts, scientists, and STEM education practitioners to improve
STEM instructional practices, and to bridge research, practice and learning.
Additionally, this project will create sustainable capacities for STEM outreach
programs via community engagement of PSETs to serve high-needs students in the
local community. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. The Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for this IUSE:
EHR project to support the project's preservice teacher preparation goals, which
are well-aligned with Noyce Program goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.