* 2111847
* SBIR Phase I:  An immersive virtual reality platform for remote physical therapy and monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Aviv Elor, IMMERGO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to investigate the research and development
of an intelligent, immersive, virtual reality (VR) platform for remote physical
therapy and patient monitoring. This innovation enhances biomechanical analysis
to facilitate telerehabilitation through off-the-shelf consumer VR head-mounted
displays in patient homes and clinics, effectively providing a means for in-
patient success metrics and full-body exercise guidance using a centralized,
remote virtual platform. Such technology may have the ability to enable greater
affordability, accessibility, and accuracy of physical therapy for patients and
therapists alike. Patient throughput could potentially be doubled through remote
visits in virtual environments and automated physical health documentation. In
addition, the platform will be designed to support therapists working in
marginalized communities of "medical deserts," where patients are uninsured and
care is significantly limited by hospital capacity, physical distance, doctors
per population, and cost. This software-as-a-service immersive physical therapy
platform may reach a projected annual revenue of $2.08M USD. With remote tools
and predictive physical therapy analytics, more individuals will receive access
to treatment regardless of their socio-economic and demographic
background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will provide an immersive virtual reality environment where
therapists can meet their patient in a 3D virtual clinic and use the platform's
tools to aid in patient evaluation. This technology addresses the shortcomings
of widely used current telehealth platforms (most often videoconferencing) where
therapists find it difficult to perform common evaluations such as movement
abilities and balance coordination tests. The goal of this project is to build
an updated machine learning algorithm with integration on the virtual platform
to enable therapists to remotely evaluate their patients with high accuracy
biomechanical metrics. The goal is to achieve remote rehabilitation of patients
that is comparable to that of in-person patient rehabilitation. In addition,
pilot research will be performed with healthcare organizations to assess this
technology in providing patient success metrics and exercise interaction through
commercial head-mounted display virtual reality systems. This technology has the
potential to positively change a consumer's physical therapy experience by
significantly reducing traditional clinical and insurance costs, enabling remote
access for populations of low-socioeconomic backgrounds, alleviating discomfort
for patients, and increasing remote recovery insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.