* 2111738
* Observational Signatures of Cosmic Strings
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ken Olum, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 60,000.00

This award funds some of the research activities of Professor Ken D. Olum at
Tufts University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cosmic strings are microscopically thin
or even fundamental objects of cosmological length, which may or may not exist
in our universe. Detection of cosmic strings would provide a window into
fundamental physics at energies beyond the reach of any accelerator. Observation
of a cosmic superstring network could provide a confirmation of the correctness
of string theory, which is our current best theory for unifying the physics of
gravity with the physics that governs the subatomic world. The best hope for
discovering a cosmic string network is through observation of gravitational
waves. The North American Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves
(NANOGrav) has detected a signal that is likely be the first sign of a
gravitational wave background formed by many sources throughout the universe.
These sources could be pairs of giant black holes in the centers of galaxies,
but they could also be cosmic string loops. Professor Olum will study the
gravitational waves that would be emitted by cosmic strings and compare them
with current and forthcoming NANOGrav observations. Professor Olum will also
involve graduate students in this work and thereby train future generations of
research physicists --- an activity which is in the national interest. The work
will further connect studies of the universe with studies of the fundamental
laws of nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Olum will
simulate the evolution of cosmic string loops under the effects of gravitational
self-interaction to see how their shapes and their gravitational wave spectra
change over time. He will use a realistic population of cosmic string loops
taken from his previous cosmic string network simulations. By combining the
spectra from these loops, he will generate a gravitational wave background
spectrum to be expected from cosmic strings and compare it with pulsar timing
observations from the NANOGrav collaboration, of which he is a member. He will
also study the velocities acquired by loops in reaction to anisotropic
gravitational wave emission, the so-called "rocket effect", which is important
for determining the degree of clustering of cosmic string loops in galaxies, and
thus their potential observability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.