* 2111915
* SBIR Phase II: Advanced Artificial Intelligence for Robotic E-Commerce Pick-and-Pack Automation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jeffrey Mahler, Ambi Robotics, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2024
* USD 972,586.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve the resiliency of the supply
chain by implementing flexible robotic systems for materials handling. The
robotic systems that are controlled by artificial intelligence. E-commerce sales
are increasing 20% year over year. During the COVID-19 pandemic additional
retail volume shifted online and many customers became accustomed to sourcing
essentials using e-commerce. This shift has put a greater burden on asupply
chain infrastructure that has traditionally relied on human labor to pick, sort,
pack, and process items for delivery. These manual processes are monotonous,
error-prone, and sometimes dangerous, have extremely high worker turnover. The
automation of these processes elevates worker roles and brings greater
consistency to the processes. The innovation developed during this Phase II
project may enable broader automation of complex materials handling processes by
creating novel training systems for artificial intelligence-enabled robotic
systems that are configured specifically for individual customer needs. This
innovation may increase US supply chain resilience, enabling citizens to rapidly
and reliably obtain necessities such as food, medicine, and health supplies
without needing to leave their homes. The commercial opportunity is large, with
over $20B spent on US pick and pack wages annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to develop new
methods for rapidly training artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled robotic
systems built for object identification and manipulation. Warehouse object
manipulation tasks are variable and automating them often requires custom
solutions for each customer and facility. These custom solutions are often
prohibitively expensive. To solve these problems, an industrial operating system
that can be deployed across many configurations of materials handling processes
is required. This project aims to develop modules critical to scaling commercial
deployments, such as quality control vision systems, automated assessments of
item pickability, and enhanced AI systems for robotic picking. The anticipated
result of this project is an industrial AI-enabled robotic operating system that
allows rapid configuration of robotic systems to implement highly-optimized
processes for picking and packing individual items in e-commerce
logistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.