* 2111138
* Developing Students' Problem-Solving Skills in Introductory Undergraduate Physics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* N. Sanjay Rebello, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping students develop
superior problem-solving skills in introductory undergraduate physics courses.
Problem-solving skills are critical for the 21st century workforce, and those
skills are often emphasized in STEM courses. Instructors search for new
strategies to promote the development of problem-solving skills. In this
project, the investigators will develop and test strategies that integrate two
proven pedagogical practices -- retrieval practice and scientific argumentation
-- to improve problem-solving in the introductory calculus-based physics course
that is usually taken by students who intend to become scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop instructional
modules and materials that will be deployed in face-to-face and online classes
in three different settings: a large land-grant university (Purdue University in
Indiana); a small, private liberal arts college (Lawrence University in
Wisconsin); and a mid-sized, regional public university (Jacksonville State
University in Alabama). The project team will also prepare a group of
teaching/learning assistants to facilitate students' learning using the modules
and materials. The major objectives are (1) to design interventions that
integrate retrieval practice and scientific argumentation during problem-solving
in physics using structured and semi-structured problem tasks; (2) to implement
these interventions in both face-to-face (traditional and studio) and online
learning environments at three different institutions; and (3) to assess the
impact of the interventions on students' conceptual understanding, performance
on quizzes and exams, and problem-solving expertise. The investigators will
address research questions such as the following: (1) What strategies do the
teaching/learning assistants utilize to facilitate the implementation of the new
strategies in the classroom? (2) How can novel structured and semi-structured
problem tasks be effectively used in introductory STEM courses, which typically
use only well-structured, end-of-chapter problems? (3) To what extent do the new
instructional strategies facilitate students' conceptual knowledge and problem-
solving skills in physics? (4) How do the interventions impact students'
attitudes toward learning physics and their retention in STEM? The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.