* 2111229
* High Energy Physics Research at the CMS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Ia Iashvili, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,709,996.00

The Standard Model of particle physics has been a successful theory, agreeing
with decades of experimental observations involving weak, electromagnetic, and
strong interactions. The discovery of the Higgs boson at the LHC was further
confirmation of this success. However, the Standard Model remains an incomplete
theory. The precise measurements of the properties of the Higgs boson at the LHC
could provide insight into new physics beyond the Standard Model. This research
focuses on exploiting the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) to search for new particles, study the decay of Higgs
bosons, carry out precision measurements of other Standard Model (SM) processes,
use jet substructure to reconstruct high-momentum objects, and extend the
capabilities of the CMS particle-tracking detector to increase its acceptance
and tolerance to high collision rates. The research activity will also foster
collaboration with high school teachers and students through the QuarkNet and
Science Olympiad outreach efforts, and foster female participation in STEM
disciplines through the university's Women in Science and Engineering
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will search for subtle signatures
of Beyond Standard Model (BSM) physics using advanced methods for identifying
rare signals and addressing systematic uncertainties. These include detailed
studies of the properties of the Higgs boson, extending the search program for
BSM physics, and systematically improving techniques to maximize the physics
potential. This research will also extend the capabilities of the CMS tracking
detector to handle conditions at the High Luminosity LHC, extend its geometric
coverage, and add tracking information to the far-forward particle flow
algorithm. In addition, studies will be performed on the properties of highly
Lorentz-boosted SM Higgs bosons decaying to bottom quark-antiquark pairs to
fully explore the Higgs coupling to quarks, as well as to search for new
phenomena in unexplored signatures at higher masses, such as new heavy vector
bosons. This program will also develop and maintain object reconstruction for
heavy- and light-flavor jets, as well as perform measurements of SM physics
processes including production of W/Z/gamma in association with heavy flavor
jets, and detailed understanding of the quantum chromodynamic evolution of
jets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.