* 2111581
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel small-scale wave energy converter for marine equipment or emergency devices
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,11/30/2021
* Mark Supal, ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2021
* USD 165,637.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to power technology used in the ocean: hurricane hunters, smart
buoys, weather stations, ocean internet hubs, and unmanned underwater vehicles
The project aims to create a low-cost, small-scale Wave Energy Converter (WEC)
that can generate electrical energy from ocean wave motion and power nearby
equipment. Unfortunately, solar panels don’t operate in low light and consume a
lot of area, and wind turbines are difficult to install and stabilize on the
sea. A study will be conducted to determine how to maximize the energy output of
the WEC at varying wave conditions in a controlled wave tank and compared
against simulation results. An accurate mathematical model will be constructed
and used to guide the development of the product. The WEC product can be used by
emergency relief teams to power radios or cell phones. It can power ocean
instruments collecting weather data and tracking incoming hurricanes, as well as
equipment at sea used to monitor and protect our nation’s coastlines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop an innovative and
compact Wave Energy Converter (WEC) that can offer small-scale power for oceanic
instruments, emergency equipment or consumer electronics. The innovation uses a
custom arrangement of gears to amplify small wave movements into rotational
energy used to power an electrical generator. A computer algorithm and actuators
will tune point absorbing arms to the frequencies and amplitudes of ocean waves
by modifying mechanical properties of the machine. The WEC has symmetrically
spaced point absorbing arms positioned circumferentially that allow the machine
to capture wave energy from any direction. The size of the WEC fits within the
limits of a laboratory wave tank where the performance of the machine can be
maximized for power output. The machine will be analyzed with the Design of
Experiments (DoE) approach which efficiently resolves factor interactions. The
factors are the number of point absorbers, length of the absorbers, the buoyancy
of the absorbers, and their masses. A mathematical model of the device will be
created, adjusted to match actual performance, and used to further develop the
product. The technical challenge is to produce roughly 10 watts of power in a
package about the size and weight of an adult.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.