* 2111998
* CQIS: Quantum Chaos and Quantum Gravity from Entanglement
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Xiaoliang Qi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

A counter-intuitive feature of quantum mechanics is that two particles far away
can have quantum entanglement, which is a kind of nonlocal correlation that is
stronger than anything possibly allowed by classical mechanics. Einstein
famously described quantum entanglement as “spooky action at a distance”.
Another fundamental question in physics is the origin of gravity. According to
Einstein’s general relativity, matter and energy distort the spacetime in a
similar way as how pushing with a finger deforms a balloon. Despite the
remarkable success of the Einstein theory, it does not tell us why our spacetime
“balloon” behaves this way, and how to describe it using quantum mechanics.
Surprisingly, these two fundamental open questions---quantum entanglement and
quantum gravity---could be two sides of one coin. Roughly speaking, the idea is
that quantum entanglement is the fiber that forms the spacetime geometry. Having
more quantum entanglement between two regions will make them closer to each
other in space. From this point of view, it is natural that matter affects
geometry, since the dynamics of matter leads to evolution of quantum
entanglement. A lot of evidence has been found to support this idea, but the
general theory behind this duality between entanglement and gravity has not been
developed. The goal of this project is to advance the understanding to the
connection between quantum entanglement and quantum gravity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the PI plans to study the entanglement-
gravity correspondence in two directions. The first direction is to apply
quantum information theory to gain new understanding to quantum gravity. While
it remains unknown how to build a complete theory of quantum gravity, there are
toy models which demonstrate some feature of this correspondence while still
being simple enough for concrete calculations. The PI plans to use such toy
models including the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model and random tensor network models to
study black hole interior physics. Black holes are simple examples of spacetime
geometry with a strong gravity effect. The fate of information falling into a
black hole is a concrete problem that is beyond general relativity. The goal of
this project is to have a more microscopic understanding of how to describe the
spacetime geometry in the interior of the black hole, and how to retrieve
information in the interior from outside. The second direction of this project
is to use the entanglement-gravity correspondence to study new questions in
quantum information theory. For example, how to define and probe the causal
structure in a general quantum many-body system? How to measure the complexity
of quantum dynamics? How can quantum computers help in learning physical
properties of a quantum system? A combination of quantum information theory
tools and insights from gravity theory brings new ways to address such
fundamental questions, which will be studied in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.