* 2111353
* I-Corps: Chemical-Free Advanced Oxidation Water Treatment System
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kevin McPeak, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a chemical-free, ultraviolet (UV) light-driven water treatment
system for the water re-use market. The cost of implementing UV light-driven
water disinfection is often a barrier to its utilization on smaller scales or in
more vulnerable communities. By improving the affordability of UV light-driven
advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), it may be possible to implement this
technology in developing communities, especially for the disinfection of
parasites like Cryptosporidium and Giardia, which pose a significant public
health threat. By replacing chlorine-based oxidants, the proposed device may
reduce harmful disinfection byproducts such as trihalomethanes (THMs). Research
suggests that consuming THMs in drinking water may elevate the risk of certain
cancers and result in adverse reproductive outcomes. More comprehensive
implementation of UV-AOPs also may lead to the degradation of many emerging
contaminants, including 1,4-dioxane, antibiotics, endocrine disruptors, and
(potentially) SARS-CoV-2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of an immobilized photocatalyst with a high effective surface
area, low mass transport limitations, deep UV penetration, and long-term
chemical, mechanical, and thermal stability. The proposed technology has been
implemented in a proof-of-concept reactor and shows that the technology will
degrade various chemical contaminants under UV light illumination in a matter of
seconds. The primary figure of merit for judging the economic viability of UV
AOPs is the electrical energy per unit order (EE/O), i.e., the amount of
electrical energy required to reduce the concentration of a target pathogen or
chemical contaminant by one order of magnitude (90%). While EE/O is largely
dependent on the water quality, target contaminant, and reactor design, UV light
disinfection systems with EE/O values below 10 kWh/m3 are generally considered
commercially viable. The proposed technology can achieve an EE/O for a model
contaminant (Rhodamine B) of &lt;0.6 kWh/m3 for several days without a drop in
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.