* 2111556
* Data Acquisition and Analysis for the MUonE Pilot Run
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kristian Hahn, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2024
* USD 447,312.00

Since the discovery of the Higgs boson at CERN in 2012, the attention of the
scientific community has turned to discovering Beyond the Standard Model (BSM)
physics. The LHC experiments so far have not had a definitive BSM discovery,
focusing the community beyond Collider Experiments. One such experiment is the
muon g-2 measurement, which measures the intrinsic magnetic moments of the muon.
The magnetic moment of the muon shows hints of BSM as announced recently at the
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory. One of the limitations of that experiment
is the theoretical uncertainties in the hadronic coupling of the muon. This
award means to correct that by direct measurement of the muon anomalous magnetic
moment through muon-electron elastic scattering. This measurement in the CERN
150 GeV muon beam will use hardware being developed for the CMS experiment
upgrade. The project will allow direct involvement of students and early-career
post docs in all phases of the experiment, contributing to the development of
the future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the necessary precision,
sophisticated silicon sensors and readout electronics being developed for the
High Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) upgrade will be used to make precise vertex and
angular track resolution measurements to allow the measurement of the anomalous
magnetic moment and, in particular, how this magnetic moment varies with
transverse energy transfer in the muon-electron scattering. This could reduce
the overall uncertainty that currently limits the interpretation of the FNAL g-2
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.