* 2111226
* Searching for New Physics in the High Luminosity Era at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Hayden, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all the elementary particles known at the time into a hierarchy
of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this model to date
was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC). However, the Standard Model as it currently exists leaves open many
questions about the universe, including such fundamental questions as to why the
Higgs mass has the value it has. One of the goals of the ATLAS experiment at the
Large Hadron Collider, which remains the premier Energy Frontier particle
accelerator, operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva Switzerland, is to
discover new physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM). This award will contribute
to the potential discoveries of BSM in three main categories: 1) maintain the
on-going operations of the ATLAS detector, including the trigger system, as well
as work on the proposed upgrade to the detector over the next three years, 2)
contribute physics analysis to both Standard Model physics (in order to be able
to recognize BSM physics) and searches for new particles which directly reveal
BSM physics, and 3) contribute to education and outreach efforts to explain BSM
physics to non-scientists including elementary students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to the Michigan State University targets
physics studies under the general category of searches for new vector bosons.
The study will search for new heavy bosons predicted in many BSM physics models.
A discovery of any of these bosons would be truly transformative. In addition,
work will include improved studies on the Standard Model, reducing theoretical
uncertainties by making precision measurements of cross sections in lepton decay
channels at the LHC energies. Members of the MSU high energy physics group have
traditionally had a strong involvement in education and outreach, and the group
has been especially innovative in informal education. This award will contribute
to the creation of a “virtual reality” experience that will allow the general
public to visualize LHC physics events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.