* 2111679
* CIF: Small: Novel biologically inspired methods for analyzing multilayer networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Tamer Kahveci, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 09/30/2023
* USD 331,244.00

Complex systems are often organized as multiple networks of interactions, where
different characteristics such as interaction mechanisms or external
perturbations govern the topology of each network. Civil infrastructures, social
networks, producer/consumer/retailer networks are just a few examples to these
systems. Each network in such a system shows how entities interact with each
other under certain premises and conditions, while the interactions across
different networks show how different conditions affect the entire system. The
investigator calls such complex systems multilayer networks. To understand how
these systems work, it is of utmost importance to consider the entire system of
networks holistically, rather than each network at different layers
independently as they collectively describe the functionality of the underlying
system. The main objective of this project is to develop the fundamental tools
needed to study multilayer networks, which requires creation of novel
computational techniques for motif identification and comparative analysis of
such networks. Biological networks, such as cellular networks, are naturally
organized in multiple layers, where each layer describes the interaction
topology among a set of molecules under a unique set of restrictions, such as
external or internal stress condition, cell type, developmental stage, and
interaction type. Thus, using biological systems as a network model provides
opportunities to describe and study complex network
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational analysis of interactions among
different molecules organized as a biological network is a computationally
interesting and difficult problem. Studying collections of such networks through
multilayer networks introduces further challenges as (i) the interaction
topologies as well as the interaction types among molecules may vary across
different layers, and (ii) networks at different layers of a multilayer network
may interact as they may share some molecules or the molecules at different
layers may affect each other. Following from these observations, the PI is
tackling the below two goals to achieve the main objective. (1) Identify
building blocks in multilayer networks. (2) Develop tools for comparative
analysis of multilayer networks. Both motif identification and comparative
network analysis problems for classical single layer networks have been
considered in the literature for over a decade. There are however very limited
studies which address these challenges for complex multilayer systems. The
methods developed in this project are combining and extending the theory and the
algorithms for fundamental graph theory, computational biology, bioinformatics,
and machine learning to achieve these objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.