* 2111821
* SBIR Phase I:  Nonlinear optical method for identifying protein-ligand binding sites
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Joshua Salafsky, PROTEIN ENGINES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop a technique that can reveal where precisely a small
molecule, such as a potential drug, interacts with a protein on its surface.
Proteins, particularly when mutated, are among the most frequent drivers of
human disease. Drugs exert their effects by binding to the surface of a disease-
causing protein and turning off the protein or otherwise changing its shape,
which is critical for a protein’s function, so that the disease process is
ameliorated or even halted. To develop effective drugs, a key piece of
information is how and where on the surface precisely a small molecule binds to
its target protein. This information is often challenging to obtain using
conventional techniques such as X-ray crystallography or nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR). This project will develop a technique that could be used
broadly for drug discovery.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Phase I project aims to
develop a technique using a nonlinear optical method to identify the binding
location of a small molecule on the surface of two cancer-causing proteins. Two
proteins with small molecule ligands will be used to demonstrate feasibility of
the technique, for which X-ray co-structures exist, providing a means to
benchmark the findings of the proposed technique. The proposed technique will be
based on a nonlinear optical technique that is sensitive to protein structure
and ligand-induced conformational changes. The proteins will be labeled and
detected by the optical technique, enabling measurements which will be analyzed
to determine a ligand’s binding site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.