* 2111278
* Collaborative Research: Particles and Proxies for Sampling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Gideon Simpson, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,687.00

This project addresses sampling in high dimensions which is important for a
variety of disciplines, including computational chemistry, materials science,
and molecular dynamics simulations for climate models, power network, traffic
models, or the study of viruses and pandemics. The project will develop new
simulation algorithms as well as improvements of existing algorithms. The
outcomes will benefit these disciplines in several ways. First, the algorithmic
optimizations will provide new tools that practitioners could use to accelerate
their computations. Second, rigorous results on these methods will provide
practitioners with confidence in their predictions. Finally, open source
software will be developed. Students will be involved and receive
interdisciplinary training.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
challenges in sampling and related problems arising from complex energy
landscapes such as in potential energy in an atomistic system; the negative log-
likelihood in a Bayesian inference problem; or the loss function in a machine
learning problem. In Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods, these landscapes often
define the evolution of a Markov chain that samples some target distribution.
This project will develop efficient computations of ergodic averages over Markov
chains and methods that reduce the computational cost of ergodic averages, by
either reducing the number of required iterations or reducing the per-iterate
cost. The new techniques and analyses will be based on proxy landscapes and
interacting particle systems. Proxies can reduce per-iterate cost or lead to
faster convergence, while interacting particle systems can reduce the bias from
proxies or cut down on variance. The project includes a study of how parameter
choices affect the variance of the weighted ensemble particle method at finite
particle number; the development of a weight-corrected particle system to
account for bias from proxies; and an analysis of methods for overcoming
sampling difficulties associated with rough
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.