* 2111039
* Collaborative Research: Lab-Data-Enabled Modeling, Numerical Methods, and Validation for a Three-Dimensional Interface Inverse Problem for Plasma-Material Interactions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Daoru Han, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 169,156.00

Plasma-material interactions play a crucial role in many science and engineering
applications, including nanoparticle synthesis, soot formation in combustion,
and space science. This collaborative project will advance the state of the art
of computational plasma science and engineering, and applications related to
plasma-material interactions. It will also prepare the next generation of
researchers for the era of exascale computing on modern and future
supercomputing platforms. This project provides undergraduate and graduate
students valuable training opportunities in data-enabled modeling, development
of numerical methods and code packages, mathematical analysis, and engineering
applications. They will gain a solid foundation in computational math and data
science, valuable research experience, and extensive collaboration experience
with mathematicians and engineers. Starting from this collaborative work, the
investigators plan to disseminate the proposed model, methods, and code packages
to more engineers and scientists for solving their problems, present the work in
professional conferences and colloquia, and organize special sessions in
conferences for related works. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Particle-In-Cell
(PIC) method for plasma simulation involving materials, the electric potential
is governed by the second-order elliptic interface problem with discontinuous
dielectric coefficients and non-homogeneous flux jumps. Immersed finite element
(IFE) methods are a class of accurate and efficient numerical methods for
solving interface problems on structured meshes, which are desirable in PIC
method because of the efficient particle-mesh interactions. However, in
simulations involving conductors, one usually only knows the total electric
charge quantity on the conductor surface, not the surface charge density, which
is necessary for solving the second-order elliptic interface equation.
Therefore, this project will start from the modeling for an inverse interface
problem to identify the surface charge density based on the lab experiment data.
According to the lab data availability, different mathematical considerations of
the data in the cost functionals will lead to various adjoint problems. Then
efficient iterative algorithms based on IFEs will be developed to solve the
inverse problem. The key techniques to improve the IFE solver include new
trilinear IFE basis functions, a partially penalized scheme, realistic interface
shapes, and adaptive mesh refinement based on a posteriori error estimates. The
numerical results will be compared with the corresponding lab experiment
results. Finally, the developed model and method will be incorporated into PIC
simulations of the charging of lunar landers/rovers/habitats and dusts under
solar wind plasma conditions for lunar exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.