* 2111294
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Project-Based Learning in Undergraduate Software Engineering Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Rodrigo Spinola, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 231,365.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the use of
evidence-based teaching practices in undergraduate computer science curricula.
One such practice is project-based learning, which gives students opportunities
to learn as they work on authentic real-world problems. Project-based learning,
and other active learning practices, have been shown to increase student
motivation and engagement, raise exam performance, and reduce failure rates. A
major barrier to implementing project-based learning in the classroom is that
instructors must provide students with the support they need to be successful
learners as they complete project tasks. Without that support, students can get
bogged down performing unessential tasks instead of learning the targeted
concepts and skills. This project aims to increase the use of project-based
learning in software engineering courses. To do so, the project will design,
develop, and evaluate a reference software engineering course with a repository
of twelve ready-to-use projects and associated active learning activities. These
resources will enable instructors to easily assign project tasks for students to
complete at home. It is anticipated that these resources will increase the
capacity of instructors to effectively use project-based learning in their
courses. In addition, project-based learning can help students prepare for
industry careers by providing learning experiences that are like the work that
software engineers do.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project
is to increase student learning by encouraging and facilitating authentic
computer science learning experiences. Data for formative evaluation of the
developed project-based learning resources will be gathered through advisory
board reviews, undergraduate beta testing, and in-house classroom trials. Field
tests at multiple volunteer sites will assess the feasibility of implementing
the project-based learning resources in college or university settings. Finally,
a pilot study will be performed to assess the promise of the developed materials
to improve student learning outcomes. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. This project is in the Engaged Student Learning track, through
which the IUSE program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of
promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.