* 2111688
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Frontier: Computation-Aware Algorithmic Design for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Murat Arcak, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,122,019.00

This project explores a new vision of cyber-physical systems (CPSs) in which
computing power and control methods are jointly considered. The approach is
carried out through exploration of new theories for the modeling, analysis, and
design of CPSs that operate under computational constraints. The tight coupling
between computation, communication, and control pervades the design and
application of CPSs. Due to the complexity of such systems, advanced design
procedures that cope with the variability and uncertainty introduced by
computing resources are mandatory, though the design choices are across many
disciplines, which may result in over-design of a system. The project will have
significant impact through the reduction in design and development time for
complex cyber physical systems including ground, air, and maritime
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovative research plan will
advance the knowledge on modeling, analysis, and design of high-performance CPSs
operating under computational constraints. By combining key expertise from
hardware architecture, real-time systems, nonlinear control, hybrid systems, and
optimization algorithms, the developed CPSs will execute algorithms that adapt
to the platforms they operate in and to the environment they are deployed on.
Additionally, the new platforms to emerge from this project may adapt to the
algorithms, through reallocation of resources and self-adaptation/augmentation
at runtime, by learning the main features of the platform (e.g., execution time,
memory footprint, and power consumption) and of the physics (e.g., dynamics,
actuation, sensing). This project will also generate tools to automatically
design, synthesize, and implement feedback control algorithms that are
compatible with both the physics and the computing platforms in the CPSs. Tools
will be validated experimentally in intelligent transportation applications,
including real-world ground, aerial, and marine autonomous vehicles, both in-
house and in collaboration with our academic and industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project stem from the
potential to enable a new generation of transportation systems that improve the
reliability and security of autonomous systems. The research in this project
significantly addresses the growing carbon footprint challenge through
efficiencies in computational CPS infrastructure, optimization of routes, and by
increasing the utilization of autonomous systems. Industry partners may deploy
enhanced safety and performance innovations on legacy vehicles, diversify
hardware applications, and expand future technologies. Additional efforts in
mentoring and undergraduate research are focused on Broadening Participation in
Computing, with the goal to empower a new generation of researchers who are
passionate to have impact on a societal scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.