* 2111251
* Mathematical and Statistical Modeling and Methodology for Topics in Diffusion Tensor Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Zhu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,907.00

Diffusion tensor imaging is a non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging technology
that can be used to analyze the complex neuronal network of the brain.
Currently, brain connectivity measurements are complicated and are difficult to
validate due to a high level of noise. This project aims to model the noise in
measurements and substantially improve the ability of scientific and medical
end-users to make confident decisions about fiber tracts in the brain.
Ultimately, this project aspires to improve early diagnostic tools for brain
diseases and disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, traumatic brain injury, and
multiple sclerosis. The results of the research are expected to help further
develop diffusion tensor imaging technology as a reliable and practical routine
clinical procedure. The investigators, with expertise in statistics,
mathematics, imaging physics, engineering, and neuroscience, are also training
an interdisciplinary team of young researchers, who will gain valuable exposure
to both mathematical and neuroscience aspects of this project through regular
meetings, graduate courses in nonparametric statistics and image processing, and
other research group activities. The group also plans to stimulate interest of
K-12 students on how to use "math and stat" to understand brain wiring
structures. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Integral curves are natural models for a
variety of scientific phenomena, from axonal fibers in the brain, to jet streams
in the atmosphere, to road outlines for self-driving cars. Traditionally, they
are modeled as solutions to the orientation distribution functions defined on
fields of direction vectors that are observed with noise in a 3D domain.
Advances in brain imaging technology can now provide highly complex directional
information, such as longitudinal data, manifolds constructed out of integral
curves, and graphic structures of the underlying axonal anatomy. Individual
integral curves as well as their bundles traced using this enhanced directional
data provide the potential to dramatically increase our understanding of
biological phenomena such as the structural integrity of the axonal fibers and
to assist in selecting an optimal scanning protocol in brain MRI. However, the
estimators for the statistical properties of individual integral curves and
their bundles based on the new data are not well understood. In this project,
the PIs aim to provide a solid theoretical foundation for linking integral curve
estimation in 3D-4D-6D fields of complex directional data with underlying
graphical noise structures and to apply the new methodology to address several
practical problems in diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and high angular resolution
diffusion imaging (HARDI), technologies commonly used in brain MRI.
Specifically, the goals are (1) longitudinal modeling of the structural
integrity of the axonal fibers, (2) modeling and assessing the uncertainty of a
bundle of fibers, (3) searching for optimal numbers of diffusion directions and
shells within a reasonable scan time, (4) equalizing methods for the fiber
tracking characterization, and (5) deriving statistically optimal designs for
data acquisition protocols. This project strives to improve DTI/HARDI not only
as a reliable neuroscience research tool but also as a reliable and practical
imaging technique for routine clinical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.