* 2111568
* Advances in High Energy Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rainer Fries, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,419.00

Among the four fundamental forces in nature the strong nuclear force is
understood the least. The strong force is behind many important processes in the
universe. One particularly important aspect of the strong nuclear force is the
existence of quark gluon plasma. If ordinary matter is heated up to temperatures
of about 1,000,000,000,000 degrees, hotter than the core of the sun, atoms and
molecules cease to exist and even protons and neutrons inside atomic nuclei
melt. The remaining primordial soup of quarks and gluons is what filled the very
early universe. One can recreate quark gluon plasma in large particle colliders
by smashing heavy nuclei into each other. Experimental programs at the Large
Hadron Collider in Europe and the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider in the US
study quark gluon plasma. The PI and his group will carry out research that will
improve our understanding of properties of quark gluon plasma in nuclear
collisions. The project will use computer simulations, machine learning, and
advanced statistical methods to reach this goal. It will provide training for
graduate students and young scientists in nuclear
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quark gluon plasma in nuclear collisions is
studied through the use of probes that are created together with the plasma in
these collisions. Among the most promising probes are high energy photons and
jets. Photons have the unique property that the quark gluon plasma is almost
transparent to them. They can thus deliver information from deep inside the
droplet of plasma that is created. However, state-of-the-art calculations assume
that the plasma is actually perfectly transparent to photons. This project
attempts to quantify the errors that are made with the assumption of a complete
absence of final state interactions. This can lead to a better understanding of
available data on photons which exhibits some puzzling features. Jets are seen
in detectors as collimated sprays of hadrons, i.e. bound states of quarks and
gluons. They emerge from a single, very energetic quark or gluon that has been
scattered away from the axis of the colliding beams. Jets evolve in a
complicated pattern in space-time as well as momentum space while they interact
with the plasma around them. This project will try to go beyond the simple
space-time picture, inspired by classical propagation, that is often utilized in
the interpretation of data, by looking at the equivalent of Wigner distributions
for these jet showers. Lastly, the PI will continue to develop and explore the
"Hybrid Hadronization" computer code. Hybrid Hadronization is a novel simulation
of the process of quarks and gluons forming hadrons in the last phase of nuclear
collisions. Applications will focus on jets and involve the recombination of
quarks and gluons from the plasma with those in jets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.