* 2111474
* Controlling Geometry: Applications in Physics, Biology, and Manifold Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shawn Walker, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 214,465.00

New materials can be created by directing the assembly of fine-scale structures
into optimal, desired patterns. This project is about controlling the shapes of
things. Controlling the shapes of droplets can yield new micro-fluidic devices
for bio-technology. Understanding the shape and curvature of bio-membranes (e.g.
cell membranes) can give new insight into how cells move and function. And human
understanding and meaning can be extracted from high dimensional data if it is
properly "unfolded." The goal of this research project is to create new
mathematical methods/algorithms to guide self-organization, material design, and
learn from high dimensional data. This research will lay the groundwork for the
optimal control of moving shapes and geometries. Part of this project involves
interacting with elementary and middle school students to highlight the
importance of geometry in applications through the PI's "sit-with-a-scientist"
program. The program provides an informal atmosphere, with hands-on activities,
to motivate students, especially minorities and under-represented groups, to
pursue STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to create new
mathematical techniques and numerical methods for self-organization. Some
examples are self-assembly, controlling droplet shape (micro-fluidics), folding
biomembranes, and data analysis/visualization through non-linear manifold
reduction. These new methods will open new frontiers of material design, enable
unprecedented control of physical phenomena, yield new understanding in micro-
biology, and reign in "big data" so it can be directly visualized. The research
will create the first numerical scheme for the singular Maier-Saupe potential
for the Q-tensor-valued solution of the Landau-de Gennes (LdG) model. We also
develop and analyze, unfitted finite element methods (FEMs) for LdG, on variable
domains, that connect with the following items. We will create methods for
controlling the time-dependent evolution of geometric structures in physics and
engineering problems, e.g. in liquid crystals and liquid droplet shape. Design
new methods for modeling and simulating bio-membranes that well approximate full
curvature information (i.e. the full shape operator) using a surface finite
element method. Moreover, we will extend our bio-membrane surface FEM techniques
to do non-linear dimension reduction of high dimensional data to a low-
dimensional space (for data analytics and visualization). Other aspects of the
research will create open source software for the methods developed here, using
both the PI's own packages, FELICITY and AHF, and other open-source options
(e.g. Firedrake). In addition, the PI will educate elementary and middle school
students using his "sit-with-a-scientist" program (mentioned
above).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.