* 2111323
* Teaching introductory CS: Shifting from detecting/punishing cheating to gaining programming behavior insight
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Frank Vahid, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 514,854.00

This IUSE project aims to serve the national interest by giving computer science
instructors insight into how students create programs, or solutions to their
coding assignments. Plagiarism in programming courses is a significant problem.
When a student submits a solution to a programming assignment that has been
copied from classmates or online sources, the student may earn a high grade on
the assignment but is likely not to gain an understanding of the concepts being
illustrated in the assignment. Currently, when a programming assignment is given
in a class, an instructor only sees a student's final submission. This project
will analyze programming log files to allow instructors to see the student's
entire programming process, much like "showing your work" on a mathematics
assignment. The project aims to prevent cheating, by creating simple approaches
that let students know their programming activity is visible to instructors. As
a result they will be less likely to cheat and will gain a better mastery of the
concepts being illustrated in the assignment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop various technologies. First, a "progression highlighter" will
provide a concise view of every program run by a student. Second, a "coding
trail" will provide a concise visual summary of a student's run. Third, an
"anomaly detector" will detect coding styles that depart from the class' style.
Fourth, a "drastic change detector" will detect unusual changes in code from one
run to the next, suggestive of a student giving up and copy-pasting someone
else's solution. Finally, an "overall concern" metric will take all the above
items, plus similarity checker results, to provide an overall "concern" score to
instructors. The efficacy of these technologies will be measured by analyzing
the behavior of at least 100 students based on programming behavior from past
quarters, that have been collected using a prototype of the tool. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track which is funding this project, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.