* 2111262
* Successful Engagement of Faculty: Promoting Widespread Use of Active Learning in Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2026
* Ryan Kasha, Valencia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,226,725.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and studying a
comprehensive faculty development program at a large enrollment community
college that will work to transform how faculty approach teaching and learning
in early college mathematics courses. Over the life of the project, at least 90
faculty will work in cohorts and with experienced peer mentors to integrate
active learning techniques into their classes. Participants will also consider
how active learning and other equitable, student-centered practices might
provide support for a broader population of students. Project research and
evaluation will contribute new knowledge about effective teaching practices that
support student success and will examine how aspects of the project mentoring,
collaborative course redesign, and year-round engagement through summer
institutes and academic-year meetings contribute to widespread, faculty-led
instructional change. Data on faculty mindset and practices will be aligned with
student outcome measures in order to identify practices that might be adopted by
other institutions nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the
project are to deepen community college mathematics faculty’s understanding of
active learning; to support faculty using collaboration and a peer-mentoring
program to create an environment encouraging risk-taking, experimentation, and
resilience; and to contribute new and useful knowledge to the undergraduate
mathematics education community. Valencia Community College is a federally
designated Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) that offers approximately 1,000
sections of early undergraduate mathematics each year. The institution’s large
size and diverse student body provides a unique opportunity to study the
project’s two central research questions: (1) To what extent does a mathematics
faculty development program, consisting of a summer institute, collaborative,
cohort-based course redesign, and a mentoring program influence faculty growth
mindset and mitigate perceived barriers to implementation of active learning at
a large, two-year Hispanic Serving Institution?; and (2) What impact do faculty
knowledge, experiences and attitudes about equity have on the implementation of
active learning in this setting? Major data sources include multiple validated
surveys, classroom observations, interviews, classroom activity logs and student
academic outcomes. Faculty adoption of active learning practices will be
assessed in the context of participants’ beliefs about students’ capacity to
grow as learners, taking into account past training, years of classroom
experience, course modality (e.g., online or face-to-face) and potential role as
a project mentor. This project is supported by the NSF HSI and IUSE:EHR
programs. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.