* 2111838
* SBIR Phase I:  Safe, Affordable and Green Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* James Clegern, KINETICCORE SOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2023
* USD 254,820.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a safe, affordable and
environmentally sustainable energy storage solution. This project offers a non-
chemical, non-hazardous alternative energy storage to accelerate grid
modernization and non-polluting renewable power integration. The project’s core
technology is a design that is cost competitive with deployed Lithium ion (Li-
ion) chemical batteries, but would be significantly less expensive per charge
than Li-ion over its 30+ year service life. This proposed approach allows the
long-term advantages of kinetic (flywheel) energy storage (low service life
costs, high power throughput, high daily charge cycles, no battery replacements,
potential for 24/7 operations) and makes it affordable and safer for deployed
stationary grid operations. With solar and wind renewables on par with
traditional carbon-based power generation costs, affordable flywheel energy
storage is vital to store and dispense intermittent renewable power, enabling
the replacement of carbon-based power generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes a comprehensive testing effort to verify the technical
feasibility of the project’s 3D flywheel composite structure for next-generation
energy storage systems. The proposed research and testing objectives are to
demonstrate the improved 3D flywheel performance and projected 9x reduction in
the traditional flywheel weight for the same energy storage capability. Testing
methodology includes dynamic balancing, torque transmission determination,
critical failure/fatigue modeling, assessing magnetically coupled commercial
external motor/generator power transmission and performance in a TRL-5
operational vacuum environment. The effort will also include energy storage
market analysis for commercial market entry based on tested 3D flywheel
performance. Anticipated results include the characterization of the 3D flywheel
structural technology, demonstrated commercial subsystem operations and
readiness to develop a full prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.