* 2111748
* Conformal Field Theories in Holography and String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Christoph Keller, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 179,796.00

There are four fundamental forces in the universe. The electromagnetic force and
the two nuclear forces are described by Quantum Field Theory (QFT); the
gravitational force is described by the theory of General Relativity (GR).
String Theory aims to unify these four forces, while at the same time providing
a quantum mechanical description of gravity. In this endeavor, quantum field
theories that are scale invariant, so called conformal field theories (CFTs),
are crucial: On the one hand they describe how strings move and interact; on the
other hand, through the principle of holography, they can describe quantum
gravity. The PI aims to deepen the understanding of string theory and QFTs by
investigating such CFTs and their applications, with a focus on their
mathematical structure and their connection to mathematics. The work aims to
construct new examples of CFTs that can be used in string theory. In addition,
this project will have a broader impact on education by offering suitable
activities and research projects for undergraduate and graduate students,
thereby introducing them to contemporary research. The PI will also work with
the Center for Recruitment and Retention of Mathematics Teachers at the
University of Arizona to develop modules that introduce high school students to
quantitative thinking and mathematical reasoning in physics and other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, the PI will develop
2D conformal perturbation theory with a focus on orbifold CFTs. He will use this
to investigate the interplay between rational and irrational CFTs in moduli
spaces of Calabi-Yau sigma models, and to investigate how the spectrum of
holographic 2D CFTs such as symmetric orbifolds changes over their moduli space.
He will also construct new holographic CFTs using permutation orbifolds and
lattice orbifolds, which may lead to new examples of AdS/CFT dualities. He will
particularly focus on CFTs with sparse light spectrum and extremal or near
extremal CFTs. This research will rely on recent results from mathematics such
as the theory of non-abelian orbifolds of vertex operator
algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.