* 2111751
* CPS: Frontier: Software-Defined Nanosatellite Constellations: The Foundation of Future Space-Based Cyber-physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Vyas Sekar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2027
* USD 3,043,509.00

The reach of cyber-physical systems into space is growing exponentially, as
launch services proliferate and satellites have become small, cheap, and
capable. Unlike expensive satellites of the past, the near future promises
constellations of thousands of inexpensive nanosatellites. Nanosatellites are
becoming capable of supporting space-based cyber-physical applications,
including defense, smart cities, agriculture, &amp; infrastructure, climate
science, and search &amp; rescue. Unfortunately, nanosatellites today operate
like monolithic satellites of the past, manually operated at high cost, impeding
the realization of the potential of nanosatellites for these important cyber-
physical systems applications. This project envisions a new operating model for
space-based cyber-physical systems in nanosatellite constellations called a
"software-defined nanosatellite constellation", which unleashes their potential.
A software-defined constellation is a collection of nanosatellites capable of
autonomously sensing the environment, processing data, and cooperatively
planning and taking mechanical actions. The project realizes this vision through
cross-cutting cyber-physical systems research spanning computer systems,
control, planning, actuation, machine learning, and communications. This project
will culminate in the launch of a software-defined constellation testbed that
implements several space-based applications, demonstrating these societally
important capabilities and applications, and functioning as a valuable resource
for other cyber-physical systems researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CPS
Frontier project is establishing nanosatellite constellations as sophisticated,
multi-tenant platforms for space-based cyber-physical systems applications. The
work is interdisciplinary, spanning controls, ML, communications, systems, and
hardware. The project makes constellations autonomous and equipped to compute
efficiently on orbit. On-orbit computing treats constellation-level satellite
control and actuation as resource management for unique nanosatellite resources:
sensor data, bandwidth, energy, and computing. On-orbit machine learning
techniques bring federated learning to the constellation, creating an autonomous
orbital learning system. The project’s new communication techniques extract
maximum information from each bit communicated, combining weak signals and often
avoiding communication altogether. The project demonstrates the project’s value
with on-orbit infrastructure and testbeds that form an open platform for future
space-based cyber-physical systems research. The project will have a broad,
transformative impact on society, industry, and education, within and beyond the
cyber-physical and space systems communities. Software-defined nanosatellite
constellations create an industry of cost-effective space-based applications.
The project eliminates barriers to space, enabling industry to develop space-
based applications. The project creates a new field of research around space-
based cyber-physical systems fostering research and education. This project
includes ambitious education activities from middle school to post-graduate
levels. The project team will mentor middle schoolers and high schoolers from
urban public schools through space systems research internships. The project
team will involve undergraduates and graduate students in research mentoring and
new curricula. The proposed outreach activities will engage society broadly via
artist-in-residence programs, research community-building, and
public/academic/private partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.