* 2111486
* Collaborative Research: Computational Methods for Optimal Transport via Fluid Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Weiwei Hu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 106,227.00

Transport and mixing in fluids is a topic of fundamental interest in engineering
and natural sciences, with broad applications ranging from industrial and
chemical mixing on small and large scales, to preventing the spreading of
pollutants in geophysical flows. This project focuses on computational methods
for control of optimal transport and mixing of some quantity of interest in
fluid flows. The question of what fluid flow maximizes mixing rate, slows it
down, or even steers a quantity of interest toward a desired target distribution
draws great attention from a broad range of scientists and engineers in the area
of complex dynamical systems. The goal of this project is to place these
problems within a flexible computational framework, and to develop a solution
strategy based on optimal control tools, data compression strategies, and
methods to reduce the complexity of the mathematical models. This project will
also help the training and development of graduate students across different
disciplines to conduct collaborative research in optimal transport and mixing,
flow control, and computational methods for solving these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is concerned with the
development and analysis of numerical methods for optimal control for mixing in
fluid flows. More precisely, the transport equation is used to describe the non-
dissipative scalar field advected by the incompressible Stokes and Navier-Stokes
flows. The research aims at achieving optimal mixing via an active control of
the flow velocity and constructing efficient numerical schemes for solving this
problem. Various control designs will be investigated to steer the fluid flows.
Sparsity of the optimal boundary control will be promoted via a non-smooth
penalty term in the objective functional. This essentially leads to a highly
challenging nonlinear non-smooth control problem for a coupled parabolic and
hyperbolic system, or a semi-dissipative system. The project will establish a
novel and rigorous mathematical framework and also new accurate and efficient
computational techniques for these difficult optimal control problems.
Compatible discretization methods for coupled flow and transport will be
employed to discretize the controlled system and implement the optimal control
designs numerically. Numerical schemes for the highly complicated optimality
system will be constructed and analyzed in a systematic fashion. New incremental
data compression techniques will be utilized to avoid storing extremely large
solution data sets in the iterative solvers, and new model order reduction
techniques specifically designed for the optimal mixing problem will be
developed to increase efficiency. The synthesis of optimal control and numerical
approximation will enable the study of similar phenomena arising in many other
complex and real-world flow dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.