* 2111056
* Microscale concave interfaces for structural reflective coloration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Chi Zhou, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 381,375.00

In everyday life, humans and machines rely on different colors to process
important information. As modern physics advanced, our understanding of color
generation expanded greatly, and different coloration phenomena were able to be
characterized; some of which include optical dispersion (e.g. prism-induced
rainbows), spectrally selective absorption (e.g. chemical pigments and resonant
photonic structures), and thin-film interference (e.g. bubble and oil
membranes). Structural colors in particular rely on optimizing their geometry to
produce color, rather than utilize pigments or dyes. These structural coloration
strategies have attracted considerable scientific and industrial interests
because of their unique ability to manipulate the flow of light. In particular,
a total internal reflection (TIR) interference introduced by microscale concave
interfaces (MCI) was recently proposed, different from conventional coloration
processes. It was believed that the incorporation of this new color creation
mechanism into large scale displays and sensors is exciting but challenging to
achieve. This NSF project will first perform a combined fundamental and
experimental research to clarify the physical mechanism of this MCI. The major
focus is to explore unambiguous physical mechanism of this new MCI structure,
which will be validated through fabrication and systematic experimental
characterization. Building upon these new optical interface structures, hybrid
visible and infrared display technologies will be explored for light detection
and ranging (LIDAR) applications. Realization of this new reflective coloration
strategies is expected to yield important technological breakthroughs in
information and display applications. The proposed micro-optics structure will
foster the research and development with the broader impact on traffic safety,
national security and sustaining the global leadership in photonics
technologies. This research will be closely integrated with educational programs
at University at Buffalo (UB). The research will inform development of new
courses on Green Optoelectronic Devices and Senior Design Implementation. The
research and current and future technology trends will be presented to a broader
audience including K-12 teachers and students, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s team developed a new MCI
structure that can realize a unique reflective structural color, i.e., under
different external optical illumination conditions, it can realize colorful
retroreflection and iridescent reflection, respectively. It was believed that
this type of structural coloration platform is different from conventional
physical processes and can enable the exploration of new color display
technologies and applications. Although it is generally agreed that this new
reflective color is introduced by TIR inside the concave interface, a complete
and accurate explanation to the coloration mechanism is still missing. This NSF
project will first perform a combined fundamental and experimental research to
clarify the physical mechanism of this MCI using thorough theoretical modeling
and experimental validation. A combined ray-tracing and light coherent
superposition modeling strategy will be developed to reveal the optical
interference mechanism of the MCI structure. The color tunability by controlling
the geometric and refractive index parameters will be investigated
systematically using this combined modeling. Building upon the fundamental
understanding of the new coloration mechanism, the investigator will develop
traffic sign samples to explore smart signs for future remote sensing/imaging
for autopilot systems. In particular, the time-of-flight of the laser from the
LIDAR system will be characterized systematically to reveal the potential of the
MCI in future autopilot applications. Due to the TIR-induced retroreflection
feature, this type of new structure is especially suitable for low light
environment (e.g. night-time traffic signs, advertisement boards, darkroom
decoration for entertainment, etc.) and is promising to address the robust
physical-world attacks on current deep learning visual classification used in
LIDAR systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.