* 2111297
* STTR Phase I:  Discovery and Development of Macrocyclic Peptide Inhibitors of SARS-COV-2 Spike Protein for the Treatment of COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Shoutian Zhu, PHENOTARGET BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2022
* USD 255,473.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project lies in the discovery and development of first-
in-class therapeutics as an anti-viral treatment of COVID-19 viral infection.
Within the proposed studies, cyclic peptide-based novel, effective anti-viral
drug candidates will be identified. Compared to small molecule-based drugs,
peptides will offer advantages in targeting protein-protein interactions. At the
same time, peptides and their metabolites, due to their nature as biological
building blocks, have more favorable safety profiles. Furthermore, peptide drugs
are time- and cost-effective to discover, develop, and manufacture, which makes
them more attractive than antibodies and other biologics. The peptide-based drug
discovery platform can potentially be applied toward many therapeutic targets
for unmet medical needs. The knowledge and experience gained through proposed
studies will be readily applied to other indications and potentially future
pandemics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will identify small cyclic peptides as novel drug candidates for
the treatment of COVID-19 viral infection. Monoclonal antibodies that disrupt
the interaction of SARS-COV-2 Spike protein and its cognate cellular receptor
ACE2 have shown promising efficacy in reducing viral burden and shortening
recovery time in COVID-19 patients. Unfortunately, a series of challenges hinder
their potential utility including high cost of manufacturing and transportation.
Small cyclic peptides are capable of disrupting protein-protein interactions
following the examples of the antibodies. Unlike antibodies, small peptides can
be manufactured in large scales in a time- and cost-effective manner through
chemical synthesis and are administered in more patient-friendly routes such as
subcutaneous and intramuscular injections. In the proposed project, a
proprietary molecular evolution technology will be applied to efficiently screen
an extremely large library of peptides&lt;br/&gt;(up to 1010 peptides within 4-8
weeks). Hit peptides will be validated for their potency in disrupting the
interaction between Spike protein and its host cell receptor, ACE2, and
subsequent inhibition of viral entry into ACE2 expressing cells. Upon the
completion of proposed studies, selected candidates will be moved into a phase
II program for optimization and preclinical
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.