* 2111853
* SBIR Phase II: A Solar Thermal CubeSat Propulsion System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Troy Howe, Howe Industries LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,192,933.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II Project addresses the need for small, low cost space
satellites to have on-board propulsion capabilities. The advent of very small
satellites is opening up space to entrepreneurs and researchers to improve
telecommunications, monitor climate patterns, look out to the stars, or launch
their own new and unique ideas. Unfortunately, many of these small satellites
have no method of maneuvering in space, and so their capabilities are limited.
Having a safe, green, and inexpensive propulsion system will allow the growing
small satellite market to perform many new tasks that were previously
unachievable. By 2026, it is expected that the small satellite market will reach
over $30 billion. By developing this technology now, users can overcome a major
obstacle in space exploration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a small satellite
system capable of using water and sunlight for propulsion. The system functions
by selectively filtering sunlight to heat water to high temperatures by limiting
radiative heat emissions. The high temperature steam is exhausted through a
nozzle and is able to control the satellite with high efficiency. This system is
capable of extending satellite lifetimes to over 300% of an unpropelled option,
avoiding debris, and performing orbital maneuvers. The major goal of this effort
will be to build a prototype to demonstrate system operations. Other goals will
be to test individual systems, determine lifetime, and investigate the resulting
savings to satellite users. The team seeks a technology that is reliable and
cost effective for expanding humanity’s capabilities for space
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.