* 2111253
* Eulerian-Lagrangian Runge-Kutta Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Nonlinear Kinetics and Fluid Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jing-Mei Qiu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 304,624.00

The primary goal of the project is the development of new computational
methodologies for a wide range of transport-dominant systems in computational
fluid dynamics. Methods with large time step sizes are still underdeveloped for
kinetic and fluid applications. Theoretical foundations are yet to be
established for quantifying the time stepping sizes allowed for stability. There
is great potential in further development of methodology for a moving mesh frame
and application to moving boundaries and interfaces. This project will further
state-of-art computational tools and theoretical analysis and aims to provide
avenues for computational simulations that are currently intractable. The
project involves training of graduate students through involvement in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a class of Eulerian-
Lagrangian (EL) Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) approaches for linear and nonlinear
transport-dominant partial differential equation models. The EL DG method is a
generalization of the (semi-Lagrangian) SL DG method for linear advection
problems, based on the design of a localized adjoint problem for the test
function that approximately tracks characteristics. Such features allow
flexibility, especially for high dimensional and nonlinear problems, where
characteristics are difficult to track. The errors occurred in approximating
characteristics will be integrated in time by Runge-Kutta (RK) methods via the
method-of-lines approach. This fully discrete scheme is termed "EL RK DG." When
the characteristics are approximated well, the very restrictive CFL constraint
in the RK DG framework can be relaxed, leading to CPU savings. The EL RK DG
method can be viewed as a general framework generalizing both the classical
Eulerian RK DG formulation and the SL DG formulation. Thus, existing research on
positivity preserving limiters, well-balanced treatments, asymptotic preserving
properties, entropy stability, and error estimates on Eulerian RK DG methods can
be potentially generalized to the EL RK DG framework. A key goal is to establish
large time-stepping size with nonlinear stability. The project will also explore
generalization of the EL DG algorithm to a moving mesh reference frame for
tracking material interfaces and moving boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.