* 2111446
* Institutional Transformation through Curriculum and Faculty Development to Serve the Modern Chemistry Student
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Minjung Ryu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 795,022.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing evidenced-based
teaching and inclusion practices throughout the undergraduate curriculum at a
public research university with a diverse student body. This works to address
the important problem of how change at the individual course or faculty level is
insufficient to drive institutional transformation. Such transformation will be
done through a multi-year effort that provides for faculty and curriculum
development work that engages multiple faculty and covers all courses, including
lecture and laboratory instruction in general, analytical, inorganic, physical
chemistry, and biochemistry. Faculty will engage in multiple iterations of
course revision using reflective practices that will provide data that
characterizes the targeted outcomes of their revision work and, then, support
iterative change. This will include a consistent emphasis on incorporating
examples from current research and societal problems, to allow courses to
improve how they teach students how to apply their knowledge to contemporary
problems. The significance of this work lies in its potential to answer the
important problem of knowing how to support change at the institutional level
with efforts that engage curriculum-wide work by multiple faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on methods of design-based research,
applied at the level of faculty development, individual courses, and throughout
the entire department. Curricular reform will include components of the use of
big ideas shared throughout the curriculum, linked also to applications in
society and current research, specific science practices, and the incorporation
of evidence-based instructional practices to support student knowledge and skill
growth over time. Faculty development work includes components of analyzing
chemistry teaching and learning, planning for instruction, reflecting on
instructional practice, and collaborative action research investigation of the
curriculum development. The research on the program will contribute to deepening
understanding of how individual faculty and course change can occur and how this
affects institutional transformation. The work will be disseminated through
sharable tools that are used within the faculty and curriculum development
community; individual reports in the education literature about course changes,
and reports in the research literature that advance understanding of the
intersecting activities of curriculum and faculty development and change at the
institutional level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.