* 2111134
* Physics Beyond Standard Model with the CMS Pixel Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sudhir Malik, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

The Standard Model of particle physics has now been confirmed at many levels.
Since the Higgs boson discovery in 2012, the holy grail of high energy physics
is the search for new physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM). This award is
centered on the CMS experiment currently running at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. The precise measurements of the properties
of the Higgs boson at the LHC could give insight into the nature of mass and the
nature of electroweak symmetry breaking, which causes the electromagnetic
interaction, manifest in part as light, and the weak interaction responsible for
beta decay of atomic nuclei to separate. The LHC might unveil lighter mass
candidates for Supersymmetry, a theory that naturally explains electroweak
symmetry breaking. The precise measurement of 'missing energy' could unveil
signatures of many undiscovered particles, some of which could be candidates for
Dark Matter. Missing energy could also account for the graviton escaping in
extra-dimensions or for other exotic particles possibly expected in
BSM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this research is to exploit the
capabilities of the newly installed CMS pixel detector to pursue searches for
Supersymmetry. This new detector has an extra barrel and endcap layers, a
reduced material profile, a new readout chip to minimize data losses due to high
pile-up of LHC events, and an optimized detector layout for 4-pixel-hit coverage
over the full CMS pseudorapidity range. These improvements translate to higher
tracking efficiencies, lower fake-track rates, lower dead-time/data-loss, an
extended lifetime of the detector, all leading to better muon identification,
b-quark tagging, photon/electron identification, tau reconstruction, improved
"particle flow" analysis, and missing energy reconstruction. An improved signal
selection efficiency due to improved b-tagging and better missing energy
estimation is central to this analysis program to discover Supersymmetry. This
effort will also include activities in design and development of additional
pixel detector upgrades while maintaining support of Pixel Detector Operations.
This challenge of building, commissioning, and maintaining a state-of-the-art
silicon detector provides workforce development opportunities in physics and
engineering. The data analyses techniques and related algorithms, hardware
instrumentation, grid computing, Machine Learning and big data science
opportunities carried out in this award give students valuable experience and
knowledge enabling them to pursue successful careers in academia or the private
sector. The Quarknet outreach activities further foster collaboration with high
school teachers, strengthening teaching and learning around the schools in
Puerto Rico and motivating students to pursue STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.