* 2111864
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling On-site Nitrate Fertilizer Production: An Absorption Unit to Efficiently and Selectively Capture Nitrates
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Joshua McEnaney, NITRICITY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will transform the production, distribution, and
application of nitrogen fertilizer, with a new process that is far more
sustainable and will save farmers money. This project enables on-farm production
of nitrogen fertilizers by progressing the scientific understanding, and
subsequent increase in the operational efficiency, of a cutting-edge fertilizer
production system. Increased system efficiency will decrease the cost of these
systems, which provide instant access to pH-controlled fertilizer for farms. Due
to the type and availability of nitrogen provided, there is an opportunity to
greatly reduce emissions, reduce nitrogen runoff, and generally transform
farming toward a more sustainable future. If successful, this project can also
positively impact nitric acid production systems for other uses and add to US
leadership in the fight against global hunger by increasing crop yields in
developing countries where fertilizer is scarce but vital to their
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal encompasses the research and
development of an absorption unit to improve the systemic efficiency of plasma-
derived nitrate production. This Phase I project will overcome key technical
hurdles with respect to an innovative nitrogen fertilizer production system,
designed for on-farm use. Particularly, the product absorption structure
requires dedicated R&amp;D to improve both gas product absorption efficiency and
product selectivity. Specifically, a research test platform will be built for
rapidly testing methods to oxidize a transitional product and capture the final
product, nitrate fertilizer compounds. The goal of these strategies is to
improve the overall efficiency of the system by 40% and enable cost competitive,
distributed nitrogen fertilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.