* 2111927
* SBIR Phase I:  A Versatile Endovascular Lattice for the Treatment of Saccular Aneurysms
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Osama Zaidat, GALAXY THERAPEUTICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to introduce a new approach to cranial
aneurysm treatment. Brain aneurysms affect ~2% of United States population.
Ruptured brain aneurysms accounts for 75-80% of non-traumatic subarachnoid
hemorrhage which are associated with high mortality rate in ~50% of cases. Due
to serious consequences of aneurysm rupture, there is a pressing need for new
treatments. This project will develop a product to aid in the healing of brain
aneurysms. The expected outcomes of this grant is the production of the an
aneurysm device that is optimal for feasibility and usability. In terms of
clinical use, optimal feasibility translates to improved occlusion rates and
aneurysm healing. For physicians, improved usability leads to device preference,
shortened training time, and shortened procedure time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR)
Phase I project advances translation of a solution that takes into account the
shape of the aneurysm, a different concept that separates this product from
other intrasaccular flow disruptors. These specialized shapes conform to the
geometry of brain aneurysms, providing better fit. This project will address
three objectives: 1) Enhancement of the product system for safety and
effectiveness. In this objective, the design characteristics of the product will
be systematically tested to achieve optimal performance. 2) Test the product for
usability and function, along with development of user focused sizing matrix.
Neurosurgeons will test the product in a silicone model. Users will grade the
system on performance. Flow dynamics will also be measured. 3) Characterize
implantation and downstream effects in vivo. A study in rabbits will be
conducted. If successful, results will be used as supporting evidence for human
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.