* 2111660
* High throughput wavelength-multiplexed electro-opto-mechanic neural probes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gianluca Piazza, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2024
* USD 279,064.00

Understanding the neural basis of brain function remains elusive mainly due to
the lack of tools and techniques for high throughput, high resolution recording
from the brain. Many individual neurons orchestrate the processing and
transmission of information across different areas of the brain, so it is
necessary to record neuronal activity with high temporal and spatial resolution.
Surgically implanted neural probes are widely used to record the
electrophysiology activity in the brain. In this project, the investigators seek
to design a novel neural probe, in which the neural signals are transduced to an
optical signal using an electro-opto-mechanic sensor. The single optical
interconnect in this probe can carry the wavelength-multiplexed data from many
different channels, rather than requiring many wires to transmit the signals
from different channels. This approach will enable scaling up the number of
channels without having to increase the size of the neural probes. This
multifaceted project will showcase how photonics, electro-mechanics,
nanotechnology and neural engineering can be combined to bring about novel
design concepts. Therefore, this project will provide a rich educational and
training opportunity for undergraduate and graduate researchers seeking career
opportunities in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
multidisciplinary project is to leverage advancements in photonics and
electromechanical systems to design a radically new implantable neural interface
platform based on electro-opto-mechanical detection and wavelength-domain
multiplexed transmission of neural signals. High-density neural probes are in
high and growing demand. Such devices must be compact, high-density, mass-
producible and reliable. The proposed research introduces a new platform for
recording neural activity that enables simultaneous recording from many channels
to better understand the neural basis of brain function and dysfunction. In this
design, the electrophysiological activity of neural signals will be converted to
a mechanical signal and then to an optical signal that will be routed to an
optical detection system located outside the brain. This way, the neural signals
can be recorded with a very high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Different channels
are encoded into different wavelengths of light and the aggregate data is
transmitted over a single optical channel with no interference. This new
platform for neural recording can be used in different neuroscience and clinical
applications in future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.