* 2111213
* nEXO: a Search for Neutrino-less Double Beta Decay with a Tonne-Scale Enriched Xenon Time Projection Chamber
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrea Pocar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 552,458.00

A fundamental question in contemporary science is why the Universe contains more
matter than anti-matter. This award supports investigations into one possible
explanation for the origin of this imbalance through the study of whether the
mass of the lightest fundamental massive particle in Nature, the neutrino, is
matter or anti-matter, or perhaps is a combination of both at the same time. A
neutrino could simultaneously be both, enabling a nuclear process known as
neutrino-less double-beta decay in which a nucleus transforms into another by
emitting two electrons and no neutrinos. If observed, this decay would indicate
that neutrinos and anti-neutrinos are the same particle. The NSF/DOE Nuclear
Science Advisory Committee (NSAC) has recommended a US-led, ton-scale neutrino-
less double-beta decay experiment as the top priority for the field. The UMass
group, along with scientists from universities and national laboratories in the
US, Canada, China, France, Germany, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, and
Switzerland have proposed the nEXO experiment to search for neutrino-less
double-beta decay of xenon-136. Using five tons of isotopically enriched liquid
xenon nEXO will achieve a 100-fold improved sensitivity with respect to today’s
experiments. The work at UMass focuses on R&amp;D for the design and
optimization of nEXO and the extraction of science from the dataset previously
recorded by EXO-200, the nEXO predecessor. The nEXO detector will be built
around a Time Projection Chamber (TPC) that allows scientists to identify and
suppress background signals which can mimic neutrino-less double-beta decay. The
detector measures the position and energy of every ionizing event inside its
volume. Combined with a detector design that minimizes the radioactivity in its
constituents, the feeble neutrino-less double beta decay signal can emerge above
environmental noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UMass group will work on the
development of key elements for the nEXO detector. The PI is the Level-2
scientist for the nEXO TPC Support (TPCS) team and the UMass group will develop
cryogenics, refrigeration infrastructure, Liquid Xenon storage capabilities,
xenon handling, and purification systems. The PI will also study the long-term
stability of VUV-sensitive Silicon PhotoMultipliers (SiPMs) for nEXO using a
cryostat where xenon can be condensed into a test cell. The group will develop a
calibration source for nEXO which can be injected into the xenon flow stream.
And the group will also search for sub-dominant neutrino-less double beta decay
of xenon-136 and xenon-134 in the previously recorded EXO-200 dataset. The
activities covered by this award will train students in STEM fields, open doors
for students from diverse backgrounds, and develop technologies that align with
strategic sectors of our economy such as data science, artificial intelligence,
nuclear medicine, and national security. The Amherst Center for Fundamental
Interactions (ACFI) contributes to promoting the physics related to this
proposal to the broader physics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.