* 2111152
* Collaborative Research: Developing Online Laboratories for Computer Science Students to Learn How to Build Accessible Software and to Use Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Daniel Krutz, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 671,070.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing flexible online
laboratories to help undergraduate computer science students learn important
skills, including design of accessible software and use of artificial
intelligence. Specifically, the project aims to create, evaluate, and
disseminate self-contained computer science laboratories about how to develop
accessible software for individuals with cognitive impairments, hearing loss,
vision impairment, and other disabilities. It also aims to create similar online
laboratories to help computer science students learn about artificial
intelligence/machine learning. In design of the online labs, the project intends
to develop a modular format that can identify beneficial features for both
students and faculty across multiple topics. The labs will be based on real-
world scenarios, will use an experiential learning model, and will address
foundational topics from multiple angles. Including these increasingly essential
topics in curricula can be challenging, especially for institutions with
resource constraints. The project’s online lab approach can help by providing
learning resources that are self-contained and easily adoptable. In fact,
adopting the labs will require only a web browser, and the project will provide
instructors with supplemental materials such as lecture slides and instructional
videos to help them successfully teach the topic. The project’s research efforts
will focus on the design and dissemination of the online labs to better
understand how to facilitate adoption at other institutions. The research effort
will also examine how inclusion of empathy-building content (in the
accessibility labs) and ethics content (in the artificial intelligence labs)
impact student users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project from
Rochester Institute of Technology and Bethune-Cookman University will develop
ten self-contained labs for undergraduate computer science students: five
addressing artificial intelligence/machine learning and five addressing the
development of accessible software. Beyond the development of these labs, major
project goals include: (1) the development of a unified framework for self-
contained labs that can be applied to other areas of computer science; (2)
evaluation of the specific labs and the broader framework, considering both
student users and faculty adopters; and (3) broad dissemination of the labs and
the shared framework, including robust digital training opportunities. The
project’s mixed-methods research and evaluation plans will collect data from
student focus groups and surveys and instructor interviews and assessments of
student learning that will be compared to outcomes of students engaged in
courses that use different, established mechanisms to teach similar content. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is an Engaged
Student Learning project through which the IUSE program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.