* 2111983
* SBIR Phase I:  Wearable Fabric Sensor for Monitoring Hydration
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Chelsea Monty-Bromer, RooSense LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to detect real-time health risks (e.g. heat
stroke, glucose). In general, the data collected from the developed sensor could
lead to better understanding of health and disease processes, including the
analysis of common diabetic neurological complications, the diagnosis of cystic
fibrosis (CF), and sweat monitoring for advanced prosthetic limb applications,
bedridden patients, or athlete performance tracking leading to better treatments
and health outcomes for all patients. The proposed technology is the first
lightweight fabric sensor to provide real-time information regarding hydration
levels during exercise or training through selective determination of sodium
levels, a better marker for athletic performance, safety, and injury. Initial
applications will be to monitor hydration for endurance athletes. Approximately
17.6 million endurance athletes cross the finish line each year, in the US
alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will focus on the development of a prototype wearable hydration
monitor, validation of the prototype in the laboratory, and body testing in an
exercise physiology laboratory. The need for well-managed hydration and the
monitoring of physiological parameters in real-time is not only crucial for
athletes to optimize performance but to also prevent illness and injury from
occurring. Understanding sweat loss and calculating hydration requirements to
avoid dehydration or overhydration is a significant challenge for athletes. This
is because sweat losses vary significantly from athlete to athlete both in terms
of concentration of electrolytes and total volume of sweat lost. When sweating,
an individual may lose as little as ~200mg of sodium per liter or as much as
~2000 mg. This variance, combined with significant differences in sweat volume,
lead to vastly different hydration requirements among individuals, to be
addressed with the proposed device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.