* 2111730
* STTR Phase I: Biophotonic plant foliage optical inspection system for improved indoor molecular farming of plant-based medicines
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Anthony Ragone, SPEKCITON BIOSCIENCES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,482.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to provide safe, reliable, sustainable medicines with molecular
medicine farming. Indoor farms are insulated from the impacts of weather and
climate and are usually located near population centers, reducing transportation
costs and fossil fuel use. The economic advantages include low-cost medicines
using plants with minimal pesticides and herbicides, and with 90% lower water
consumption. Plant-based pharmaceuticals markets are expected to grow yearly
more than 20%. Producing medicines in plants will accelerate pharmaceutical
development, due to the speed and consistency of processing plants in well-
regulated controlled environments. This project will develop and demonstrate a
real-time plant foliage optical inspection system that will predict
pharmaceutical production in crops and signal plant stress, enabling the grower
to remediate defects and optimize production. These advantages of molecular
farming can be used more generally for crop foods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project advances an in-process precise chemical imager for two-
dimensional understanding of where, how and at what rate protein and stressor
generation occurs in the leaves of Nicotiana benthamiana plants. The imager
method analyzes medical protein production and food crop growth. The test plan
will modify production variables, including specialized bacteria introduced into
the plants to stimulate them to generate the proteins, to enable fingerprinting
the generated plant stresses and protein productivity responses. Trial cycles of
two weeks will permit rapid development of algorithms to model production rates
and optimization for commercial use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.