* 2111147
* Collaborative Research: Multidimensional couplings for flow and transport in porous media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Thomas Fuentes, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 198,762.00

The project focuses on the study of physical phenomena coupling different
spatial scales. The mathematical and numerical analysis of these coupled
problems is challenging because of the lack of smoothness in the solution.
Applications of these coupled problems are many; for instance the mathematical
modeling of blood flow in organs is important in understanding the mechanisms of
organ perfusion, embolization and drug delivery. The project will train graduate
students and undergraduate students in computational and applied mathematics.
Research outcomes will be published in research journals, online and presented
at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is
the formulation, analysis and application of discontinuous Galerkin methods for
the solution of coupled one-dimensional and three-dimensional flow and transport
processes in porous media. The numerical analysis is challenging because weak
solutions exhibit a singularity on the line source. The research team will
develop and analyze numerical methods for model problems with singular data. The
methods will combine novel efficient time-stepping algorithms with discontinuous
finite element methods. The investigators will apply the algorithms to
multidimensional couplings in organ and vasculature. The development and
validation of physics-based computational models will be guided by imaging of
flow and transport. Neural network based image image segmentation extracts the
geometry of the organ and blood vessels. Students will be involved in the
research and they will be trained in numerical analysis and scientific
computing. Outreach activities will engage high school students with recent
developments in computational mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.