* 2111963
* SBIR Phase II:  A New Class of High-Conductivity Solid-state Composite Electrolytes for Next-Generation Lithium Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Grant Farrell, NextGen Battery Technologies, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the introduction of non-flammable, easy-to-
manufacture solid battery electrolytes that are also compatible with lithium
metal. The cell architecture seeks to ensure safety while enabling a significant
improvement in the energy density. The teams also seeks to lower the costs of
the lithium-ion batteries by eliminating extrinsic costs associated with thermal
management and explosion containment. Safe, easy-to-manufacture electrolytes may
alter the rate of electrification of the global economy. The next generation of
battery powered medical devices, a large proportion of which are manufactured in
the United States, may also benefit from the adoption of the new solid
electrolyte. In addition, the proposed composite solid electrolyte aims to
enable new cell architectures with significantly higher energy densities than
what has been possible in liquid electrolyte systems to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
II project will develop a non-flammable, high-conductivity composite, solid-
state battery electrolytes that are compatible with mixed metal oxide cathode
chemistries and cell manufacturing processes. The morphology of the composite
electrolyte is such that it offsets disadvantages present in polymer
electrolytes, as well as inorganic sulfide and oxide solid electrolytes, when
they are used as monolithic materials. The unique heterostructures of the
proposed solid electrolytes advance the current state-of-the-art by enabling
faster diffusion of lithium ions through multiple pathways, while mitigating the
growth of lithium dendrites. The electrolyte's nonflammable nature makes it a
potential replacement for conventional liquid electrolytes in reducing fire
hazards and reducing the costs of reqired thermal protection systems in lithium-
ion batteries. The compatibility with lithium metal presents a unique
opportunity for improvement in the energy density over currently used silicon-
graphite anodes, that translates to a lower cost per unit of stored energy
($/kWh). An additional advantage is that these batteries do not require special
handling and they are compatible with both spiral wound and planar battery form
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.