* 2111524
* Characterizing Inclusive Strategies that Retain Black Students in Computer Science to Graduation and Beyond
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Kinnis Gosha, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 66,464.00

This IUSE project aims to serve the national interest by identifying factors
that lead to the lack of diversity in computing professions. Research has shown
that the first two years of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) majors are often where students are lost in the pipeline. This project
will identify factors that affect the retention and graduation of under-
represented minority students in the computing major. The goals are to identify
inclusive strategies for success in computing programs and investigate ways to
increase the retention and post-graduation success of Black students in
computing. Of particular interest are strategies that are transferable to
different types of institutions and STEM fields in general. This project
features a collaboration between two Historically Black Colleges/Universities
and a Primarily White Institution that will work together to understand the
challenges facing each institution and the strengths each institution brings to
addressing this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through detailed transcript
analysis, this research will take an asset-based approach, focusing on the
strengths of students succeeding in the major. Two cohorts of lower division
(freshman and sophomore) Black CS students from two Historically Black
Colleges/Universities (HBCUs) and one Primarily White Institution (PWI) will be
studied to measure perceived societal impacts and their understanding of content
through conceptual assessment instruments. A cohort of upper division students
will be studied to measure the factors that led to their success using surveys,
a content assessment, and interviews. Using a mixed methods analysis approach,
White students will be compared to Black students at the research intensive PWI
and then the principal investigators will compare Black students at the PWI to
Black students at the two HBCUs. The goal is to expand knowledge of inclusive
teaching strategies and provide institutional awareness of factors that can go
beyond recruiting URMs to focus on retention in the major and student success
post-graduation. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.