* 2111533
* Applying a Digital Tool to Support Self-regulated Learning Strategies in Introductory Geoscience Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Rebecca Walker, Mount San Antonio College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2024
* USD 67,559.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
and success in introductory geoscience courses. To do so, it will modify and
expand a prototype online tool that provides immediate feedback to students
about the relationship between their perceptions of their knowledge and their
actual knowledge. The tool, CLASS (Confidence-based Learning Accuracy Support
System), provides an online quizzing environment that measures student learning
and confidence in that learning. It then displays results that can guide
students to adopt more effective learning behaviors and thus increase course
performance. The project has three objectives, to: a) improve the tool to
include more resources and an expanded question database; b) upgrade and expand
the technology by adding a mobile app and dashboard to enhance the student user
experience; and, c) investigate the effects of these changes on student learning
at different institutional types (research university, four-year college, and a
two-year college) and across multiple introductory geoscience courses. The
project will explore the application of CLASS to enhance geoscience learning
among underrepresented students at two Hispanic Serving Institutions.
Consequently, the project will serve students from communities that have been
disproportionately impacted by COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instructional
interventions that focus on supporting effective student learning behaviors,
termed self-regulated learning, have been shown to result in greater academic
achievement, improved motivation, and greater persistence. Students who use the
CLASS tool receive immediate feedback on both their level of knowledge and the
accuracy of their perceptions of their learning linked to instructor-defined
learning objectives. Consequently, students are able to readily identify gaps in
their knowledge and determine what to study to fill those gaps. Self-regulated
learning represents the sum of a student's awareness of their own thinking,
their approach to monitoring and managing their learning, and their control over
motivations and behaviors related to learning. Effective self-regulated learning
behaviors are consistently correlated with increased learning. This project will
expand the application of CLASS, a tool that promotes the use of effective self-
regulated learning behaviors and also gives instructors a mechanism for
providing automated feedback about the quality of students' learning. CLASS is
grounded in the findings of educational psychology research and provides
information regarding course teaching and learning processes that cannot be
readily ascertained from traditional assessment methods. The use of CLASS will
make it possible to integrate the results of cognition research directly into a
course by applying a common assessment method that could be readily adapted by
any instructor. The research design will provide quasi-experimental quantitative
data (e.g., quiz results) to make causal inferences about the effects of CLASS
activities combined with qualitative data from student interview descriptions of
their use of the tool. The project will produce a suite of related materials
that can be customized for a variety of introductory geoscience courses.
Finally, the generalizability of both the tool and essential facets of student
learning will enable both STEM-wide and education-wide application of findings
and recommendations for practices that increase student success in undergraduate
courses. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.