* 2111513
* Collaborative Research: Strategic Course-based Adaptations of an Ecological Belonging Intervention to Broaden Participation in Engineering at Scale
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Allison Godwin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2025
* USD 471,103.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the number and
diversity of engineers produced in the United States. While science overall has
made great progress in increasing the participation of women, engineering has
made no overall progress in the last 20 years, with women continuing to earn
only 20% of engineering bachelor’s degrees each year. Improving retention in the
first two years of engineering programs is important in addressing ongoing
attrition. In particular, engineering will become more inclusive when the
concerns that many students have about feeling alone in thinking they are
incapable of mastering the course’s content are addressed. Here, short
interventions will be implemented that reveal to students that most of the
students in their class have these same concerns, that previous students just
like them with similar concerns have successfully completed this coursework, and
that their instructor believes they are capable of succeeding. Prior research by
the project team using the intervention in first-year courses has shown that
these interventions can entirely eliminate course retention differences by
gender as well as by race/ethnicity. A new method for customizing this
intervention will be developed, tested, and further improved so that it can have
similar strong benefits in many different courses and many different
universities. Simple interventions that can be easily and scientifically
customized to many contexts may have potential for significantly improving
engineering outcomes across the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
uses an ecological-belonging intervention approach that only requires a one-
class or one-recitation session to implement and has been shown to erase long-
standing achievement gaps by gender and race/ethnicity in several introductory
STEM courses. However, while simple, the intervention cannot involve a fixed
script for different university and course contexts. Rather, the content of the
intervention needs to be customized to the local context in order to address the
specific concerns students have in that specific context. This project brings a
highly interdisciplinary team across three strategically-selected universities
with the goal of developing an approach to identify which 1st and 2nd year
courses need this intervention, reveal student concerns in that course, adapt
the intervention to address those concerns, and address other pragmatic
constraints of how that course is taught. This systematic approach also includes
processes for onboarding all the instructors of the given course. In answering a
set of seven core research questions, the project intends to expand knowledge
about 1) where (on which outcome variables), when (in which contexts, for which
students), and why the ecological belonging intervention has positive effects,
and 2) the extent to which this intervention on its own has measurable impacts
on the overall problem of representation in the larger challenge of
representation within the large engineering pathways that have struggled with
representation. This kind of foundational knowledge is critical to making
decisions about when to apply the intervention as well as providing important
insights into how to apply the intervention. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.