* 2111812
* Bosonic Condensation and Emergent Phenomena in 2D Janus layers and Moiré Lattices
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Sefaattin Tongay, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2025
* USD 557,407.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Recently discovered Janus materials are a new
class of ultra-thin crystals. Here, the name ''Janus'' comes from the ancient
Roman God of beginnings and transitions with two faces one looking to the future
while the other facing to the past. Like Janus himself, Janus materials have top
and bottom faces made of different atoms. This unique atomic arrangement brings
promising optical properties towards next-generation quantum technologies,
especially, if one manages strong interaction between materials and light. This
project aims to discover new quantum properties by encapsulating these materials
within a special mirror, a Bragg reflector, designed to trap light and achieve
strong light-material interaction. While doing so, an innovative educational
plan is proposed to train the undergraduate and high school students in an
active research environment to create next-generation science and engineering
workforce. In parallel, the educational plan introduces ‘Living in a Materials
World’ outreach activity to stimulate and prepare K12 students for careers in
sciences and engineering through monthly and quarterly online and in-person lab
tours, demonstration, and tutorial events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have demonstrated exciton-polaritons in two-
dimensional excitonic dichalcogenides. These bosonic quasi-particles have highly
appealing properties and functionalities that are not accessible with excitons
alone. Exciting new material properties are possible if the density of exciton-
polaritons is sufficiently increased to form polariton Bose condensates. Here,
owing to the presence of colossal dipole moment and dipolar excitons, Janus
layers offer extended exciton lifetimes, exotic valley-physics, and non-linear
properties that are ideal for reaching this quantum regime. As such, this
project first aims to stabilize exciton-polaritons in the strong-coupling regime
by encapsulating 2D Janus layers in designer high-Q factor microcavities.
Systematic studies next aim to demonstrate Bose polariton condensates in the
high-density regime and establish their quantum properties. Lastly, the research
team investigates the formation of topological excitons, controls the super-
radiant phase formation, and explores new regimes of Bose-Hubbard physics by
using their Moiré lattices and tuning its potential landscape. Once completed,
the introduced Janus and Moiré exciton-polaritons, polariton condensates, and
topological excitons are anticipated to fill a large fundamental knowledge gap
in the field. Potential societal impacts include high-temperature polaritonic
lasers and new quantum information devices as well as educational training
activities for high school and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.