* 2111216
* ExplainIt: Improving Student Learning with Explanation-based Classroom Response Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2025
* Gamze Ozogul, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating ExplainIt, an
innovative explanation-based classroom response system that provides real-time
support to undergraduate STEM students and instructors by using natural language
processing to analyze student explanations of STEM phenomena. The project will
advance understanding of how to improve undergraduate STEM education by
providing real-time formative feedback to each individual student and real-time
summaries to instructors so they can quickly adapt their instruction to the
current needs of their students. The project will produce significant
theoretical and practical advances in undergraduate STEM education. It will lead
to a deeper understanding of how students learn with explanation-based classroom
response systems, including the learning gains and improvements in student
engagement. It will also lead to a set of effective instructional support
principles for explanation-rich classroom interactions that will be broadly
applicable in multiple STEM disciplines and in diverse institutional settings.
Together, these advances will yield fundamental improvements in undergraduate
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three goals guide this project. First is to
create the ExplainIt explanation-based classroom response system. Second is to
produce empirically grounded research results on adaptively supporting student
learning and engagement with ExplainIt. Third is to develop online resources
that enable instructors to easily integrate ExplainIt into their teaching. Each
year, instructors in biology, computer science, and physics will contribute to
the design, development, and evaluation of the ExplainIt software. The project
will investigate conditions under which improved student learning occurs by
evaluating ExplainIt in a wide range of undergraduate STEM courses. ExplainIt
will be evaluated with more than 6,000 students in introductory courses, lower-
division courses, and upper-division courses. The evaluation will have a dual
focus: evaluating ExplainIt’s effects on students’ STEM learning (conceptual
knowledge, problem solving), and evaluating ExplainIt’s effects on improving
students’ engagement in STEM (STEM self-efficacy, STEM interest). The project
team will grow the ExplainIt community of practice through workshops and
presentations at conferences on biology education, computer science education,
and physics education, as well as through webinars and social media. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.