* 2111661
* CREST Phase II: Center for Aquatic Chemistry and Environment (CAChE)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Todd Crowl, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2026
* USD 5,134,515.00

Center for Aquatic Chemistry and Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers of
Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the
enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving institutions through
the establishment of centers that effectively integrate education and research.
CREST promotes the development of new knowledge, enhancements of the research
productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded presence of students
historically underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics disciplines. With National Science Foundation support, Florida
International University strengthens their Center for Aquatic Chemistry and
Environment. The Phase II Center expands detection capabilities to unknown and
novel emerging contaminants, both natural and anthropogenic, as well as
ecosystems of study. Center researchers develop new technologies for improving
water quality analysis and contaminant detection in a range of ecosystems,
including freshwater, coastal, and urban environments, as well as provide data
on the impacts of these contaminants on ecosystem function. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Center expands the study area to include aquatic systems along an
urbanization gradient. By designing novel sensors and autonomous vessels that
can explore difficult to reach urban areas, the Center collects continuous and
near real-time data on emerging contaminants. Phase II moves from a focus on
detection and transport of contaminants, to a mechanistic understanding of the
impacts of these contaminants at the organismal, community, and population
levels. Using an Understanding the Rules of Life conceptual approach, Phase II
unifies across multiple scales, as well as integrates campus-wide programs in
Chemistry, Biology, Earth Systems, Computer Science, Engineering, and
Architecture. The Center implements a rigorous education program that builds on
lessons learned during Phase I. The Center adds an undergraduate research
fellows’ program. Formal and informal education programs prepare students to
communicate the results of their research and for the future STEM workforce.
Center training includes core professional skills, as well as micro-credentials
in tools necessary to understand complex environmental problems, including
robotics, next generation sensor development, big-data analytics, virtual
reality, and artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.