* 2111743
* Dark Matter: Fundamental Processes and Quantum Information Aspects
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Daniel Boyanovsky, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Daniel Boyanovsky at the
University of Pittsburgh. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dark Matter constitutes over 80%
of the matter content of the Universe. It is also a fundamental ingredient in
the formation of Galaxies such us our Milky Way. Yet after more than two decades
of experiments dedicated to its direct detection, the nature of Dark Matter
remains unknown. Understanding the nature of Dark Matter is thus one of the
greatest scientific challenges of our time, fueling a large theoretical and
observational effort. Research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions:
understanding the nature of the fundamental building blocks of the natural
world. In his research, Professor Boyanovsky aims to develop new methods through
which to study the production and observational consequences of dark matter. He
will also explore intriguing connections of this research to research in another
discipline called "quantum information theory". This project also has
significant broader and interdisciplinary impacts. Professor Boyanovsky will
involve graduate students in his research, thereby providing critical training
for junior physicists beginning research in this field. He also intends to give
public lectures and develop new course curricula based on the results of his
research, thereby stimulating the curiosity of the general public and the next
generation of physicists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Boyanovsky will study alternative production mechanisms of dark matter as a
consequence of cosmological expansion and associated non-equilibrium dynamical
processes. Incorporating the efforts of graduate students, these research
projects will also explore recently-revealed intriguing connections between the
dynamics of production and evolution of dark matter and aspects of quantum
information. This aspect of the research program makes this endeavor truly
interdisciplinary, with broad impact across fields and providing an enriching
interdisciplinary educational component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.