* 2111763
* Nucleosomal Proofreading of Activator-Promoter Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2025
* Hinrich Boeger, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 05/31/2025
* USD 810,149.00

This research program investigates the role of random molecular behavior in
regulating gene expression by "transcriptional activators", molecules that
control the activity of genes by binding to specific regulatory sequences in
DNA. The project introduces students from diverse backgrounds to a fundamental
theoretical problem at the interface between molecular genetics and statistical
physics as well as advanced experimental tools to address this problem.
Pedagogically, the program aims to integrate mathematical, physical, and
quantitative reasoning into the biology curriculum for undergraduate and
graduate students and provide research opportunities to high school students to
increase participation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specificity of
transcriptional regulation – which genes are transcribed in response to a
particular signal – is thought to rest entirely with the specificity of
activator-gene recognition. Yet, for many eukaryotic activators the energetic
differences between correct and incorrect sequence binding are remarkably small
– too small to explain observed regulatory specificities. The specificity
problem may be solved by "kinetic proofreading", i.e., insertion of a free
energy-transducing delay step between activator-promoter binding and
transcription. The mechanism enhances specificity not by increasing the
energetic difference between correct and incorrect associations but by
exploiting the same difference twice, before the delay step and afterward, when
free energy dissipation favors complex dissociation over formation and return of
the suspended delay mechanism to its repressive state. A prime candidate among
possible delay mechanisms for activator proofreading is ATP-dependent chromatin
remodeling, which relieves genes from nucleosomal repression in an activator-
dependent manner. Logical implications of this proposition, including the
prediction that perturbation of chromatin remodeling affects the ability of
activators to distinguish between correct and incorrect genes, will be tested by
employing a combination of live-cell multifocus fluorescence microscopy, single
molecule-fluorescence in situ hybridization, nanopore sequencing, and reverse
genetics in yeast. The outcomes will provide new insights on how near
deterministic behavior of biological systems emerges from the random behavior of
their molecular components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Genetic Mechanisms program of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Mathematical Biology
program of the Mathematical Sciences Division in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.