* 2111936
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Dense Fiber Array for Astronomical Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Kevan Hashemi, OPEN SOURCE INSTRUMENTS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2023
* USD 240,700.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to make it possible for astrophysicists to
dramatically expand their ability to collect the spectra of distant galaxies,
and so to advance their understanding of the universe. The most important factor
in large-scale spectrographic data collection is the number of spectra taken per
viewing hour. The planned Direct Fiber Positioning System (DFPS) is mechanically
simpler than the current state-of-the-art positioning systems; it will cost less
to produce per installed fiber, and it will provide more fibers per unit area
than any existing design. The spectra of galaxies is critical to dark energy and
dark matter research programs, and these programs address the greatest open
questions in astrophysics today. The relative simplicity of the DFPS mechanical
components makes it a better choice for spectrographs of tens of thousands of
fibers, but also for much smaller arrays of a few hundred fibers, such as could
be installed on smaller telescopes. Thus, the DFPS will win a share of the small
market for very large spectrographic instruments, but also to create for itself
a large market for smaller spectrographic
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be a small Direct Fiber Positioning System
(DFPS) consisting of a 4 x 4 array of 16 fibers on a 5-mm grid. Each fiber will
provide a 3.6-mm x 3.6-mm range of motion and will be controlled by electronic
circuits consuming less than 20 mW. A calibrated camera will view the
illuminated fiber tips, monitoring their position with an accuracy of 10 µm, to
measure and demonstrate the precision and repeatability of the fiber positioner.
The stability of the positioner will be determined over the course an hour in
warm and cold environments, and in both horizontal and vertical orientations.
The direct method of fiber movement requires accurate control of voltages
applied to many fibers in parallel, which is a challenging electrical
engineering problem that has been avoided by other, mechanically complex
systems. If we can locate fibers with an accuracy of 10 µm in the focal plane of
a telescope, we will be able to provide a new and superior type of fiber-
positioner, one that will be more compact, less vulnerable to mechanical
failure, less susceptible to corrosion, and more resistant to fatigue than any
other existing fiber-positioning system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.