* 2111426
* Electroweak Interactions and Fundamental Symmetries in Effective Field Theories
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Lucas Platter, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Atoms are composed of the positively charged nucleus and negatively charged
electrons. The nucleus itself is made up of protons and neutrons. The properties
of nuclei are an important aspect of our understanding of the universe, such as
big bang nucleosynthesis or stellar evolution. In addition, experiments with
nucleons can inform us about the fundamental forces that exist in nature.
Nucleons, however, are composite particles themselves built from elementary
particles called quarks and gluons and have therefore a finite size. This
feature complicates the modeling of the nuclear interaction and of the
determination of uncertainties that are important to interpret possible
disagreements between theoretical calculations and experiments. This project
will use a tool called effective field theory to calculate how nuclear systems
interact with the weak and electromagnetic interaction and provide predictions
for a number of important experimentally relevant observables. Effective field
theory is one tool that can provide reliable uncertainty estimates and it will
be used to reduce uncertainties on a number of important observables. This work
will thereby also improve our understanding of the nuclear
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at improving the
understanding of electroweak processes using effective field theory (EFT). EFT
is a systematic expansion in a ratio dictated by a system-inherent scale
separation. The PI will use two EFTs, the EFT for short-range interactions
(SREFT) and chiral EFT (CEFT). The PI and his collaborators will calculate
structure functions for the 3-nucleon system using SREFT and CEFT. In turn, that
will allow for improved predictions for nuclear corrections to the hydrogen
spectrum that will be used to connect atomic physics experiments with nuclear
physics properties. With the SREFT the PI will consider electric dipole moments
(EDM) and try to understand how the Coulomb interaction and finite range effects
impact the EDM form factors. Here, SREFT provides a guide to understanding the
renormalization/uncertainties for such a calculation that, through experiments,
can provide possible insights into features of physics beyond the standard
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.