* 2111153
* I-Corps: Designing an Adaptive, Modular Framework for Wheelchair Users
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Heather Canavan, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a modular framework to assist people using wheelchairs in
completion of daily activities such as accessing electronic devices, typing, and
opening doors to buildings. The primary end users are students, teachers,
entrepreneurs, athletes, children, parents, and others in wheelchairs who need
additional tools to support their unique lifestyles. The wheelchair market is
expected to reach $7.5 billion by 2024. This growth is predicted due to factors
such as the rising population over age 65 and prevalence of progressive
diseases. The primary customer segment for the device includes the 3 million
manual and motorized wheelchair users and may be further separated based on
location and extent of physical limitations. Another customer segment that will
benefit from the device is caregivers. The total number of caregivers in the
U.S. in 2015 was 39.8 million for adults 18 and older with adaptive needs. In
2016, 20% of family caregiver earnings were spent on assistive care. Adopters
with a personalized wheelchair assistant will have additional autonomy which, in
turn, will alleviate part of the financial burden on caregivers currently unable
to maintain full-time jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of an adaptive device for assisting people with disabilities
in completion of fundamental daily living activities above the waist so that
they are able to independently engage in employment, academic, and home
environments. The project will result in an all-in-one wheelchair assistant with
customizable “arm” modules for providing independence and control. Inspired by
analogous natural and man-made assemblies a “carapace-like” shape will allow
people to have multiple, opposable extensions that may be maneuvered manually or
through the use of robotics. The innovation of the device is demonstrated
through the way in which the assistive modules are combined and implemented to
ensure independence for the specific user. The research to date has implemented
knowledge gained during preliminary interviews of regionally located wheelchair
users, caregivers, and specialists. In addition, the specific needs of
wheelchair users in a university setting, including the need for unique
ergonomic typing positions, have been investigated. The current prototype for
this adaptive component has been shown to improve typing speeds by 30 words per
minute. The proposed additional modules may result in similar measurable
improvements in the completion of daily living
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.