* 2111945
* SBIR Phase I:  Platform for Printable Chemical Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,02/28/2023
* William Fitzhugh, American Nanotechnologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop a platform
for chemical sensors based on thin films of functionalized carbon nanotubes
(CNT). Functionalized CNT thin films have demonstrated remarkable performance as
chemical sensors in applications as varied as diagnostics, food safety,
industrial process monitoring, environmental monitoring, national security, and
more. The unique combination of small form-factor and impressive performance
give CNT sensors the potential to bring chemical sensing to a myriad of use
cases, with a combined market of over $13.2 billion projected by 2027, some
which are not addressable with current sensing technologies. High-performance
alternatives require bulky and expensive lab-based equipment that cannot be
adopted by most users. Those chemical sensing solutions that do have suitable
form factors lack the performance of CNTs. Moreover, CNT sensors also offer the
benefit of being printable, flexible, and operating at room temperature—all of
which contribute to a sensor technology platform with the ability to drastically
expand the serviceable chemical sensing market. This work will focus on
developing solutions to two key technical challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project will focus on demonstrating the feasibility
of using high-purity semiconducting CNTs as the basis material for a thin-film
sensor platform. Despite the impressive performance and small footprint of CNT
sensors, commercialization of these thin films has been slow to non-existent due
to two major challenges: First, due to drift – the tendency of CNT thin-films to
degrade over time – sensors fail after 12–24 hours. Given that high-performance
CNT sensors require expensive semiconducting CNT materials, such rapid failure
is not economically viable. The second major technical pain point is that when
transitioned from the lab to real-world applications, thin-film sensors are
likely to react with interferents (e.g. humidity, low-molecular-weight
compounds, temperature, etc.), resulting in false readings. This proposed work
will seek to develop solutions to both technical
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.