* 2111977
* Quantum Field Theory and String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Silviu Pufu, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 110,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Silviu Pufu at Princeton
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the important problems in theoretical
physics is that of finding universal patterns governing the behavior of systems
composed of large numbers of constituents that interact very strongly. Examples
of such systems range from boiling water at high pressure, or the plasma that
forms as a result of a collision between heavy ions, to new phases of quantum
matter that currently are only conjectured to exist. Professor Pufu will develop
theoretical tools for understanding how the physics that describes the short-
distance behavior of such systems constrains the physics that describes the
behavior of these systems at longer length scales. These tools are partly based
on ideas from string theory, whereby one can study such strongly-interacting
systems by instead studying gravity in a higher-dimensional space. Research in
this area advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in
one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new
physical laws. This project also has an important educational and mentoring
component which includes engaging undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdocs in research, and thereby preparing them for successful scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, one of the goals of
this project is to enhance our understanding of how a quantum system can be
described holographically as a higher-dimensional theory of Quantum Gravity.
Towards this goal, Professor Pufu will explore the relation between conformal
field theory correlators of operators with spin, and flat-space scattering
amplitudes in one dimension higher. He will also use an effective field theory
approach to investigate what information about Quantum Gravity is encoded in
quantities such as the sphere free energy of conformal field theories with
holographic duals. Lastly, Professor Pufu will study toy models of the
gauge/gravity duality that are based on exact results in strongly-interacting
quantum field theories that possess supersymmetry. Another goal of this project
is to study analogs of Quantum Chromodynamics in two dimensions that can be used
to extract lessons about color confinement and screening of probe
quarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.