* 2111728
* Molecular Modeling and Simulation of the Mycobacteria Cell Envelope
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Wonpil Im, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2024
* USD 769,298.00

Mycobacteria are generally non-motile bacteria covered by a protective envelope
consisting of an outer cell membrane, a peptidoglycan layer and an inner
membrane. This cell envelope provides the bacterial cell with structural
integrity and protects the cell from hostile environments while allowing the
transport of solutes and proteins. Despite its importance, our understanding of
this envelope is rudimentary at best. Due to technical difficulties in
deciphering these complex envelopes through experimentation, all-atom modeling
and simulation should be able to provide an unprecedented understanding of the
structure and dynamics of the mycobacterial cell envelope. This project aims to
study the mycobacterial cell envelope by establishing reliable computational
methods for all-atom molecular modeling and simulation of each constituent and
their assembly. Undergraduate and graduate students will be directly involved in
the research and an excellent outreach component includes community
participation by use of the developed modeling platforms and sub modules. A
large benefit to the scientific and general community is expected as the model
will inspire new research and development of antimicrobial
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although mycobacteria are Gram-positive bacteria, it
is now well-known that their cell envelope is unique and has a mycobacterial
outer membrane (MOM), a peptidoglycan (PG) layer, and a mycobacterial inner
membrane (MIM), which is very similar to the cell envelope of Gram-negative
bacteria. This project will provide an in-depth and molecular-level
understanding of how different lipid compositions modulate the MIM and MOM
properties, how the PG layer is connected to the MIM and MOM, and thus the
overall structure of the mycobacterial cell envelope. It will also provide
insight into how membrane proteins behave in and interact with the MIM or MOM.
These results are significant and important to the field because there is no
such molecular-level understanding (to the best of our knowledge). In addition,
this project seeks to foster synergistic scientific research and education on
the mycobacterial cell envelope and various lipid molecules unique to the MIM or
MOM, by providing reliable and general computational methods through Membrane
Builder in CHARMM-GUI to students and researchers in the simulation community
and other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This works is jointly funded by the
Cellular Dynamics and Function and Molecular Biophysics Clusters of
MCB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.