* 2111604
* RUI: Studies of Heavy Quarkonium Spectroscopy with Belle and Belle II
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Todd Pedlar, Luther College
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

One of the big mysteries in high energy physics today is why the universe is
almost entirely made of matter and not antimatter. This matter/antimatter
asymmetry could be explained by understanding the different reactions of
particles and antiparticles in particle accelerator experiments. This award will
study these differences in particles created at the Belle and Belle-II
experiments at the High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK)
laboratory in Japan. This facility creates particles called mesons consisting of
quark-antiquark pairs. By studying these mesons, one can probe for Beyond the
Standard Model fundamental physics processes such as particle â€“ antiparticle
transitions, rare meson decays and possible exotic particles which could
indicate the presence of Dark Matter. Differences in these transitions could
indicate why matter dominates over antimatter in the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Belle II Experiment at KEK in Japan has the
world's largest data samples recorded at the bottomonium resonances in the mass
range of 10 GeV, the so-called Upsilon resonances. At these resonant energies
the electron positron beam particles have a much higher probability of producing
B mesons, allowing experimenters to acquire large statistics and observe rare
phenomena. The central aim of this RUI program of research by the Luther College
group is to study the spectroscopy of bottomonium and related states, with a
focus on resonant states that probe the limits of our understanding of Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD) and improving the theoretical understanding in lattice QCD
(the techniques used to make computer predictions of QCD calculations). The
Luther College program provides an unusual opportunity for undergraduate
students to become meaningfully involved in a world-leading experiment, taking
part in every aspect of Belle data analysis, and in the development of software
tools for the upgraded experiment, Belle II. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the program are exemplary, fostering greater exposure to scientific
research among students and teachers in rural Northeast Iowa, through
masterclasses for High School students and now involvement of Belle-II STEM
classes in the Dorian Music camp program in Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.