* 2111610
* Collaborative Research:  Building Educational Theory Through Enacting Reforms in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* PATRICK Burnett, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 495,089.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building educational theory
to support broadening participation in the context of improving undergraduate
STEM education. This collaborative project across three institutions seeks to
embed inclusive research-based instructional strategies (RBIS) within STEM
undergraduate courses and departments and investigate effective strategies to
support their use. Project activities and findings will significantly impact how
STEM departments at two- and four-year institutions nationwide support faculty
members’ use of inclusive RBIS in their undergraduate STEM courses. The primary
goals are to: 1) apply an established theory of change to institutionalize the
effective use of inclusive RBIS in STEM courses, 2) generate new knowledge about
how specific change strategies enable STEM departments to institutionalize the
effective use of inclusive RBIS in courses, and 3) generate new knowledge about
benefits of and barriers to effective use of inclusive RBIS in undergraduate
STEM courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major project activities are to
implement and study a coordinated set of change strategies targeting key
barriers and drivers for undergraduate STEM reform at a community college
(Whatcom Community College), a regional comprehensive university (Western
Washington University), and a large Hispanic-serving institution (University of
Texas- Rio Grande Valley). The absence of a shared framework to define, measure,
and reward effective teaching can be a barrier to broad implementation of
inclusive RBIS. Through this project's coordinated set of change strategies,
STEM faculty will: 1) Develop a shared framework for effective instruction that
operationalizes RBIS and includes equity and inclusion as key components, 2)
Develop faculty and chairs’ knowledge and skills around the framework, 3) Engage
instructional change teams of 2-4 faculty in peer observations followed by
learning-focused conversations for feedback to improve enactment of RBIS, 4)
Prepare faculty to lead departmental change through a leadership development
program, and 5) Co-facilitate departmental conversations to revise policies and
procedures to reward faculty’s use of inclusive, equitable RBIS. An existing
four-category model of change strategies will provide a framework for design-
based research to deepen understanding about how these strategies can be
implemented and sustained. The involvement of three distinct institutions will
increase the applicability and transferability of research findings about the
faculty, departmental, and institutional factors that support or inhibit
effective implementation of the proposed change strategies. This project is
supported by the NSF HSI Program and the NSF IUSE: EHR Program. The HSI Program
aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and
build capacity at HSIs. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.