* 2111119
* Refinement and Expansion of the Community College Anatomy and Physiology Education Research (CAPER) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Chasity O'Malley, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 701,854.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the prevalence of
evidence-based instructional practices in Anatomy and Physiology (A&amp;P)
courses offered at community colleges. Across the country, nearly one in two
students fail or withdraw from the required Human A&amp;P course on the path to
careers in health sciences, jeopardizing our future workforce. Contributing to
this low success rate is the predominance of traditional, lecture-based teaching
approaches that undermine active student participation and fail to result in
deep learning. Notably, these approaches may perpetuate classroom inequities
that disadvantage the many community college students from underrepresented
communities in STEM including women, students of color, and first-generation
college students. Effective implementation of evidence based instructional
practices such as group work and peer-to-peer teaching can improve student
success in STEM education. Community college instructors will receive training
in both teaching practices and educational research, and within a short time
period will become co-investigators in studies examining the impact on student
performance. These instructors will then act as leaders in A&amp;P education
within their schools and their professional societies, to spread these practices
more broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a previous pilot
project that aimed to improve the quality of A&amp;P instruction in community
colleges and assess the impact of the interventions on both faculty and
students. This project takes an evidence-based approach to fostering
transformation in student learning and retention. Over a period of five years,
four cohorts of 10 community college instructors will complete two professional
development courses, design and implement a small-scale educational research
project investigating the impact of a student-centered teaching strategy on
student success. In addition to their individual projects, instructors will
collaborate in a multi-institutional effort examining the hypothesis that
evidence based instructional practices could alleviate the negative impacts of
anxiety on student performance and retention by improving learning and building
community. The instructors' contributions to this project will be foundational
to the increasingly relevant topic of student anxiety in the classroom. Finally,
the research team will monitor instructor perceptions and practices using a
combination of validated survey instruments, interviews, and classroom
observation protocols. The evaluation measures will determine if the project is
able to promote instructor transition to more student-centered instructional
practices. A dissemination strategy of conference presentations, blogs, and
articles will ensure that our findings reach key end users, the first step in
promoting educational change. In particular, the instructors will be well-
situated to influence the practices of other community college instructors, both
within their institutions and within professional organizations such as the
Human Anatomy and Physiology Society and the Physiology Educators Communities of
Practice. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.