* 2111941
* STTR Phase I:  Design of Diffusiophoresis Processes for Drinking Water
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Howard Stone, PHORESIS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this STTR Phase I project will be to improve water
purification with a new process offering reduced costs. Currently 1.8 billion
people worldwide drink feces-contaminated water, of whom half a million die from
waterborne diarrhea annually. The proposed technology also will reduce capital
costs in more developed areas as it eliminates the need for pumps and filtration
membranes. The modular nature of the process equipment makes it scalable, from
the modest requirements of isolated rural communities not served by distribution
networks to the largest-scale throughputs of utilities serving major cities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology advances new methods for drinking water
purification leveraging new research in fluid mechanics and electrokinetics. The
suitability for drinking water purification of a diffusiophoresis process needs
to be proven in the presence of complex chemistries representative of water
streams with multiple dissolved impurities, and for the removal of colloidal
contaminates, including bacteria. Experimental results spanning a range of
parameters need to be obtained and tested against mathematical models, to
establish design rules for scale-up. A laboratory experimental program,
supplemented by mathematical modelling for quantitative understanding, aims to:
(1) establish process feasibility and latitude in practical, ‘multi-ion’
environments; (2)map device dimensions, particle characteristics, water
chemistries, particle removal efficiency, CO2 required; (3)demonstrate removal
of colloids such that membranes will be at minimum significantly ‘unburdened’,
and of bacteria such that chemical treatment can safely be at minimum
significantly reduced; (4) determine process parameters and values for varying
colloidal and microorganism loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.