* 2111302
* Precise Q Values for Ultra-Low Energy and Highly Forbidden Beta Decays Using Penning Trap Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Redshaw, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 269,998.00

The study of extreme phenomena in the physical sciences has often provided new
discoveries and insights. In this project the PI will investigate one extreme
limit of radioactive decays: beta-decays that occur with very low energy. These
decays are interesting because they can be used in experiments to determine the
mass of the neutrino (the light, neutral particle that is also emitted in beta-
decay) and because they require the development of a more detailed theoretical
description of the effect of atomic electrons on the nuclear decay process. To
date, only one ultra-low energy beta decay has been observed (that of
Indium-115). There are many other potential candidates, but the atomic masses of
the parent and daughter nuclei are not known precisely enough to determine
whether the proposed decay can actually occur. In this project the PI will
perform precision atomic mass measurements of low energy beta decay systems
using Penning trap mass spectrometry. The technique involves confining ions with
magnetic and electric fields and then measuring the ion cyclotron frequency in
the trap; from which atomic mass can be determined. Experiments will take place
at Michigan State University and at Central Michigan University (CMU), providing
training in experimental nuclear physics techniques for undergraduate and Ph.D.
students at CMU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weak decay processes such as nuclear beta-
decay have provided significant contributions to our understanding of nuclear,
atomic and particle physics. They continue to be of interest to aid our
understanding of astrophysical processes, nuclear structure, fundamental
symmetries, and properties of the neutrino. Very rare weak decay processes, such
as highly forbidden, ultra-low Q value, and double-beta decays are important for
investigating the particle nature and mass scale of the neutrino, modelling and
understanding the background in very low count rate experiments, and for testing
theoretical descriptions of nuclear beta-decay. In the proposed work, the PI
will perform precise measurements of Q values for potential ultra-low energy
beta-decay systems using LEBIT at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB).
The decays of interest occur between the ground state of the parent nuclide and
an excited state in the daughter with an energy of &lt;1 keV. The proposed
measurements will help to identify isotopes that are potential candidates for
ultra-low Q value decays. These isotopes could be used in future neutrino mass
experiments and will also be important for enabling meaningful tests of nuclear
theory for these extreme decays where atomic interference effects are expected
to play a significant role. The work will be performed by Ph.D. and
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.