* 2111898
* SBIR Phase I: A mobile, device-based, screening tool for assessing K-6 studentsâ€™ cognitive and motor skills via machine learning handwriting analysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Renee Cassuto, OT APP DESIGN LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2023
* USD 275,993.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1
project is to improve the assessment of cognitive and motor skills in K-6
students. More specifically, this project will develop and perform feasibility
testing of a novel, objective, and machine learning-driven approach to analyzing
student handwriting proficiency, a measure of cognitive and motor skills.
Through the use of a smart device application, end-users (teachers, aides, and
parents) will be able to take a photo of a student's handwriting and receive
immediate results regarding proficiency, handwriting error types, and targeted
intervention suggestions. Given the myriad of visual motor, fine motor, and
higher-order cognitive skills needed to generate a handwriting sample and the
fact that up to 30% of students have difficulties, there is a need for new and
better detection schemes. The identification of cognitive and motor skill
deficiencies is becoming especially important with the increased use of virtual
learning environments due to the COVID-19 crisis. Students are interfacing more
with computers, and teachers have decreased access to handwriting
assignments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 1 project focuses on developing machine learning (ML) algorithms to
generate highly accurate, rapid, and objective predictions of handwriting
proficiency. These algorithms seek to predict the handwriting error sub-type. ML
analysis of handwriting images has never been done before. Through the use of
data annotation schemes, highly sensitive and grade-specific algorithms will be
created and accessed by a smart device application following the acquisition of
a single photo of a single handwritten sentence. This technology is envisioned
as a universal screening tool to be used at the beginning of each school year to
identify students with subpar handwriting proficiency. The real-time analysis of
handwriting proficiency will allow for earlier identification and earlier
interventions to improve student outcomes and deliver cost savings to school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.