* 2111845
* SBIR Phase I:  Mobile inspection robot for industrial corrosion detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2022
* Dianna Liu, ARIX Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the accuracy, safety, and
efficiency of pipe corrosion inspections for petrochemical and other
manufacturing facilities. Pipe corrosion is a major issue, estimated to cost
3.4% of the global gross domestic product (GDP), and if left unmanaged, can
result in catastrophic safety and economic incidents such as fatalities or
fugitive gas emissions (which can total 13 million metric tons/year in oil and
gas alone). Current methods to inspect pipe corrosion are expensive, slow,
manual, and unable to collect all the necessary data requested by field
engineers. The proposed robotic solution addresses these issues by: (1)
improving safety and efficiency through improved inspection and localization
mechanisms, (2) reducing the need for expensive and dangerous manual auxiliary
inspection tasks such as scaffold construction and insulation removal, and (3)
reporting significantly higher amounts of analytical data to allow improved
decision making by corrosion engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable the development of a new.
highly-automated, robotic pipe inspection tool. Current inspection data is both
difficult and manually-intensive to obtain. A novel pipe crawling robot has been
created that enables automated inspection scans of pipes for a niche use case.
Improvements in both onboard sensors and spatial positioning may enable
widespread commercial adoption. The proposed research will improve the onboard
sensor capabilities of the robot for improved corrosion detection uses and
create an artificial intelligence-driven positioning system to improve
locomotion, obstacle avoidance, and data integrity. Objective 1 requires both
mechanical and electrical research, ranging from physical design challenges
(including adhering to strict clearance, size, and weight requirements) to data
processing experiments to regulatory research. Objective 2 encompasses research
in autonomous movement, obstacle avoidance, and three-dimensional geometry
reconstruction. The resulting robot may provide the industry with a safer and
cheaper method of inspecting critical piping infrastructure, thus preventing
potentially catastrophic safety and financial consequences and environmentally-
detrimental leaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.