* 2111275
* Collaborative Research: Further Characterizing Active Learning Environments in Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Adrienne Traxler, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 04/30/2023
* USD 135,398.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving teaching and
learning in college and university physics courses. This collaborative project
involves investigators at Drexel University (Award DUE-2111128) and Wright State
University (Award DUE-2111275). Education research has shown that using an
"active learning" approach is central to improving students' learning in STEM
classes. In physics, many different teaching methods fall under the umbrella of
"active learning," but the specifics of how the methods differ from one another
are not clear. One way in which all active learning classes are the same is that
the students interact more with each other than they do in standard lectures. In
this project, the investigators will attempt to identify the important features
of active learning in physics by collecting data on what students and
instructors are doing during class and how students are interacting with each
other. Then they will attempt to relate these data to improved student learning.
This research will help instructors make decisions about which teaching methods
are best for their population of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will build on exploratory research that the investigators conducted during a
previous project that was funded by NSF Awards DUE-1711017 and DUE-1712341,
"Collaborative Research: Characterizing Active Learning Environments in
Physics." That research analyzed differences among active learning environments
using network analysis and the Classroom Observation Protocol for Undergraduate
STEM (COPUS). The focus was on a small number of sites that represented high-
fidelity, high-quality implementations of six active learning pedagogies. The
investigators discovered recurring mid-scale network structures across
pedagogies, with fine-grained models beginning to identify smaller-scale
features. In addition, by using Latent Profile Analysis (LPA) on COPUS
observations, the investigators found that the COPUS presents distinct profiles
for the different pedagogies that were examined. In the new project, the
investigators will extend the baseline data from the pilot project, exploring
whether the patterns are broadly repeated at other implementation sites of the
same pedagogies and how they relate to student outcomes. In particular, the
investigators will extend their previous work by collecting and analyzing data
from 32 different sites and by coordinating the existing network and COPUS
measures with student outcome data. Key aims of the research will be (1) to
characterize implementations of active learning curricula in physics in terms of
student-student interactions and instructor and student activity within each
learning environment, (2) to survey common features of student-student network
development across active learning environments, and (3) to integrate data on
student networks and COPUS profiles in relation to student outcomes. The
additional data and analyses should enable researchers to identify the specific
features of active learning environments that contribute to specific student
outcomes. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.