* 2111865
* STTR Phase I:  An AI-Enhanced Angiographic System to Guide Endovascular Treatment of Intracranial Aneurysms
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Kelsey Sommer, QAS.AI INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,577.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project falls within the larger scope of expanding artificial intelligence (AI)
methods into health care applications. The application is focused on image
guided endovascular surgical procedures for intracranial aneurysms (IA), which
may cause subarachnoid hemorrhage, the most devastating type of hemorrhagic
stroke. The current trends in treatment of aneurysms show that endovascular
approach has become the mainstay procedure due to reduced surgical complications
when compared with open skull surgery. Despite tremendous technological advances
in devices and surgical instrumentation, as many as 30% of these lesions are not
completely healed after the first surgical intervention, exposing patients to
additional risks for complications due to multiple surgical procedures. The AI
autonomous solution developed in this project will be the one of the first
applications that provides intraoperative prognosis for six-month healing of an
aneurysm after each surgical step to allow surgical adjustments, reducing the
risk for ruptures and re-treatments from 30% to an estimated 5% and creating
savings for the $65,000 in retreatments (roughly $1.95 B annually in the
U.S.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase
I project will aim to develop a comprehensive and autonomous AI method that will
provide intraoperative prognosis of complete healing for an IA at six months. In
current clinical practice, neuro-interventionalists cannot guarantee successful
healing of intracranial aneurysms immediately post-device placement. Treated
patients have to wait a minimum of 3-6 months before their aneurysm is
reassessed on medical imaging and the clinician decides if re-treatment is
needed. During this critical time, patients are still at risk of rupture. In
addition, re-treatments have higher risk to the patient as well as bear a
financial burden on hospitals and insurance companies. The proposed algorithms
will be fully integrated with surgical equipment and will allow dynamic
angiographic analysis to derive physics-based parameters related to the nature
of blood flow inside the aneurysm sac. These parameters are combined with a
machine learning algorithm to provide a prediction as to whether the treatment
is sufficient for a full healing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.