* 2111260
* Collaborative Research: Online Professional Enhancement and Capacity Building for Instructional Practices in Undergraduate Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Douglas Ensley, Mathematical Association of America
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,140,379.00

This project aims to serve the national interest to advance implementation and
understanding of effective practices in delivering online teaching- and
learning-focused professional development to undergraduate mathematics
educators. Current models for effective professional development often are
expensive and restrictive regarding who can participate, largely because they
require travel and other support that is neither universally available to
individuals nor sustainable in the long term by institutions and individuals,
thus limiting the potential impact. To this end, the Mathematical Association of
America (MAA) and the University of Colorado at Boulder (UCB) will implement and
study a new online teaching- and learning-focused professional development
program which will reach higher education professionals, including those who
have been less able to travel due to various constraints. The impetus will be to
determine effective use of online tools and practices to deliver professional
training around themes of active learning in the mathematics classroom, leading
to broad impact on mathematics instruction throughout the country, as well as
the development of a large cadre of people with this skill set. In line with
this, the project will incorporate explicit efforts to build this capacity by
training new workshop providers, including those who have had and continue to
have scant opportunities to travel for professional development. The project
will activate two levers for change at two levels: (1) empowering individuals to
make research-based changes to their teaching that will enhance student
learning, and (2) shaping their departmental and disciplinary cultures to
support those changes. By hosting over 40 workshops and directly serving some
1000 mathematics instructors, the project will make a lasting impact on
participant knowledge, skills, and uptake of research-based instructional
strategies in inclusive undergraduate mathematics instruction. These effects, in
turn, will reach into undergraduate mathematics classrooms to benefit many
thousands of students across the country for many years, and across all types of
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will bring
together the MAA, a long-standing source of professional development in
pedagogy, curriculum, and inclusion for post-secondary mathematics, and UCB’s
Ethnography &amp; Evaluation Research (E&amp;ER) group, an independent research
group with rich experience in measuring effectiveness of professional
development and institutional change in STEM. The project will operate at
multiple levels to achieve several underlying goals. First, planning,
implementing, evaluating, and researching the workshops to generate new
knowledge regarding best practices for online professional development models.
Second, creating a professional network that aligns community needs with content
expertise, provides administrative support for managing complex processes, and
directs a communication plan to reach into underserved areas of the mathematics
community. Third, attracting instructors with varying interests by addressing a
variety of mathematical topics, content areas, and tools. Fourth, emphasizing
research-based approaches to instruction, course design, assessment. And
finally, developing strategic use of synchronous and asynchronous approaches
and, overall, developing best practice models for intensive and extended online
workshops. All workshops will create an inclusive classroom environment under
the framework offered by the MAA Instructional Practices Guide (2018), a
compendium of research-based approaches to teaching. The project design is
firmly grounded in scholarship on effective instruction, professional learning,
system change, and measurement. The E&amp;ER investigators will apply a
research-with-evaluation approach to measure impact of online professional
development, employing Ajzen’s Theory of Planned Behavior coupled with a
component perspective of Century et.al. to implementing innovations, as
conceptual frameworks for measuring individual instructors’ growth and
implementation and how these depend on their professional backgrounds and
instructional contexts. Mirroring the multiple levels in which the project will
operate, E&amp;ER will also track the growth of professional development leaders
who take part in project trainings, and will evaluate, research, and disseminate
findings on effective evidence-based techniques for online professional
development. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program
supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of
higher education and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.