* 2111065
* Collaborative research: Integrating Perspective-taking and Systems Thinking for Complex Problem-Solving
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Paul Brehm, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 220,245.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by using computer modeling to
present multiple perspectives, helping students to improve systems thinking and
complex socio-technical problem-solving. The topics with which STEM fields
grapple are often not merely scientific problems; they are also at times
ideologically and emotionally charged issues. Such contemporary “socio-
scientific” issues affect multiple stakeholders in different ways and have real
and diverse consequences, both economic and societal. Understanding and
responding to these socio-scientific issues, such as genetically modified crops,
vaccine development/deployment and climate change mitigation, requires that
individuals not only understand scientific content and how systems work, but
also how these systems look from different vantage points. The goal of this
project is to develop and assess new teaching strategies to improve
understanding and decision-making related to such complex social and
environmental problems. This project will build on research from previous
studies to develop the state-of-the-art undergraduate instruction strategies.
The software, curricular tools, and case studies being designed will be used by
college instructors across the United States to promote perspective-taking and
problem-solving. Formally engaging students in this type of thinking is
essential to the training of America’s future workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, students will engage with a series of case
studies on complex socio-scientific issues, and use the MentalModeler
(www.mentalmodeler.org) software to map out the system from the perspectives of
different stakeholders. We believe this approach will promote systems thinking,
model-based reasoning, perspective taking, and problem-solving ability in the
undergraduate classroom. We intend to test the hypothesis that integrating novel
perspective taking and systems modeling across different undergraduate courses:
1) helps students overcome some of the cognitive and motivational obstacles
elicited by controversial socio-scientific topics, 2) leads to a deeper and more
accurate understanding of the system itself, and 3) helps learners create and
support arguments regarding the effect of interventions on system-level
outcomes. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.