* 2111827
* SBIR Phase I:  4D Flightpath-Based Autonomous Separation Assurance Systems (ASAS)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Joseph Thompson, 4-D AVIONIC SYSTEMS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 275,994.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable the safe and autonomous management
and control of airspace. The Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) and Advanced Air
Mobility (AAM) sectors are expected to grow but that will only be economically
viable if the UAV and AAM operations are highly automated. The technology
developed in this project uses a new trajectory-based approach to aircraft and
airspace operations to support that level of automation. The immediate focus of
the project is on the emerging AAM aircraft and airspace, but the technology has
an even broader potential impact for application to the commercial Air Traffic
Control (ATC) system. In the United States, over a period of one year, over 1800
operational errors (breaches of minimum required separation) were officially
attributed to airspace controller error. The commercial ATC is largely a manual
system and and there is a limit to the number of flights air traffic controllers
can manage with incremental improvements of the present system. Expansions in
the number of airborne vehicles (of all sorts) requires that air traffic control
systems be more automated to maintain their safety record.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to produce a functioning proof-of-concept demonstration of an
autonomous aircraft and airspace management and control system for AAM class
vehicles. These aviation sectors are expected to see a rapid expansion but the
highly manual implementation of airspace control will not be practical or
economically viable. The objective of this research is to support a much higher
level of automation, enabling the growth of the sectors. Aircraft missions are
defined by 4D analytic flightpath models; Aircraft are must precisely follow the
flightpaths set by the models. Deterministic and certain algorithms autonomously
detect and resolve potential loss of separation events between flightpath models
of all aircraft in the airspace. The autopilots allow the aircraft to operate
autonomously and the deconfliction ensures safe operation of the airspace.
Development of the proposed demonstration system will identify and resolve
communication and integration issues. The demonstration system seeks to provide
a test case to evaluate the viability, scalability, and robustness of the
technology and to explore the responses to nonstandard and unforeseen operating
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.