* 2111970
* STTR Phase I:  Investigation and Optimization of a Novel, Pheromone-based Tool for Measuring Honey bee Colony Pest and Disease Resistance
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Kimberly Petersen, OPTERA LLP
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2023
* USD 255,748.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project includes the reduction of honey bee colony mortality by up to 75%
through early identification and improved breeding of pest- and disease-
resistant colonies. Honey bees are dying at unprecedented rates, with annual
losses up to 45% in the United States. A primary cause of colony death is the
parasitic mite Varroa. The unhealthy brood odor (UBO) assay is a pheromone-based
tool that reduces labor costs required to measure Varroa-resistance by 18x,
accelerating decision-making by 20%. The assayâ€™s user-friendly design makes
honey bee selection and queen evaluation more accessible to beekeepers, who are
often restricted by the high technical skill and/or extensive labor required for
existing assays. The UBO assay has potential to improve honey bee health and
increase profitability of beekeeping operations, and thus may significantly
improve global crop pollination and food security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will assess the technical feasibility of using a honey bee
pheromone-based assay to predict colony-level disease- and pest-resistance. This
novel tool has the potential to improve honey bee health, revolutionize honey
bee breeding, and inform important apiary management decisions, as it improves
efficiency and efficacy of honey bee selection by enabling rapid and accurate
identification of Varroa-resistant honey bee colonies. However, to be highly
effective and achieve widespread uptake the technology must be practically and
economically accessible, must perform consistently despite environmental
variability, and must be established as a reliable indicator of heritable
Varroa-resistance traits. The proposed research will employ sophisticated
behavioral, biochemical, breeding, and manufacturing techniques to optimize
prototype efficacy, safety, and delivery, reduce production costs, assess
prototype performance across environmental variables, and provide a proof-of-
concept for heritability of Varroa-resistance traits identified by colony
response to the prototype assay. Expected results include improvements to the
safety and efficiency of the product delivery system, improved understanding of
the effects of environmental variability on product performance, and
confirmation of the heritability of traits identified by honey bee behavioral
response to in-hive tests of the product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.