* 2111066
* The Parity Violating Electron Scattering Program of Louisiana Tech University
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Neven Simicevic, Louisiana Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 305,909.00

A central goal of subatomic physics is to gain a comprehensive understanding of
the basic "building blocks" of matter, and how they interact with each other.
Since its formulation nearly five decades ago, the “Standard Model” of nuclear
and particle physics has been remarkably successful and allows us to describe a
vast range of physical phenomena. It is known, however, to be incomplete, and
there are compelling reasons why the Standard Model should eventually break down
and fail to describe some properties of matter. Precision measurements using
electron accelerators present an opportunity to test the Standard Model of
particle physics and to search for new physics. The Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab) in Newport News, Virginia is currently the
world's leading laboratory enabling precision tests of the Standard Model
through electron scattering experiments. This project will support an effort to
precisely determine the weak charge of the electron in a large collaborative
experiment, known as MOLLER, at Jefferson Lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
electroweak mixing angle is a fundamental parameter of the electroweak sector of
the standard model of particle physics and a comparison of the measured value,
at a particular energy scale, with the predicted value allows for a sensitive
search for physics beyond the standard model. The Louisiana Tech University
nuclear physics group will collaborate with other US and International groups to
measure the weak mixing angle at low energy using parity-violating electron
techniques at low momentum transfer; 4.5 x 10-3 GeV/c2 &lt; Q2 &lt; 0.20 GeV/c2.
The main goals of the LTU group’s work will be to design and develop charge
particle detection systems for the MOLLER experiment, design an electron
detector for a polarimeter, design radiation shielding measures for MOLLER, and
develop a theoretical interpretation of the experimental results. In addition,
the group will finish publishing the results from a prior experiment at
Jefferson Lab: Q-weak.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Louisiana Tech University is
located in a rural area of Northern Louisiana. In recent years, all of the
surrounding universities have eliminated their physics departments leaving the
Louisiana Tech program as the only physics undergraduate or graduate program
available in Northern Louisiana. The LTU commitment to the involvement of
undergraduates in research is one of the reasons they have a physics
undergraduate program. The NSF funding will enable underrepresented groups from
several disciplines, engineers, science teachers, and high school students to
participate in forefront physics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Physics Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.