* 2111490
* 3D Partonic Structure of Hadrons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Peter Schweitzer, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project will contribute to study of the internal structure of hadrons,
fundamental building blocks of matter that include protons, neutrons, and other
subatomic particles. Important insights in the internal structure of hadrons are
gained from experimental studies of high-energy processes carried out at leading
experimental facilities in the USA, such as the Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility and the Brookhaven National Laboratory, and other
facilities world-wide. The PI and his collaborators will be developing
theoretical and phenomenological tools to provide theoretical support to those
experimental science programs and help extract the 3-dimensional structure of
protons, neutrons, and atomic nuclei in terms of quarks and gluons, their
constituents. This project will provide excellent training opportunities for a
new generation of nuclear physicists, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
and undergraduate students. This project will also support outreach activities,
such as public lectures to engage with the general public, share the excitement
of nuclear physics, and disseminate the latest results in nuclear and particle
physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Depending on the specific reaction being studied,
the internal structure of hadrons is characterized in complementary ways in
terms of various functions including: parton distribution functions, generalized
parton distributions, transverse momentum dependent distributions, and
generalized transverse momentum dependent distributions. In this project the PI,
together with his postdoc and students, will study this set of complementary
functions with the objective of exploring so far unknown hadronic properties
including spin-orbit correlations of partons, the 3-dimensional imaging or the
mapping of strong forces exerted on partons inside a hadron. This research will
provide new insights on the theoretical and phenomenological properties of these
functions and advance the current knowledge of the hadronic structure. This
research will provide support to experiments conducted or in preparation at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility,
and the planned future Electron-Ion Collider.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.