* 2111531
* University of Utah Particle Astrophysics Research Group Grant (VERITAS, HAWC, CTA)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* David Kieda, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,200,423.00

High-energy gamma-radiation represents one of the key messengers of the extreme
universe, in particular providing insight into the cosmic ray accelerators that
produce the highest energy particles observed. The award supports the activities
of researchers at the University of Utah for on-going participation in
observations and analysis of data from the High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
and VERITAS observatories, and the future Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA)
observatory. Students and postdoctoral researchers supported by this grant will
explore the origin of the high-energy gamma-radiation emitted by black holes,
neutron stars, and supernova remnants. In addition, the researchers will develop
ultra-high-resolution visible-light observations to accurately measure the
diameters and create images of nearby stars using the VERITAS Stellar Intensity
Interferometry Observatory. The award supports an extensive training program for
undergraduate students who do not otherwise have access to extensive research
facilities, and activities that explore the connections between astronomical
dark skies, urban planning, biodiversity and microclimate, workforce diversity,
and economic opportunity through the Universityâ€™s Consortium for Dark Sky
Studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in multi-wavelength analyses
developed by the researchers provide a framework to explore possible
astrophysical origins of galactic cosmic rays and the observed local positron
flux. This includes studies of archival and new VERITAS observations of
promising TeV halo regions identified from current all-sky catalogs published by
the Fermi satellite Observatory, and the HAWC northern-sky surveys. Next steps
will realize improved gamma-ray observations with the newly-developed wide-field
of view Schwartzchild-Couder Telescope and result in integrating these elements,
the Multi-Messenger Maximum Likelihood analysis framework (3ML), and Matched Run
Method analysis tools to the GammaPy analysis framework, for use by the future
CTA observatory. Completing the program is a survey of stellar diameters
measured in the U/V optical bands via intensity interferometry observations with
the VERITAS telescopes that will permit development of a suite of analysis tools
for imaging of O/B/A stars, Cepheid variables, and binary systems. This project
advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.