* 2111742
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid surgical stapler with tissue sensing technology
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Thomas Wenchell, REVMEDICA INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 01/31/2022
* USD 275,881.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the current state of the art of
surgical stapler devices. Despite their widespread adoption in surgical
practices, stapler malfunctioning or misuse can cause severe surgical and post-
surgical complications which include bleeding, sepsis, and death. Misfiring and
cutting errors are the main causes of staplers malfunctioning. This project
proposes a semi-reusable surgical stapler which will provide real-time feedback
to surgeons to guide the firing, thus reducing staplers malfunctioning and
increasing surgeries success rates. The proposed solution combines a reusable
control system, which will decrease the amount of toxic waste generated by the
healthcare system (adding up to landfill and accounting for 25% of healthcare
expenditures), and a disposable handle, which will allow to cut down the cost
and time required for surgery preparation (40% savings/procedure). The proposed
solution will save hospital costs and improve surgeries performances, decreasing
the risks of complications during surgeries. Additionally, this project will
bring forward research in the field of smart devices in medical industry,
potentially leading to innovation for other types of surgical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project proposes to develop the control system to automate the tissue
recognition of the firing system of the proposed surgical stapler. The stapler
working parameters must be carefully selected in accordance with the tissue’s
biomechanical properties. Tissues' intrinsic characteristics vary among organs
and individuals, complicating the standardization of firing parameters. The
proposed system will assist surgeons by providing real-time information over the
tissue to clamp and advising over the optimal cartridge to be used. This project
will feature the design of the control system capable of sensing the tissue in
the clamp and deciding optimal staple firing parameters. First, the components
of the control system will be designed. Successively, the algorithm to control
firing speed, energy consumption, and articulation will be developed on an
empirical dataset. The project will establish the correlation between clamping
forces and tissue parameters. The benefits yielded by the developed surgical
stapler, will be benchmarked against commercial solutions both in vitro and ex
vivo. At the completion of this Phase I project, the proposed innovation will be
ready to be tested in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.