* 2111376
* Examining the Effects of Course Climate, Active Learning, and Intersectional Identities on Undergraduate Student Success in Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Mary Lou Maher, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 356,996.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
student success in computer science courses. To do so, it will study
relationships between student success and the course climate and teaching
practices of their computer science courses. It will further analyze these
relationships for students with intersecting identities, such as women who are
first generation college students. Many STEM classrooms feature passive learning
approaches and intentionally or unintentionally establish create competitive
course climates that inhibit collaboration. Alternative teaching approaches that
encourage collaboration and active learning are gaining traction in many
undergraduate computing programs. Studies have generally indicated a positive
relationship between collaborative active learning and increased student
learning outcomes. However, implementation of active learning varies and the
results on student learning have been inconsistent. It is possible that the
inconsistencies may reflect differential impacts of competitive, passive
learning on groups of students with specific intersecting identities. This
project aims to explore the relationship between active learning and cooperative
course climate on students with intersecting identities, including race, gender,
and social class. The knowledge generated by this research has the potential to
improve student success in computer science and thus broaden participation of
individuals from groups that are not yet equitably represented in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project identifies course structure and
sociality as two major components of course climate. Course structure includes
features such as the course timeline, expectations for attendance or
participation, and how grades are determined. Sociality involves forming and
working in supportive communities. The project uses the constructs of course
structure and sociality to capture pedagogical components that faculty select
and combine in their adoption active learning approaches. Correlations will then
be identified between these active learning components and student outcomes, and
will be used to explore differential outcomes across intersectional student
identities. This knowledge may help instructors select active learning
strategies that would lead to more effective student learning, or combine
elements of structure and sociality to develop new promising pedagogies in
undergraduate computing education. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. This project is in the Engaged Student Learning track, through which
the IUSE program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of
promising practices and tools.   &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.