* 2111020
* Inverse Problems for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* William Rundell, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 210,295.00

This project will address three topics in the general area of inverse problems
and those are the amount of data needed to recover the desired unknown, the
stability of the result in terms of the data measurements, and the existence or
not of an algorithm to go from the measured data to the desired unknowns. Each
of these will be an essential component of the work for this proposal. The first
of these is critical and from a mathematical viewpoint typically the most
challenging. Without such a result we have no guarantee that even finding a
solution to the mathematical problem allows us to correlate this with the actual
physical solution. In each of the works we anticipate this will require the
greatest effort and challenges. Answering the stability question will be
essential for us to determine: "given a tolerance level between our constructed
solution and the actual one, what is the allowed maximal error in the data
measurements that will allow us to achieve this." Of course, to carry this out
one needs a reconstruction method and each algorithm, even if it provides a
solution, may require a different error bound on the data. Thus in some sense
the question we have to answer is not only if a computational algorithm can be
found, but in what sense is it near to being optimal? This latter question is
one where the work of a mathematically strong undergraduate student can be
engaged. Mentoring of such students will be an aspect of this work. This project
will support 3 undergraduate students each year of the 3 year grant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the recovery of the nonlinear terms in
nonlinear reaction-diffusion equations and systems of parabolic type is sought;
that is, coefficients such as the conductivity or the reaction or interaction
terms that depends on the solution itself. An example here is a (spatially or
environment variable) rate coefficient in a complex inter-species interaction
term that itself has to be determined as is typical in sophisticated epidemic
models. Also considered are nonlinear hyperbolic equations occurring in, for
example, medical imaging. Nonlinear acoustics has a term that essentially
represents the object to be reconstructed and this is coupled to a second term
that arises from the nonlinear model and appears as a coefficient in the leading
term of the partial differential operator. The simplest model that retains the
nonlinear effects is to take this to be the identity operator but a more
realistic case is to assume this is more complex and additionally seek its
recovery. The damped or attenuated wave equation occurs in many areas of physics
and engineering. The usual assumption is the damping mechanism is proportional
to velocity so that a time-derivative term is incorporated into the basic
equation. It is often been observed in applications such as acoustics,
viscoelasticity, structural vibration and seismic wave propagation, that the
magnitude of the damping is frequency dependent and obeys a power law behavior.
A typical formulation involves operators of nonlocal type and these are usually
based on fractional derivatives or fractional powers of differential operators.
The aim is to explore these effects with particular emphasis on asking whether
the inverse problems are more tractable (that is, in terms of ill-conditioning
and convergence of numerical methods) for both types of damping. In all cases,
the analysis of iterative schemes to recover the unknown terms is an essential
feature of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.