* 2111756
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Catalytic Membrane Reactor for the Production of Valuable Chemical Intermediates from Zero/Negative Value Feedstock and Waste
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Davar Sasongko, SIEV TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to convert non-food cellulosic corn fiber, a
low-value byproduct from corn ethanol plants, to fermentable sugars using a
bolt-on catalytic membrane reactor without the need to construct new facilities.
The successful completion of the project will enable corn ethanol producers to
diversify revenue streams, maximize production efficiencies. The proposed
technology operates with higher efficiency than naturally occurring systems and
can complete the conversion in less than one day, 5-10 times less than the
exiting enzyme technology. The catalyst can be used repeatedly and is
environmentally friendly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project relies on a
catalytic membrane reactor with a patented enzyme replacement catalyst to
simultaneously convert cellulosic biomass into fermentable sugars and separate
the hydrolyzed sugars with high yield in one step. This catalyst consists of two
adjacent polymeric nanostructures, a polystyrene sulfonic acid and poly (ionic
liquid) chains grafted from a membrane support. Two types of grafted polymer
chains will act cooperatively to bind and hydrolyze the biomass substrate,
similar in nature to the functions of cellulase enzymes. The polystyrene
sulfonic acid chain catalyzes the hydrolysis of the polysaccharides to soluble
sugars whereas the poly (ionic liquid) chain enhances the catalytic activity and
selectivity of the synthesized catalyst. The catalytic activity and selectivity
of the designed catalyst can be tuned and optimized by ring substitution and by
varying independently the properties of the grafted nanostructures. A porous
membrane with an appropriate pore size will enable the separation of monomer
sugars immediately after they are released, thus driving the forward reaction,
minimizing acid-catalyzed sugar degradation, and improving sugar yields. In
addition to fermentable sugars, the catalyst can be tuned to convert cellulosic
biomass or other carbohydrates such as agricultural residues or food waste into
platform chemicals for the production of bio-based
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.