* 2111185
* The Precision Frontier at FRIB: Masses, Radii, Moments, and Fundamental Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Georg Bollen, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,500,000.00

What are the underlying forces and constituents of atomic nuclei? An answer to
this question is revealed through the basic nuclear properties of matter such as
the mass, charge radius, and decay of atoms into other atoms. The Precision
Measurements group at FRIB will perform experiments to determine atomic masses,
nuclear radii, and extend the search for exotic decays of nuclei. The
measurements are designed to extract the fundamental properties of nuclei, with
large neutron to proton ratios, which can only occur in Nature during extreme
astrophysical events. The research has implications for nuclear structure
physics, nuclear astrophysics and the interpretation of multi-messenger
astrophysical signals. The work proposed here will also provide significant
contributions to the NSF Big Idea “Windows on the Universe” through measurements
that improve the interpretation of signals observed in multi-messenger
astrophysical events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Precision Measurements group will
take advantage of the unprecedented capabilities of the Facility for Rare
Isotope Beams (FRIB) to create beams of unusual isotopes and to measure their
properties. There are three main thrusts in the project. First, measuring atomic
masses. These measurements are of direct importance for understanding
nucleosynthesis in extreme astrophysical environments and as probes of nuclear
structure at the edge of stability. In addition, with adequately precise
measurements, the PIs can test fundamental symmetries in Nuclear and Particle
Physics. Second, nuclear radii and electromagnetic moments. Measurements of the
properties of mirror nuclei will contribute to our understanding of the nuclear
equation of state, which is particularly relevant for the understanding the
merging of binary neutron stars. In addition, ground-state measurements in a
variety of systems test nuclear-structure theory. Third, exotic interactions.
Measurements with exotic nuclei, polarized nuclei, and positronium will test
fundamental symmetries. In addition, these measurements test the extremes of
basic nuclear theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurements will be performed on
the FRIB stopped-beam line using, for example, a Penning Trap and local laser
facilities. These tools will also be made available to other users of the FRIB
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.