* 2111696
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficient Arithmetic on Quasi-Compressed Data for Performance Improvement
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,10/31/2023
* David Chen, ARITH INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve the performance of semiconductor chips. Specifically, it
develops a novel method to operate directly on compressed data, saving time,
energy, and latency. This improved performance will affect computationally
intensive applications such as medical imaging (e.g., CT/MRI), climate
simulation, hurricane warnings, and earthquake alerts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a method to
operate on compressed data. Today, computers apply data compression to identify
and remove redundancy in the data in order to save storage space. Computers
apply arithmetic to compute in integers or real numbers (usually represented
internally as floating-point data). However, today's computers first decompress
the data, compute, and then compress the computed result, consuming additional
time and energy. This project develops an arithmetic and math hardware
accelerator capable of processing compressed data directly to dramatically
improve computation performance, storage effectiveness, and energy efficiency.
This project combines data compression and floating-point engineering to deliver
the first-ever Compressed Floating-Point Unit (CFPU) that minimizes
semiconductor and energy usage and reduces computation
latency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.