* 2111563
* Divide-and-Conquer Approach for Strongly Interacting Systems via Convex Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Yuehaw Khoo, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 149,270.00

Many problems in physics, data science and engineering involve interactions of
so-called agents via pairwise potentials. Beyond the simple regime where the
agents are independent of each other, determining the joint states of agents
often suffers from complexity that increases quickly with the dimension of the
problem; this feature is called the curse-of-dimensionality. Research in this
project will address these challenges by exploiting a convex optimization
approach and will demonstrate synergy between various aspects of computational
mathematics and data science. The project will provide new tools for the
Material Genome Initiative by accelerating the computation of many-body quantum
system as well as improve the capability of protein structure determination from
distance-based experimental measurements. Graduate students will be involved in
research and will receive interdisciplinary training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop a variety of divide-and-conquer and multiscale techniques
to significantly improve the scalability of algorithms for interacting agents.
In addition, tensor compression strategies will be developed to accelerate the
solution of subproblems. The project will demonstrate the effectiveness of the
strategy for several scenarios. In the domain of data science, through the lens
of the proposed optimization methods, the PI will investigate the sensor-network
localization problem and multimarginal optimal transport problem. In physics and
chemistry, alternative paradigms will be developed for solving for the ground
state energy of strongly correlated systems such as quantum Ising and Hubbard
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.