* 2111555
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving farmer safety and grain storage efficiencies via a remote-controlled grain management and extraction robot
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Benjamin Johnson, GRAIN WEEVIL CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to help farmers across the nation improve
their grain storage efficiencies in a remote and safe manner. In addition to
demonstrating technical feasibility of a mobile robot, this project may help
refine key design considerations such as cost, portability, and usability, that
will help promote widespread customer adoption during commercialization. Though
the robot will be initially designed for commonly stored cereal grains in the
U.S., this technology may be applied across numerous agriculture-related
commodities around the world. The robotics technology has the potential to
enhance farmer safety while simultaneously improving grain management practices
that yield more efficient and stable food supply chains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project explores the use of mobile robots for grain storage assessment. Grain
bins provide challenging environments for the operation of robots including:
dust and temperature extremes, shifting fluid dynamics, and grain quality
challenges. The focus of the research includes classifying and characterizing
key grain surface variables that impact robotic effectiveness, identifying the
top 3-5 grain management tasks by frequency and importance, and analyzing the
impacts of grain characteristics on each task, and designing and conducting
controlled environmental studies to quantify performance requirements. The
project will also identify and define potential grain engagement paths/patterns
for top use case tasks, and analyze potential failure modes for robot operations
within grain bins. Once complete, the research may demonstrate the impact on
post-harvest workflows, develop autonomous operations, and build a safe robot
platform for use in grain bins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.