* 2111810
* SBIR Phase II:  Transcranial Dynamic Focused Ultrasound for the Non-Invasive Opening of the Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Bhaskar Ramamurthy, CORDANCE MEDICAL INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Chinchoy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 998,501.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enable new therapeutic strategies to
treat brain diseases such a brain cancer. Treating brain diseases is challenging
partly because of the existence of an anatomical structure called the blood-
brain barrier. This barrier prevents the entry of almost all therapeutic
molecules into the brain tissue from the blood. This has led to a devastating
impact on the patients and society as a whole. As an example, for glioblastoma,
the most common form of primary malignant brain tumors, the five-year survival
rate is only 6.8%. Impact and commercial potential include increased treatment
options where few or none are available and improved patient outcomes, all with
a system that is patient-friendly and designed to cause minimal disruption to
the existing treatment workflows. Additionally, the advancement of this project
will provide a convenient tool for drug developers to study and develop new
drugs without the need to develop a special carrier to transport drugs into the
brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project involves designing and building a prototype version of a system
that can deliver therapies to the brain in a non-invasive and non-intrusive
manner. The performance of this system to accurately deliver to regions of
interest within the brain will be measured and characterized in a test
environment mimicking that of a human head. This project will advance a
prototype for use in both clinical and research
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.