* 2111653
* NSF Future of Semiconductors and Beyond Workshop: Materials, Devices, and Integration, March 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Alan Seabaugh, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2021
* USD 43,176.00

This workshop convenes leaders in electronic materials, devices, and systems to
discuss emerging opportunities in semiconductors and related materials and their
integration within electronic and photonic systems. Semiconductors have long
been at the core of electronic systems and permeate modern life. The versatility
of semiconductor materials and devices has led to continuous opportunities for
innovation and technology development. Semiconductors constitute a broad range
of devices in computers, cell phones, lasers, lighting, solar cells, medical
diagnostics, and the internet. Continued American leadership in semiconductor
technology is essential to maintain national security and defense, and foster
economic growth. This workshop is aimed to develop a vision for directed
research in future innovations in semiconductors and related materials to
promote continued U.S. leadership in this critical
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Future of Semiconductors and Beyond Workshop
will promote discussion around four topical areas with significant potential for
innovation and future applications. These are: (1) Harnessing electronic phases
and phase transitions, (2) Engineering heterogeneous semiconductor structures,
(3) Extending device frontiers, and (4) Advancing organic/biodevices. Topic (1)
builds on our increased understanding of how to control “phase transitions” in
semiconductors that lend them new functionality such as superconductor or
ferroelectric behavior, thus enabling new applications, and improvement in speed
and energy efficiency. Topic (2) will explore new insights into forming
heterogeneous semiconductor materials in ways that are not compromised by the
traditional challenges of material defects, interfaces and surfaces. Topic (3)
will address unsolved problems in signal transduction and optoelectronic devices
in the far infrared and ultraviolet spectral regions. This is a space with broad
applications extending from defense to medical diagnostics. Finally, Topic (4)
will focus on the intersection of semiconductor devices and biological sensing
and control. Themes of interest include flexible semiconductor form-factors and
bio-compatibility. The topical sessions will address both future visions and
grand challenges, as these can serve to generate innovation and collaborations
leading to rapid advances in science and engineering. The virtual workshop
format will enable wide participation and stimulation of ideas across a diverse
community and these will be summarized in a final report of the workshop
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.