* 2111796
* SBIR Phase I:  Delivery systems for the controlled release of bioactive compounds to extend the shelf life of perishable agricultural products
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Benjamin Jones, RYP LABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2023
* USD 255,044.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to reduce the loss of fresh produce due to microbial spoilage during
its journey from farm to consumer. These food losses amount to $200 billion per
year in direct costs worldwide, as well as an increase the environmental
footprint of food production systems. The food spoilage also causes additional
potential damage to the environment and human health due to the increased use of
synthetic pesticides and preservatives in an effort to prevent loss. This
project aims to reduce food spoilage and the unintended consequences by
providing safe, effective, and environmentally responsible methods for managing
food crops post-harvest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on
the development of controlled release systems to deliver naturally occurring,
safe, anti-fungal essential oil compound (EOC) vapors to protect perishable
agricultural produce from spoilage. Several experimental systems have been
reported in the literature for the controlled release delivery of the EO vapors
but no commercialized solutions yet exist. This highlights the importance of
focused research and development needed to develop these EO delivery systems.
Concurrently with controlled release systems investigations, crucial testing and
modeling capabilities both in house and in an external network are also being
developed. These include various volatile quantitation techniques ranging from
photoionization detectors (PIDs) to gas chromatography with mass spectroscopy
(GC-MS) instruments, test beds, and dynamic and finite element modeling of
transport phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.