* 2111087
* Collaborative Research: Facilitating Engineering Faculty's Adoption of Evidence-based Instructional Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Shane Brown, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 399,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing adoption of
evidence-based instructional practices (EBIPs) in undergraduate engineering
courses. Research shows that, although many faculty are aware of EBIPs,
relatively few adopt them in their classes. EBIPs include important educational
innovations with demonstrated evidence of a positive impact on student outcomes.
Thus, widespread STEM educational success hinges upon greater implementation of
these innovations. Workshops on EBIPs increase faculty awareness of them, but do
not result in high levels of adoption. To increase adoption of EBIPS, efforts
must focus on faculty needs for content-specific resources and for help on
implementing EBIPs in their classrooms. This project aims to address specific
contextual needs of faculty and examine the process by which faculty attempt to
implement EBIPs within their local conditions. Primary activities of the project
include: 1) examining faculty’s contextual barriers, affordances, and the
decision-making process when implementing EBIPs; 2) co-developing course
curriculum and materials to implement EBIPs with faculty; and 3) developing
research-informed resources for EBIP-based course development. The project will
engage faculty from at least 40 different institutions, including R1,
undergraduate-focused, minority-serving, and two-year
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase the adoption of EBIPs in
engineering classrooms, it is critical to understand the contextual, individual
challenges and successes faculty encounter when developing their courses. The
expected outcomes of this project are: (1) an understanding of the contextual
barriers, affordances and decision-making process of engineering faculty when
implementing EBIPs, (2) case study examples that provide detailed descriptions
of faculty attempts to incorporate EBIPs, and thus provide accounts of how the
change process occurs, and (3) a conceptual model for EBIP-based course
development that will facilitate engineering faculty learning about how to
integrate EBIPs. Project results will have implications for facilitating faculty
adoption of EBIPs. The materials developed, sample exercises and answer keys,
literature, and resources accessed during the process, as well as implementation
strategies with examples of contextual challenges and how to mitigate them, will
be shared through publications, workshops, and online media. Cumulatively, the
model and ‘real classroom’ examples are expected to serve as a platform for
supporting faculty and promoting large scale adoption of EBIPs. The project will
contribute to national objectives to broaden implementation of effective
instructional practices at higher education institutions. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.