* 2111546
* Precision Neutrino Oscillation Physics with JUNO
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Juan Ochoa-Ricoux, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2024
* USD 502,700.00

Neutrinos are among the most ubiquitous and intriguing of the fundamental
elementary particles. They have no electric charge and interact only very weakly
with the other fundamental particles of nature. They were also long thought to
be massless. However, a revolution in our understanding of neutrinos occurred
roughly two decades ago with the discovery that these elusive particles change
their quantum property known as flavor as they travel through space. This
phenomenon, commonly referred to as neutrino oscillation, is now confirmed by a
wealth of data and implies that the neutrino must have a mass, even if very
small. This award supports the activities of the Jiangmen Underground Neutrino
Observatory (JUNO) group at the University of California-Irvine (UCI). The JUNO
experiment is primarily designed to provide precision measurements of the
interactions of neutrinos produced in reactors at the China Taishan and
Yangjiang nuclear power plants. The UCI JUNO team will provide key contributions
to the installation and commissioning of the experiment’s small photomultiplier
tube (PMT) system and will lead the calibration of the energy response of the
full detector. The team is also preparing the data analyses for the first
oscillation parameter measurements of the new detector. The program reinitiates
the UCI QuarkNet center, including a Masterclass focused on the JUNO experiment,
with a primary goal of providing opportunities in particle physics research to
high-school teachers and their students with a particular focus on participants
from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JUNO is currently
under construction in the southeast of China and is designed to provide a first
measurement of the ordering of the neutrino mass states. The detector is
scheduled to begin data taking in 2022. The UCI JUNO group is a leader in the
project’s small (3-inch) PMT system, consisting of 25,600 photodetectors.
Combined with the laser calibration system, the small PMT system is essential to
realizing an energy response of the full JUNO detector of 3 percent at 1 MeV and
become the first experiment to observe the effect of the “fast” (first and third
eigenstates) and “slow” (first and second eigenstates) oscillation frequencies
simultaneously. In addition, reaching the detector design energy response will
make it possible to measure the oscillation cycles driven by the mass splitting
of the second and third eigenstates, and thus discriminate between the two mass
ordering scenarios at approximately 3 sigma after 6 years of data
taking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.