* 2111383
* Adaptive High Order Low-Rank Tensor Methods for High-Dimensional Partial Differential Equations with Application to Kinetic Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Wei Guo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 237,111.00

Kinetic models find a wide range of applications in science and engineering. One
celebrated example is the Vlasov-Maxwell system which plays a fundamental role
in plasma physics. Among many existing challenges for deterministic kinetic
simulations, the curse of dimensionality and the associated huge computational
cost have been a key obstacle for realistic high-dimensional simulations. The
project focuses on the development of a novel computational framework for
kinetic simulations by integrating the emerging low-rank tensor decompositions
with advanced high order discretization schemes. The framework can lead to a
class of accurate and efficient algorithms that are resistant to the curse of
dimensionality for solving challenging high-dimensional problems. This project
will support one graduate student during each of the three years of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the project is to develop a novel
computational framework for simulating high-dimensional kinetic models with high
order accuracy, numerical stability, and manageable cost. The algorithms
incorporate the emerging tensor approach and advanced high order discretization
schemes, aiming to accurately and efficiently extract the low-rank structure of
the solution data with significantly reduced complexity and potentially break
the curse of dimensionality. Another project focus is to develop a novel low-
rank tensor approach that can mitigate possible severe rank increase for
transport-dominated simulations, which is known as a major limitation for the
existing low-rank tensor methods. The key component in the algorithm design is
to consider the underlying flow map system. Several computational and
theoretical aspects of the proposed algorithms will be investigated, including
structure preservation, complexity, stability and accuracy analysis, application
to the rotating Vlasov model, and beyond. Through this research, both numerical
and analytical techniques for solving challenging high-dimensional problems will
be advanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.