* 2111628
* SBIR Phase I: Autonomous Vehicle Multi-Sensor Obstacle Detection Safety System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,08/31/2022
* Sara Jennings, ORION LABS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project enables low-cost, high-performance sensing for a
wide range of commercial applications. Robotics and automation technology are on
the rise. Autonomous systems must perform at high standards of safety while
maintaining high efficiencies for task completion. The Phase I project is
focusedon robotic sensing to provide better information and decision-making
capabilities to applications across industries. This work addresses the ever
growing need for safe robotics and automation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to improve sensing and
decision making in the real world with a focus on robotic applications. During
this phase, the performance of existing sensing and processing solutions will be
tailored to specific target environments. This tailoring is enabled by fusing
synthesis of above-human level data and contextual cues from multiple sources to
build better understand machine observables. The output from this effort will be
a cumulative, high-performance sensing and decision-making solution tuned for
robotic platforms. The technology seeks to demonstrate the ability to provide an
integrated sensor system that is redundant, reliable, cheap, and easily
deployable based on existing autonomous robotic systems. The project will
specifically enable obstacle detection capabilities for low-speed autonomous
mobile robotic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.