* 2111752
* RUI: Lorentz and CPT Violation in Particles and in Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Mewes, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 135,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Matthew Mewes at
California Polytechnic State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lorentz invariance
is the mathematical principle which implies that the laws of physics do not
depend on the speed or orientation of the experiment through which they are
tested. Lorentz invariance is a feature of our two most fundamental descriptions
of Nature, the Standard Model of particle physics and General Relativity. The
Standard Model provides a complete characterization of subatomic particles and
physics on very small distance scales, while General Relativity explains gravity
and is relevant on large scales. Physicists believe that these two theories can
be combined into a single all-encompassing unified theory. However, decades of
research have failed to produce a definitive unified theory. The research of
Professor Mewes focuses on an approach to this problem that involves a possible
breakdown of Lorentz invariance itself. This breakdown might arise from a
unifying theory, and any detection of Lorentz-invariance violation would provide
valuable clues that could help uncover the unifying theory. The goal of this
research project is to extend the existing theoretical description of potential
Lorentz-invariance violations and to identify their resulting experimental
signatures. This research advances the national interest by promoting science in
one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new
physical laws. Moreover, parts of this work will be accessible to undergraduates
and will provide research opportunities for physics majors at Cal Poly, a
primarily undergraduate institution. Students involved in this research will
gain valuable exposure to theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, Professor Mewes aims to fill several gaps in the theoretical
framework known as the Standard-Model-Extension. The Standard-Model Extension
provides a general description of Lorentz-invariance violation in particles and
in gravity. One goal is to study the effects in gravity. The gravity sector of
the Standard-Model Extension includes many different types of Lorentz
violations, many of which have yet to be fully characterized. This work will
extend the existing formalism and examine the effects in gravitational waves and
Newtonian gravity. This research will also study the effects of violations in
particles, with particular focus on interactions and on
neutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.