* 2111510
* Collaborative Research: Replication of a Community-Engaged Educational Ecosystem Model in Rust Belt Cities
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Jay Brockman, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2025
* USD 874,944.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving educational
environments that contribute to strengthening and diversifying the regional STEM
workforce. The challenges of building a STEM workforce in shrinking Rust Belt
cities are addressed by replicating and examining an effective STEM learning
environment that applies and innovates high impact practices. Rust Belt cities
refer to areas of the northern and Midwest United States that were once known
for steel production and heavy industry. These cities often have high poverty
rates and lower educational attainment in STEM, highlighting the need to bridge
the divide of communities that can engage in the knowledge economy. This project
aims to build STEM attraction and retention by immersing high school and college
students in the STEM knowledge, skill, and capacity needs of deindustrialized
cities using project-based learning, community engagement, and community
development techniques. The Community-Engaged Educational Ecosystem Model
(C-EEEM) was first developed and implemented in South Bend, Indiana in the
Center for Civic Innovation at the University of Notre Dame. It produced a
sustainable network of educational institutions and community stakeholders in
delivering a high impact STEM learning environment. This project will replicate
and study the C-EEEM in two other cities, Youngstown, Ohio and Erie,
Pennsylvania. The ultimate goal of the project is to establish an interconnected
network of STEM education initiatives to benefit the regional
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to answer questions about the
implementation of the C-EEEM in two sites with different community
characteristics and types of anchor institutions. The project will also
investigate differences in learning and dispositional outcomes in students in
these new contexts. Consequently, units of analysis are nested: 1) the learning
environment created by the C-EEEM and 2) the individual students. Both levels of
examination use structured mixed-methods data collection. For students, the
research will explore STEM motivation and persistence in STEM career pathways
using theoretical framing derived from Self Determination Theory (SDT), as well
as explore and expand on pilot findings regarding place attachment. For the
C-EEEM learning environment, researchers will examine the core elements and
critical factors specified from the pilot C-EEEM against the development of the
new sites, allowing for comparison and assessment of relevance of the C-EEEM
specifications in different conditions as well as identification of adaptations
for generalizability. Concurrently, researchers will look for differences in
student outcomes correlating with model differences. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.