* 2111150
* Grappling With Graphs: New Tools For Improving Graphing Practices of Undergraduate Biology Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Joel Abraham, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,566,948.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping educators understand
how students learn to accurately make and interpret graphs. All STEM disciplines
use graphs to display, interpret, and analyze data. With today’s data analysis
and visualization tools, graphing skills are even more crucial as the public
gains greater access to databases and dissemination platforms that can widely
share both accurate and flawed graphs. Graphing is particularly difficult in
biology, where a wide range of topics leads to many different graphic contexts
and where the data tend to be noisy. Currently, educators do not understand the
various paths students take in learning to graph biological data or how those
paths may differ based on a student’s background. Also not yet understood are
the types of instructional interventions that could help students develop
graphing expertise. This project will generate information to answer each of
these questions. Specifically, the project will adapt, develop, and refine
instructional tools for teaching graphing in a biology context. The project will
involve instructors from diverse institutions that have introductory biology
courses that enroll large numbers of students from different demographic
backgrounds. Using a graph construction tool called GraphSmarts, the researchers
can examine student performance on different graphing tasks to reveal strategies
students use to improve their graphing-related abilities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon and expands on previous work examining the
graphing practices of undergraduate students using a lobster-kelp scenario in
the GraphSmarts tool. The project will develop four new scenarios for
introductory biology graphing assessments. These scenarios will focus on topics
in physiology, cell biology, and ecology. Instructors from different
institutional types across the United States will participate in a Faculty
Mentoring Network to design new assessments that share context-independent
attributes with the original lobster-kelp scenario. Using backward design
strategies, the instructors will develop activities to teach the new scenarios
in their introductory biology courses. Then, using the GraphSmarts tool, data on
student performance will be collected to measure student learning and to
validate the new graphing assessments. As students explore the new scenarios,
the project will gather qualitative and quantitative data including student
graphs and answers to questions. The information gathered from the newly
designed assessments will provide educators with a more nuanced understanding of
student graphing competencies. The results will help educators across STEM
fields understand barriers that students face in understanding graphing, as well
as potential solutions to those barriers. The project will produce open-access
materials that will be shared on the high used QUBE network. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. This is a Level III project in the Engaged
Student Learning track, through which the IUSE program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.