* 2111244
* NSF-BSF: Elementary Particle Physics with ATLAS
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Allen Mincer, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,755,000.00

This award will provide support for the NYU group working on the ATLAS
experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics
laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large particle
detector facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from NSF and
other agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to find the
Higgs Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model"
(SM) that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between, known
particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been successful.
The next step in the experiments is to look for evidence for physics Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the presence of the
mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of the universe. The
LHC experiments are currently in the midst of analyzing data from Run 2, at
almost twice the energy explored earlier and with significantly increased event
samples. It is possible that evidence for BSM physics could emerge at this
higher energy and with the higher event statistics from the current run and by
means of further upgrades of the LHC and ATLAS to follow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NYU group will be studying Higgs decays, searching for
evidence of supersymmetry and exotic new states of matter through several
approaches, including the reaction process known as Vector Boson Fusion, and
will be developing novel approaches to the reconstruction and study of high
energy Jets. NYU will partner with the Weizmann Institute of Science through
support from the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation program to search for
the decays of Higgs boson decays to charm quark pairs, through heavy flavor
tagging. Here the joint NYU-Weizmann effort will exploit advanced machine
learning techniques to identify and select such challenging final states in
Higgs decay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical projects include improvements and
refinements of the ATLAS trigger for missing energy, a key variable in the
searches for new physics, and track triggering, an essential technique for
dealing with reconstruction of events in very high rate collisions, which are
endemic at the LHC. The group also helps to lead a smaller experimental effort
called milliQan, whose objective is to search for fractionally charged particles
that might be produced at the LHC. The group has a strong Machine Learning
effort to further the precision of the Higgs measurements and to clarify BSM
discovery in channels such as new Higgs particles in the so-called Hidden Valley
suggested by string theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NYU group's broader impacts
efforts are extensive, including a collaboration with the National Museum of
Mathematics and Brookhaven National Laboratory designed to bring to the general
public the excitement of particle physics and a better understanding of how a
basic understanding of statistics can be used to assess conclusions that might
be drawn from experiments or medical tests. The group's use of machine learning
and simulation-based inference will continue to impact scientific areas beyond
particle physics including neuroscience, epidemiology, and algorithmic fairness,
and to foster collaboration between academia and industry. Additionally, the
analytical projects of the group, which include statistical applications,
machine learning, and analysis preservation tools and techniques, can be
extended to fields outside of physics, and young researchers supported under
this program will have training in such innovative and cross-cutting
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.