* 2111442
* Theoretical Studies of Medium- and high-energy Electron Scattering off Light Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Wim Cosyn, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

Atomic nuclei make up close to 100% of visible matter around us. Even though
it's known that nuclei are bound by the underlying fundamental theory of the
strong nuclear interaction, it is not yet understood how exactly they (and the
nucleons within them) emerge from it. This project will study and advance our
knowledge of the strong interaction through the theoretical modeling of high-
energy reactions with light nuclei. Light nuclei consist of only a few nucleons,
resulting in reactions with a high degree of precision and control. In these
systems, the strong interactions can be studied both between different nucleons
and within a single nucleon, where it acts on the fundamental quark and gluon
building blocks. The PI will mentor graduate students working on the research,
develop a graduate course in nuclear physics, and engage in outreach activities
involving high-school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to advance our theoretical understanding of non-perturbative aspects of the
strong interaction through electron scattering off light nuclei. In high-energy
reactions, an electron probes the nucleus as if sitting on a wave front moving
at the speed of light. Hence the PI and his collaborators will use the framework
of light-front quantum mechanics, which enables one to cleanly separate the low-
energy nuclear structure of the light nucleus from the high-energy reaction
dynamics. Light nuclei offer unique features to probe the strong interaction:
they can be polarized, enabling spin-dependent studies; the initial nuclear
state is well known and can be controlled in measurements. For this project, the
PI will exploit these features in reactions on the deuteron and helium. These
studies are of importance for current and future measurements at US-based
accelerator facilities such as Jefferson Lab and the future electron-ion
collider.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.