* 2111940
* Collaborative Research: How and when did the Mongolian Altai (de-)form? Implications for intracontinental deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Andrea Stevens Goddard, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 294,898.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The Mongolian Altai are a ~2000 km-long mountain range
in western Mongolia that are part of a vast mountainous region in central Asia
referred to as the Central Asian Orogenic Belt. Understanding how a mountain
system that is located &gt;1000 km from a modern tectonic plate boundary
originally formed is important as the Altai play an important role in regulating
Asian climate and biodiversity and in controlling the distribution and
reorganization of Earth materials through erosion and sediment transport. This
study will test how the Earth’s crust deforms into mountains in the middle of
tectonic plates rather than at the edges. The PIs will use thermochronology (the
study of mineral cooling histories) to measure the timing of mountain
development and conduct field-based studies of sedimentary rocks to study
changes in erosion and deposition patterns caused by mountain uplift. These
results will be compared to numerical models testing different ways to form
mountains in the middle of tectonic plates. This research will provide important
societal outcomes by 1) supporting the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in STEM fields including minority and underrepresented students at a
Hispanic Serving Institution, 2) increasing participation of women in STEM as
both Principal Investigators and graduate students within this project, 3)
increasing public scientific literacy through undergraduate education and
education outreach, 4) developing partnerships between American and Mongolian
scientists, and 5) the development of online interactive field tours for
undergraduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent large-scale,
interdisciplinary projects have led to major advances in our understanding of
the rates, relative timing, and periodicity of tectonic plate margin processes
that define orographic landscapes. However, our understanding of plate interior
orogenesis is less evolved, as intracontinental orogens defy models of
orogenesis as a plate-boundary driven process. The Mongolian Altai are part of
one of the largest intracontinental orogenic systems–the Central Asian Orogenic
Belt, and yet limited data exist to explain the origin of this mountain system.
This project will test specific models of intracontinental orogenesis in the
Mongolia Altai, each of which predict a different timing, rate, and style of
uplift. This research will integrate bedrock and detrital thermochronology,
sedimentology and basin analysis, and geomechanical modeling to document the
timing of onset of intracontinental orogenesis in the Mongolian Altai;
understand fundamental (rheological, geodynamic, inherited) controls on the
formation of an orographic landscape in this region; and to understand the
possible conditions that produce intracontinental deformation from plate
boundary forces and the timescales on which this deformation occurs. These
outcomes will allow testing of whether the Mongolian Altai are relict topography
from a Mesozoic suture zone, are a geodynamic feature of isostatic or dynamic
processes, or formed due to localized deformation from Cenozoic plate boundary
stresses. Field and analytical data will provide direct observations to test
these hypotheses that can be further constrained by numerical models that
interrogate the geomechanical plausibility of these processes. This study will
not only provide the first basement thermochronologic dataset from a ~800 km
along strike zone within the Mongolian Altai and the first detrital
thermochronologic dataset from the entire Altai system (2000 km strike length),
but will integrate this dataset with work in contemporaneous sedimentary basins
and geomechanical modeling to put these data in a well-constrained geologic
context. The proposed research will also improve our understanding of what
processes drive formation of intracontinental orogens globally, a major
outstanding question in the field of tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.