* 2111191
* Workshop on Future of Semiconductors and Beyond: Devices and Technologies: To Be   Held Virtually Feb 8-9, and 17-18, 2021.
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Kang Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,999.00

Proposal Number: ECCS-2111191&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Kang
L. Wang (PI) &amp; Subramanian Iyer (co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California, Los Angeles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NSF
Workshop on Future of Semiconductor and Beyond: Devices and
Technologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. created the semiconductor
microelectronics industry through transformative innovations in science and
engineering over the past century. However, our leadership advantage has
severely eroded over the past two decades amid the stiffest global competition
never been experienced before. The goal of the proposed “NSF Workshop on Future
of Semiconductors and Beyond: Devices &amp; Technologies” is to research and
identify the challenges in semiconductor innovation and manufacturing
ecosystems, infrastructure, and workforce, which need to be overcome for
fostering innovation to create a “new Silicon Valley”, which will ensure the
U.S. economic prosperity and national security. Several follow-up workshops on
these identified directions will be formulated to detail the strategies. The
results will produce a set of recommendations to NSF for supporting the new
ecosystems of innovation in research, infrastructures, manufacturing, and
education and training in semiconductors; and incubate the entire chain of
comprehensive talent necessary from research and development to manufacturing
and commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will recommend research strategy to
identify and formulate the scientific and technical directions to assure the US
leadership in semiconductors. The workshop approach is to include the top
leaders of all stakeholders to discuss ideas and formulate strategic directions
for innovation in broader areas of semiconductors, including devices, materials,
semiconductor technologies and manufacturing, integrated circuits, and systems
and architectures, design methodologies and platform, heterogeneous integration,
and semiconductor fabrication, metrology and characterization equipment research
and development comprising the full chain of innovation in microelectronics.
Intellectual merits will include the knowledge learned, vertically, in
computing, communications, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of Things
(IOT), future manufacturing, and others, as well as, horizontally, in health
care, transportations, energy, security, and the industries of future. The
knowledge learned will also help the development of the entire future
semiconductor sector and will have broader impacts on science and engineering
that affect the daily life. This workshop aims to identify the critical
strategies to help the U.S. to regain the leadership position in semiconductors,
which is vital to the socio-economic prosperity and national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.