* 2111359
* WoU-MMA: Enhancing the Neutrino Sensitivity of the Pierre Auger Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Nitz, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,804.00

The origin of ultra-high energy cosmic rays is not yet a settled question.
Detection of ultra-high energy photons or neutrinos, which travel from their
source without deflection by interstellar magnetic fields, would help elucidate
the nature of the acceleration sites and our understanding of the extreme
universe. The Pierre Auger Observatory is the largest operating cosmic ray
observatory in the world, containing 1,660 surface detector stations spread over
3,000 square km, overlooked by 4 fluorescence telescope eyes, which observe
cosmic rays interacting in the earth's atmosphere. An upgrade to the observatory
called AugerPrime is currently underway to enhance the experimental
capabilities. This award supports scientists at the Michigan Technological
University in ultra-high energy cosmic ray astrophysics research using the
Pierre Auger Observatory and the AugerPrime upgrade. The focus of the research
program is increasing the detection efficiency of the surface detectors of the
observatory for ultra-high energy neutrinos and photons, thereby augmenting the
multi-messenger astrophysics capabilities. This program introduces undergraduate
students, in particular underrepresented groups, to front-line astrophysics
research, and trains graduate students in the art of developing scientific
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the Pierre Auger
Observatory in the next decade is to discover the origin of ultra-high energy
cosmic rays, the most energetic particles observed in the universe. The
AugerPrime upgrade provides the observatory with the ability to simultaneously
measure the muonic and electromagnetic components of extensive air showers,
thereby enhancing the ability of the observatory to study ultra-high energy
cosmic ray composition, composition-assisted anisotropies, and hadronic
interaction effects at the highest energies. Simulations of neutrino and photon
induced air showers will be applied to examine the characteristics of the
signals recorded by the AugerPrime surface detectors. This information will be
utilized to realize more sensitive level 1 and level 2 trigger algorithms in the
field programmable gate array that generates the triggers in each detector
station of the Auger Observatory surface array, resulting in the increased
sensitivity needed to target the first detections of ultra-high energy neutrinos
and photons by the observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.