* 2111636
* SBIR Phase I: Synergizing Braille and Science: Real-time Accessibility of Tactile Graphics in Laboratory Settings for Blind and Low Vision (BLV) Students
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Ashley Nashleanas, Independence Science, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2022
* USD 254,767.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to increase the participation of the
underrepresented population of blind and low vision (BLV) persons in the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Through a novel
assistive technology that provides BLV individuals with multisensory access to
scientific data in real time, this technology will enable access on par with
sighted peers. BLV students, unlike their sighted peers, lack independent access
to real-time scientific data whether in the laboratory or in the field. This
inaccessibility either precludes their full participation in hands-on science
inquiry, or leaves them dependent on sighted peers to access real-time data.
With this project, BLV students across K-12 and post-secondary institutions, as
well as BLV scientists and others interested in STEM, will benefit from a tool
that makes it possible for them to work independently in laboratory situations.
This innovation will make science laboratory learning and laboratory workplaces
more inclusive and equitable for the blind and low vision
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is focused on developing a 2-dimensional, hand-held, portable,
refreshable Braille and tactile graphics scientific data collection tool that
can be used to collect quantifiable data in real time using wireless sensors.
Blind and Low Vision (BLV) students are as capable as their sighted peers in
STEM yet, unlike their sighted peers, lack independent access to real-time
scientific data in the laboratory. This effort seeks to address this inequity by
leveraging the expertise of blind scientists and pioneers in STEM access
technology to iteratively develop a interative versions of novel, blind-
accessible innovations which will give BLV students, scientists and others
access to quantitative data collected in the laboratory or in the field. This
innovation will be optimized for the BLV by documenting usability concerns and
making the necessary modifications to hardware and source-code prior to field-
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.