* 2111160
* Graphene Plasmonic Nanostructures for Terahertz Light Emission
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Anna Swan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Title: Terahertz Light Sources Based on Graphene Plasmonic
Nanostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Electromagnetic radiation with frequency in the 1-10 THz
range is ideally suited for many demanding imaging and sensing applications.
Unlike visible or near-infrared light, THz radiation can propagate through many
common packaging materials and therefore provides visual access to concealed
objects or defects. Furthermore, many chemicals of potential interest for
sensing applications, including explosives and illicit drugs, feature
distinctive absorption resonances at THz frequencies and therefore can be
accurately detected by THz spectroscopy. Specific areas where these capabilities
can play an enabling role include security screening, medical diagnostics,
manufacturing quality control, and artwork conservation. However, the widespread
adoption of these technologies has so far been hindered by the lack of suitable
devices for the generation of THz light. Existing sources tend to be bulky and
expensive, often requiring cryogenic cooling, have limited frequency tunability,
and otherwise cannot provide sufficient THz output power for most
applications.&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new device technology for
THz light emission that can overcome these critical limitations, by leveraging
recent advances in materials science and fundamental nanophotonics. The proposed
devices can operate at room temperature with the required output power levels
(several milliwatt) for typical THz applications, can be manufactured at low
cost with highly miniaturized form factors, and are broadly tunable across the
THz spectrum. As a result, these devices are promising for a transformative
impact on a diverse set of technology sectors that can benefit from the unique
capabilities of THz imaging and sensing. The proposed activities will also
promote education through the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
relevant areas of optoelectronics, nanophotonics, and materials science, and
through related curriculum development efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed devices are based on the recently developed
family of two-dimensional materials and heterostructures – specifically single-
layer graphene combined with the two-dimensional semiconductor molybdenum
disulfide (MoS2). The underlying radiation mechanism involves the excitation of
THz plasmon polaritons (collective oscillations of the electron gas) by current
injection, and their outcoupling to free-space radiation in specially designed
graphene nanostructures. The proposed work focuses on maximizing the efficiency
of this radiation process, through a combination of electromagnetic design
simulations, materials development efforts, and device fabrication and
characterization activities. The plasmonic extraction efficiency will be
optimized by combining the graphene nanostructures with additional optical
elements (metallic THz antennas in an open-cavity configuration) designed to
promote critical coupling to free-space radiation. At the same time, the
plasmonic internal emission efficiency will be enhanced through the controlled
injection of non-equilibrium carrier distributions in the plasmonic
nanostructures using graphene/MoS2 Schottky junctions. The latter idea is
analogous to the principle of operation of light emitting diodes (LEDs) used in
solid-state lighting, but applied to an entirely new material system and
spectral region. In addition to its potential technological impact on THz
imaging and sensing, this project will also create new knowledge and new
research opportunities in the area of plasmonics and light-matter interactions
in two-dimensional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.