* 2111221
* Optimal Control of Open Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Xiantao Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 395,391.00

On the technological front, there have been several emerging and exciting
developments to understand and utilize systems that exhibit unique quantum
properties. Examples include quantum transport, where nano-materials and
molecules are central parts of electronic devices, and quantum computing, where
the operations of quantum gates are carried out to solve scientific computing
problems that are difficult for classical computers. Such quantum properties are
often described by a closed quantum system that is isolated from its surrounding
environment. But in practice, all quantum systems are open, and the interactions
with their environments are inevitable. The interactions often occur
continuously and they lead to complicated irreversible quantum dynamics, which
also poses a great challenge for the control of the quantum system to carry out
specific tasks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will support 2 graduate
students and 1 undergraduate student each of the 3 years of the project. This
project will develop open quantum models, where the influence of the environment
is incorporated implicitly. Several consistency conditions are enforced to
ensure the model accuracy so that the reduced model has an accuracy that is
comparable to the full dynamics. The model will be combined with an optimal
control framework to enable an external control so that the quantum system can
retain its quantum properties and perform specific tasks. Robust and efficient
numerical algorithms will be constructed to solve the optimal control problem.
The overall objective is to develop reliable computational tools, better
understand the dynamic properties of open quantum systems, and provide
strategies to utilize quantum properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.