* 2111561
* Improving Engineering Student Engagement, Self-Efficacy, Diversity Awareness, and Retention using Visualization and Virtual/Augmented Reality Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,11/30/2021
* Heidi Diefes-Dux, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,700,000.00

This project serves the national interest by creating visualization and
augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) education modules in architectural engineering
and construction (AEC) courses that will help improve studentsâ€™ persistence in
the program, self-confidence, and diversity awareness. Students will work on
real world projects in teams using the visualization and interactive AR/VR
modules. Social and technical interactions between students will be facilitated
using virtual spaces that simulate physical meeting rooms in which students can
share engineering artifacts. Student learning will be supported with an
interactive building environment, interactive exercises in a 3D virtual
environment, and embedded audio/videos that provide feedback on student design
decisions. Students will visualize themselves as AEC professionals and increase
their self-efficacy starting in K-12 or community college contexts as well as in
the first year of their degree program. More advanced real-life engineering
experiences will continue to reinforce self-efficacy and engagement in
engineering throughout the AEC curriculum. This collaboration between a
research-intensive institution, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, and an HBCU,
Tennessee State University, will provide an opportunity for students to interact
with other students from diverse backgrounds and produce valuable insights on
the effectiveness of the education modules with different audiences. A virtual
workshop series will be used to support the adoption of the modules by other AEC
programs, other engineering disciplines, and high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three education modules will be developed and
implemented in courses at the collaborating institutions. An introductory module
will be used for outreach to K-12 and community colleges to generate interest in
AEC fields. The remaining modules will be used for first and second-year AEC
students in existing courses. The design of the modules is informed by the Model
of Domain Learning theoretical framework including its constructs of stages of
learning and phases of interest. Modules will be developed with attention to the
learning objectives of the courses and the level of AEC curriculum that is being
targeted. The project seeks to answer the following overarching research
questions: 1) How does a module impact students' engagement, self-efficacy, and
diversity awareness? 2) How do enrollment, retention, and graduation rates
change as modules are introduced into the curriculum? and 3) How do the findings
to the first two questions vary by institution? Each module will provide the
basis for a multi-case study where the institutional context defines each case.
Rich case descriptions and cross-case analysis will guide improvements to the
module, highlight module transferability barriers and affordances, and enable
interpretation of findings based on data from survey instruments and interviews.
This project will advance knowledge about the impact of AR/VR-based learning
modules in STEM teaching and learning. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.