* 2111680
* DNA Base Excision Repair in Chromatin
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Sarah Delaney, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,231,440.00

The environment contains many reactive species that can damage DNA in living
organisms. Exposure to these reactive species generates an array of DNA damage
lesions that alter the genetic blueprint of cells and threaten all aspects
organismal function, as well as the faithful transfer of genetic information to
the next generation. A variety of repair pathways have evolved to protect DNA,
including base excision repair (BER) in which damaged DNA bases are removed and
replaced with undamaged ones. This project investigates how BER acts on DNA
packaged by proteins into chromatin – the form DNA takes inside cells. The goal
is to determine how this packaging influences DNA repair and to identify ways
that cells overcome challenges associated with repairing DNA secluded within
chromatin. The project will offer training opportunities to students, including
undergraduates from women’s colleges, in DNA chemistry, protein biochemistry,
biophysics, and molecular biology. These skills will enable students to pursue
STEM careers in research and education, and to contribute to biotechnology
industries. Science outreach to middle school students is planned as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BER is a coordinated series of enzyme-catalyzed
chemical reactions in which a damaged base in DNA is removed and replaced. A
paradoxical aspect of this fundamental cellular process that still remains
poorly understood is the ability of BER to repair DNA when it is packaged in
chromatin, which can limit enzyme access to damaged bases. The research will
employ an innovative “repair fingerprint” technique that can precisely identify
locations in chromatin where BER enzymes are catalytically active as well as
those that are refractory to repair. This technique, as well as a variety of
biochemistry, biophysics, and molecular biology approaches will be employed to
(i) determine how DNA base flipping is controlled in packaged DNA, (ii)
understand how the density of DNA packaging modulates BER, and (iii) establish
the contribution of a damage sensor protein to BER in packaged DNA. The outcomes
will help answer key questions regarding cellular mechanisms to overcome the
packaging paradox and prevent genomic instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is funded by the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.