* 2111429
* I-Corps:  A respiratory monitor that provides transcutaneous airflow prediction using ultrasound waves
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Guelay Bilen-Rosas, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-corps project is to address
the gap in real-time recognition and quantification of respiratory airflow
through a novel device with real-time feedback capabilities. Current monitors
are not capable of providing quantitative and reproducible respiration
assessment causing health care providers to rely on their subjective and biased
experience and expertise. Even though clinical end-users and health care systems
operate at highly informed levels, there are still major healthcare disparities
in quality of care across all specialties and health care industries. The
proposed technology provides a quantifiable monitoring tool to removing bias and
subjective assessments and make respiration assessment more reproducible across
all levels of health care workers (with varying levels of training and
expertise).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is focused on developing a
wearable, wireless respiratory monitor for measuring parameters related directly
to airflow and other metrics of respiration. This technology may allow early
notification and initiation of corrective and resuscitative measurements. The
proposed approach uses ultrasound waves and machine learning methods to quantify
respiratory flow through the neck tissue overcoming monitoring limitations of
other technologies. When respiratory distress/obstruction happens during
sedation, it occurs suddenly and to the untrained eye, the patient appears
unchanged, as though they are asleep. Current monitors do not directly measure
airflow as a function of respiration instead, they monitor the downstream
effects of blocked airflow (such as decrease in oxygen), resulting in delayed
response times. Adverse outcomes are more likely to occur when there is a
significant delay between the development and the detection of respiratory
depression/obstruction in sedated patients. Thus, the proposed technology may
fill this critical need for a respiratory monitoring method that provides real
time, quantitative feedback about airflow changes to allow for early recognition
of respiratory depression, airway obstruction, and respiratory
failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.