* 2111981
* SBIR Phase I:  Fully Screen Printed Electric Cell-Substrate Impedance Sensing Toxicity Assay
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Daniel Fucich, ORTUVO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a new product testing tool to
evaluate potential human toxicity of products in development. Current practices
that test a product’s effects on humans consist of lengthy, expensive, and
harmful animal studies. Given the cost, many animal toxicity screenings often
happen in later product development stages – at which point millions of
development dollars have already been spent. Major financial losses follow
unfavorable screening results. Specifically, this technology will be developed
with the intention to not only save millions of dollars downstream, but also
maintain animal welfare and ethics in the product development process across
industries. Compared to the current market offerings by others, this novel cell
toxicity assay is intuitive and easy to manage with respect to time and the
number of samples, while providing a rapid, accurate assessment. The global
toxicology testing market is projected to reach $14.4 billion by 2025.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is aimed at developing a novel, scalable in vitro toxicity assay that
leverages a cellular-electrode interface bioprinting technology. Toxicological
testing occurs toward the end of product development of a drug or consumer
product after millions of dollars have already been poured into R&amp;D. These
in vivo screens are expensive, harmful to animals, and have the potential to
kill products after years of pre-market development. Bioprinting has emerged as
a promising new approach for biofabricating models and systems for in vitro
toxicology screening in an attempt to address the ethical and financial burden
aforementioned. Yet, despite revolutionary potential, traditional bioprinting
has technical and commercial drawbacks (e.g. cell damage, low throughput, high
cost, inflexible). This proposal is designed to address those drawbacks by
developing 1) a novel method to biofabricate tissues using an innovative
bioprinting technique and 2) an integration of electrode sensors to
quantitatively measure cell health and viability via electrical signal output
correlations. Experimental success of tissue fabrication and electrode-cellular
measurements will be determined by greater than 80% of cellular viability
following novel bioprinting method and a correlation value of r&gt; 0.6 between
electrical impedance readings and canonical molecular toxicity
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.