* 2111544
* Collaborative Research: Axion Resonant InterAction Detection Experiment (ARIADNE) - a Renewal Proposal
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Geraci, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2024
* USD 350,676.00

The Standard Model of particle physics provides the most current accurate
description of the fundamental particles and forces at the subatomic scale. As
successful as the Standard Model has proven to be, it is known to be incomplete,
requiring extensions to incorporate new elements including particulate dark
matter. Axions are hypothesized particles that appear in many extensions of the
particle physics Standard Model, including the well-motivated Peccei-Quinn (PQ)
theory. The PQ axion may provide explanations for both the anomalous smallness
of the measured neutron electric dipole moment, and is also a promising dark
matter candidate. The Axion Resonant InterAction DetectioN Experiment (ARIADNE)
is designed to search for axion-mediated spin-dependent interactions between
nuclei at sub-millimeter ranges. This award supports the collaborative research
team to complete the development and construction and initiate operation of the
ARIADNE experiment. The unique approach provides the proposed team of
postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate researchers with a broad training in
the techniques of experimental atomic physics, optical pumping, nuclear magnetic
resonance, low-temperature physics, micro-fabrication, magnetic shielding,
vacuum systems, and modeling. This breadth of expertise will be valuable
preparation for opportunities in basic or applied research in the U.S. work
force or scientific community. The experimental program involves a diverse group
of young career researchers with an emphasis on broadening participation of
under-represented groups. In addition, searching for dark matter is a topic with
broad public appeal, and the group is involved in local outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axions and axion-like particles also generate
macroscopic P-odd and (Time Reversal) T-odd spin-dependent interactions which
can be sought in sensitive laboratory experiments. The ARIADNE experiment
involves a rotating non-magnetic mass to source the axion field, and a dense
ensemble of laser-polarized 3He nuclei to detect the axion field by NMR (nuclear
magnetic resonance). The signal from an axion field can be resonantly enhanced
by properly modulating the axion potential at the nuclear spin precession
frequency. With the start of the data taking stage, new parameter space for the
PQ axion and axion-like particles will be explored. In contrast to cosmic axion
searches, since the experiment sources the axion field using local matter, this
setup is sensitive to the axion even if it does not make up most of the dark
matter. Furthermore, by sensing the axion's coupling to nuclei, an entirely
complimentary coupling is probed to that sought by Sikivie-type microwave cavity
“haloscope'' experiments and their proposed lower- and higher-frequency
extensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.