* 2111003
* Collaborative Research: Improving Students’ Computational Thinking Skills in Construction Engineering and Management
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Abiola Akanmu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 05/31/2024
* USD 477,340.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating a tool to help
students learn computational thinking skills in construction engineering and
management courses. The project focuses on active learning experiences in which
students learn how to extract meaningful information from large datasets and use
the results to make informed engineering decisions. These experiences can help
better prepare students to address construction industry needs, such as
increasing productivity, reducing waste, and improving worker safety. The use of
sensors on construction sites is a growing trend because they provide real-time
data showing what is happening on a site. Students need to develop skills in
data analytics and computational thinking so that they can process sensor data,
perform data analyses, and develop an understanding of construction site
operations. To accomplish these aims, the project team will develop a web
application that provides students with a graphical interface to select,
analyze, and display sensor data. Students will be able to explore a
construction site in real-time to understand behaviors and relationships between
objects on a site and how they relate to construction project safety and
productivity. The web application software will be made available to the
engineering education community through public software repositories. By
addressing the computational skills gap in the construction industry, this
project will benefit construction workers and the economic competitiveness of
construction companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
improve students’ computational thinking skills by engaging students in real
world problems on construction sites. It will do so by developing a web
application that provides interactive programmable objects for students to
perform computational functions in the context of construction engineering. The
application will help students analyze sensor data and improve their
understanding of important computational concepts for engineering problem
solving. Students will learn about sensor data collected from construction
sites, computational approaches for data analyses, and making sense of low-level
sensor data to support decision making. The application will be developed for
web browsers and will include a Python package that contains custom objects
(e.g., vehicles, workers) and a library of computational functions. A mixed-
method research study will be conducted to answer research questions that
address (1) competencies in data analytics that are needed in the construction
industry, (2) the elements of the web application that are needed to help
students develop the competencies, and (3) the impact of the web application on
students’ computational thinking. A nationwide survey of construction
engineering and management professionals will be conducted to identify skills
that are needed for working with construction site sensing systems and to
determine the value of and demand for these skills in the construction industry.
The project will introduce high school students to computational thinking in the
construction industry through an existing outreach activity that involves a
construction project. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.