* 2111457
* Collaborative Research:  The SuperCDMS at SNOLAB Science Program
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jodi Cooley, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,146.00

This award supports the base research program of the SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment
that will address one of the most fundamental questions of modern science—the
nature of dark matter. SuperCDMS explores a lower mass dark matter parameter
space with world-leading sensitivity that is complementary to on-going searches
at the Large Hadron Collider, indirect detection experiments, and direct
detection experiments like LZ and XENONnT that will search for heavier-mass dark
matter. The SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment will have a broad impact that extends
beyond the search for dark matter. The experiment’s phonon-mediated detectors
have applications in cosmology, astronomy and industry. This effort will
contribute opportunities for training of undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. The SuperCDMS Collaboration has a long history of
outreach with a strong focus on engaging students from underrepresented groups
at all educational levels. This award will enable the development of accessible
analysis resources that will significantly increase the number of undergraduates
involved in SuperCDMS science analysis and in particle physics analyses in
general. In addition, SuperCDMS will leverage the SNOLAB outreach team by
increasing participation in tour groups and SNOLAB on-site exhibits, and partner
with the Colegio de F´ısica Fundamental e Interdiciplinaria de las Am´ericas
(COFI) in bringing dark matter themed educational efforts to student and public
audiences in Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the SuperCDMS
Collaboration is to directly detect galactic dark matter and, in so doing,
address the following questions: what is the particle nature of dark matter,
what are its astrophysical properties, and how does it relate to the Standard
Model? In pursuit of this goal, the Collaboration is in the process of
constructing a new experiment, SuperCDMS SNOLAB, equipped with advanced
cryogenic detectors that have unprecedented sensitivity to dark matter particles
with masses at and below the GeV/c-squared scale, with an ultimate potential
sensitivity down to dark matter-nucleon cross sections where solar neutrino-
nucleus scattering becomes significant (the so-called “neutrino fog”). The
experiment will be sited in SNOLAB, Sudbury, Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.