* 2111639
* SBIR Phase I:  Generalized Approach to Robotic Thermal Management
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Victor Aguero, CAMBRIAN WORKS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2023
* USD 255,941.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be enabling the use of commercial robotic
systems from terrestrial industries in the space domain. This technology will
allow the space industry to adopt lower cost, commercial systems for space
robotic operation, without the need for expensive customization or unique build
approaches. This innovation allows the developing space economy to quickly
leverage new capabilities developed terrestrially, rapidly increasing the
cadence of on-orbit inspection, assembly, and operational activities. The
ability to maintain a persistent and distributed presence and conduct more
regular, active operations remotely in space will increase the understanding of
the space environment, interactions between space and terrestrial systems (e.g.
climate/weather), and will provide new understanding of vacuum and plasma
interactions with materials and components in space. These activities will serve
to increase the rate of commercialization of space and the build-up of the
fundamental infrastructure elements of a space economy, including
communications, resource management, transport, and trade or exchange of goods
and services. The resulting commercial impact may accentuate and accelerate an
ongoing trend in the transition from a government-dominated space domain to a
true commercial space economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will study new approaches to managing
thermal challenges of operating in a vacuum environment with the technical goal
of achieving a wider thermal operating range for the actuators and computing
elements of commercial robotic systems. Common failure modes of commercially
available robots, specifically issues affecting repeatability of positional
accuracy on robotic arm position and controller board component failure, will be
analyzed over both hot and cold vacuum operating ranges expected in typical low
Earth orbit scenarios. This experimental data, combined with thermal modeling,
will be used to identify the highest value component or material property
modifications and operational constraints that can be implemented to minimally
impact commercial production. Achieving a wider operating range will result in
commercial robotic subsystems being able to play a greater role in various
orbital regimes and under varying lighting conditions without costly
customization and operational impacts (such as allowing operations only in
specific sunlight conditions). The results will also provide feedback to
commercial robotic system developers that can be used to increase the robustness
and efficiency of terrestrial robots in a broader range of terrestrial
environments, providing further improvement in space as systems
evolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.