* 2111844
* SBIR Phase I:  Tagging and Authentication Technology for Vaccines (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Brendan DeLacy, BALLYDEL TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a state-of-the-art,
counterfeit-proof security technology to enable vaccine manufacturers to tag,
track, and authenticate vaccine products throughout the supply chain. The
tagging process will be amenable to its integration into a scalable glass vial
manufacturing process. Digital information such as product, lot number, expiry,
etc. may be embedded into the tags, if desired. In light of the current global
COVID-19 pandemic, security and authentication of vaccine dosages throughout the
supply chain represents a significant public health and global logistics
challenge. Industry concerns over vaccine theft and counterfeit products drive
the market need for an effective ID security technology that enable
manufacturers to authenticate vaccines in a safe, covert, and efficient manner.
The tagging process developed in this program will add minimal expenses to the
manufacturing cost of each vaccine dosage form, at an estimated cost of pennies
per dose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will require the completion of several tasks, including: 1) the
computational design of the taggant patterns, 2) the development of a scalable
tagging process, 3) the development of instrumentation and associated software
for tag authentication, and 4) the encryption of tags with digital information
such as lot number, expiry, manufacturing location, or any other desired product
information. In summary, the specific design parameters of the tag will be
elucidated and optimized during this Phase I effort. The design parameters will
subsequently be demonstrated on flat glass and glass vaccine vial prototypes
using a scalable process. Finally, newly developed “reading” instrumentation
will be used to authenticate the tagged glass prototypes, demonstrating the
overall utility of this anti-counterfeit technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.