* 2111053
* Precision Measurements of Neutrino Oscillations and Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Nelson, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 07/31/2024
* USD 940,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers to
these and other open questions about the universe, how it came to be, and why it
is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to
use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM). Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact
with practically nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and
were once thought to be massless. We now know that neutrinos have a mass and
because they do, they can change from one type to another. Detailed measurements
of these changes as well as others form one of the most promising ways to probe
for new physics beyond the Standard Model. This award further advance our
understanding of these neutrino interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The William
and Mary Group is searching for evidence of CP Violation (related to the
imbalance of matter and antimatter in the universe) with the NOvA experiment and
is studying how neutrinos interact in normal matter with the MINERvA experiment.
The group is also engaged in R&amp;D for DUNE, the next generation, long
baseline neutrino experiment with endpoints at Fermilab in Illinois which
provides the neutrino beam and the Sanford Underground Laboratory in South
Dakota which is home for the large detectors. This award will contribute to the
R&amp;D of both the far detector in South Dakota and the near detector at FNAL
for the DUNE experiment, with the long term goal of potentially observing
neutrinos from supernovae and testing the neutrino flavor mixing paradigm as
well as continuing the search for CP violation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The William
and Mary group is committed to engaging undergraduates in research as a vital
component of their undergraduate education. Beyond promoting science education
at the College, the group operates a successful Emerging Scholars program at a
local elementary school. This ten-week, after-school program exposes students
who are from communities historically underrepresented in the sciences to
practicing physicists and exciting science activities. The program was developed
in consultation with the Coordinator for Gifted and Talented Students of the
Williamsburg- James City County schools and has grown and been strengthened
based on feedback from follow-up discussions with the students and notes from
in-session observations by specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.