* 2111828
* Workshop on Overcoming Measurement Barriers to Internet Research
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,999.00

A large part of computer science is the discovery and transition to practice of
new concepts, advances in performance, and derivation of foundational
principles. However, another essential part of the computer science agenda is to
understand the behavior of large systems that arise from our earlier innovation.
The Internet is the best example of a computer science artifact so complex that
its behavior cannot be derived from the specification of its components. One has
to measure to see how it is behaving. For this reason, measurement needs to be
an essential component of the portfolio of computer science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this workshop is to identify
critical research questions that warrant a call for network measurement (broadly
defined), identify barriers and facilitators of that research, and discuss how
research results can have impact beyond the research community. This workshop
will focus on the identification of critical questions about the Internet that
justify research, exploration of barriers to successful execution of that
research, and collective activities that might facilitate that research. Long-
term data collection and persistent infrastructure foster reproducibility and
repeatability, robustness, and extensibility of research results. Typical topics
for network measurement include (but not limited to) performance, security,
privacy, stability and resilience, growth, censorship, economics, and neutrality
as well as spanning broader technological areas such as broadband wireless,
cloud and data centers, mobile, new edge devices or underserved
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop activities can be found at
https://www.caida.org/workshops/wombir/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.