* 2111591
* RUI: Quantum Kinetics of Neutrinos: Studying the Universe at the Interface of Neutrino and Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Chad Kishimoto, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 232,026.00

Every second, trillions of neutrinos pass through our bodies, leaving nary a
trace. On the other hand, in the first few minutes of the lifetime of the
universe — a mere blink of the eye in the 13.8 billion year history of the
universe from the Big Bang to the present day — the universe is so hot and so
dense that neutrinos, in spite of the weakness of their interactions with
matter, play an important role in the dynamics of this early epoch in the
history of the universe. As a result, the early universe provides an interesting
environment to study fundamental physics that may be either difficult or
impossible to probe in the terrestrial laboratory. This project looks to
leverage upcoming advances in upcoming high-precision cosmological observations
to use the dynamics of the early universe to explore fundamental physics. The PI
will train undergraduate student researchers, and as they engage in this
intriguing field of study, they will build various skills that are valuable
across a range of 21st century careers. In performing this work, they will
numerically simulate neutrino evolution in astrophysical environments along with
the concomitant effect on their environment. These simulations will explore the
complex evolution of neutrinos that are influenced by their quantum mechanical
nature and by many interactions with other neutrinos and their environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the quantum kinetic evolution of
neutrinos in the early universe where this evolution is driven by the hot and
dense environment as well as large fluxes of neutrinos. The quantum kinetic
neutrino evolution is affected by their coherent, unitary quantum mechanical
behavior, their high scattering rates, and nonlinearity introduced by neutrino-
neutrino interactions. In the early universe — the first few minutes after the
Big Bang — this nonlinear quantum kinetic behavior plays an important role in
the dynamics of the universe as well as the interconversion between protons and
neutrons. A self-consistent exploration of this behavior is needed too
understand its effects on cosmological observables as well as the synthesis of
elements in Big Bang Nucleosynthesis. The goal of this project is to solve the
quantum kinetic equations in the early universe to build a broader understanding
of the nonlinear quantum kinetic evolution of neutrino states in this
environment, to elucidate the feedback of this evolution, and toward the goal of
leveraging upcoming anticipated high-precision cosmological observations
complemented by high-fidelity theoretical calculations to treat the universe as
a laboratory to study fundamental physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.