* 2111428
* Improving Chemical Mechanisms of Reactive Nitrogen from Snowpack and Transportation in a Global Chemical Transport Model
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Yaoxian Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2024
* USD 332,689.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The goal of this project is to improve the chemical
mechanisms associated with emissions of global nitrogen oxides (NOx) and nitrous
acid (HONO) from snowpack and HONO from the on-road gasoline and diesel sectors.
The PI hypothesizes that the photolysis (reaction by sunlight) of nitrate
aerosols in the snowpack leads to the production of NOx and HONO in the
atmosphere. This work will improve the modeling of ozone production and air
quality in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this proposal are to
(1) parameterize representations of the NOx/HONO chemical mechanisms associated
with snowpack emissions, and HONO chemical mechanisms associated with on-road
gasoline and diesel subsector emissions and implement these in the global GEOS-
Chem chemical transport model; and (2) quantify the impacts of global missing
sources of NOx/HONO production from snowpack, and on-road gasoline and diesel
subsectors in transportation on atmospheric oxidants and air quality. The
updated NOx/HONO chemical mechanisms in GEOS-Chem will be evaluated against
global surface HONO and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) observations, as well as
tropospheric NO2 column density measurements from satellite
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.