* 2111140
* Germanium-Based Neutrinoless Double-Beta Decay Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jing Liu, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

Neutrinos are subatomic particles which are both abundant in the Universe and
elusive at the same time. They are electrically neutral and barely interact with
matter. In addition, neutrinos have tiny masses and the reason for this is
unknown and could be related to whether neutrinos are their own antiparticles.
The particle-antiparticle nature of neutrinos can be investigated by searching
for an extremely rare form of radioactive decay, namely neutrinoless double beta
decay. One of the most common forms of radioactivity is (normal) beta decay,
where one electron is emitted from a nucleus along with an antineutrino. Two-
neutrino double beta occurs when two electrons and two antineutrinos are emitted
by a neucleus. Finally, a more exotic decay process has been hypothesized called
neutrinoless double beta decay; in this process two electrons and no
antineutrinos are emitted, and this is only possible if neutrinos are their own
antiparticles. The search for this hypothetical decay is a priority for nuclear
science, and a positive observation would shed light on the compelling mystery
of why there is more matter than antimatter in the Universe. This project
facilitates ongoing and future experimental searches for neutrinoless double
beta decay in Germanium-76. This project will advance experimental nuclear
physics, yield new scientific knowledge, and help early-career scientists
develop their technical skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major research
activities of this project focus on the MAJORANA DEMONSTRATOR (MJD) experiment
in South Dakota and the multi-phased Large Enriched Germanium Experiment for
Neutrinoless double beta Decay (LEGEND). This project supports MAJORANA’s
continued operation as well as its data analysis of the full physics dataset,
particularly by contributing to energy calibration and statistical analysis, so
that the final double beta decay sensitivity of the DEMONSTRATOR can be
realized. New scientific knowledge on (alpha, neutron) reactions in the MAJORANA
calibration data will come from the proposed measurement of deexcitation gamma
rays. The LEGEND project aims to measure a double beta decay half-life beyond
10e28 yr. The initial LEGEND-200 phase is under construction and the later
LEGEND-1000 phase is under design. Research activities at USD for LEGEND include
1) contributing to the extensive simulation efforts of the LEGEND-200 phase, 2)
expanding existing efforts on LEGEND-1000 background prediction and modeling by
investigating cosmogenic and radiogenic backgrounds for both the evolving
baseline design and promising alternative designs, and 3) developing analysis
routines that will significantly suppress LEGEND
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will serve to train undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students in the techniques of precision nuclear
physics and in the analysis of large and complex data sets. The PI will also
engage in physics education and outreach through his participation in "Neutrino
Day" at the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) in Lead, South
Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.