* 2111182
* Measuring Chemistry-Specific Mindset Beliefs of Students in Undergraduate Chemistry Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Suazette Mooring, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 272,619.00

College students’ beliefs about intelligence and learning can impact their
academic achievement and success. Students with fixed mindset beliefs view their
intelligence as unchangeable, while students with growth mindset believe they
can improve their intelligence with time and effort. Growth mindset beliefs are
associated with better academic performance and achievement in STEM, including
for students from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. However,
there is limited understanding of the role of domain-specific mindset beliefs in
students’ success in introductory college chemistry courses, which is pivotal
for retaining students in many STEM majors. With support from NSF’s Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program, this project seeks to serve the
national interest by developing a valid and reliable measure of chemistry-
specific mindset beliefs. In addition, the project team will investigate the
relationships between these mindset beliefs and student outcomes in general
chemistry and organic chemistry courses. Being able to measure chemistry-
specific mindset beliefs will assist researchers and instructors in better
understanding what interventions are effective for supporting students’ success
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of researchers at Georgia State University
and Portland State University will investigate students’ implicit beliefs about
chemistry intelligence and develop a measure of these beliefs. Theories of
implicit beliefs about intelligence posit that students with fixed mindset
beliefs tend to avoid challenging situations while students with growth mindset
are more likely to choose challenging tasks and engage in behaviors that lead to
success. However, the role student mindset beliefs play in chemistry courses is
not well studied. To this end, three specific objectives will guide this
project. First is to characterize the chemistry-specific mindset beliefs of
students in general and organic chemistry courses. Second is to develop and
psychometrically evaluate an appropriate measure of chemistry mindset beliefs
for undergraduate students. And third is to understand the relations between
chemistry mindset and various affective and cognitive outcomes for chemistry
courses. To accomplish these objectives, the project team will conduct
qualitative interviews with students to understand their implicit beliefs about
intelligence as it relates to chemistry. The team will also conduct cognitive
interviews to assess the interpretation and readability of newly-designed items
to measure chemistry-specific mindsets. In addition, the data generated by this
project will be subjected to psychometric analyses to assess validity and
reliability. The project team will collect data from Georgia State University, a
large minority-serving institution, as well as from Georgia Gwinnett College,
Georgia Southern University, and Spelman College. This will provide substantial
input from students from diverse and underrepresented groups in STEM, which is
expected to enhance the ability of this project to widely inform STEM education
nationally. An advisory board of experts external to the project will provide
feedback on the research findings and present recommendations for broader
impacts. The project team will widely disseminate the results in discipline-
specific and STEM-wide education journals, and will also seek opportunities to
present webinars and workshops through the American Chemical Society Chemistry
Education Research Committee and the Biennial Conference on Chemical Education.
Moreover, the final mindset measure will be made publicly available through the
Chemistry Instrument Review and Assessment Library (CHIRAL) portal. The
development of this chemistry-specific mindset measure will provide the
chemistry education community with a theoretically grounded measure to advance
the understanding of domain-specific mindset beliefs and provide an appropriate
measure to assess the impact of chemistry-specific mindset interventions. This
work will also provide a model for developing and measuring domain-specific
mindset beliefs in other STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.