* 2111379
* Transport and Superconductivity in Strongly Correlated Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Philip Phillips, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2024
* USD 375,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research aimed at understanding electronic and transport properties of systems
in which strong interactions between electrons lead to emergent behavior such as
high temperature superconductivity. In a superconductor, electrons conduct
electricity without any loss, but this typically happens only at low
temperatures. As electrical loss represents a significant portion of all
electrical bills, a room temperature superconductor would represent a major
advance in power transmission. The PI's work is focused on understanding a class
of high-temperature superconductors discovered in 1987 that have defied
understanding within the so-called BCS theory proposed in 1957 by Bardeen,
Cooper, and Schrieffer. The primary difficulty is that while the BCS theory
works fine for metals such aluminum where the interaction between the electrons
can be ignored, this is not the case for the high-temperature superconductors
where superconductivity occurs by doping materials which are insulators due to
strong repulsion between electrons. The PI has advanced an exactly solvable
model for such systems and shown how superconductivity emerges. Since the model
is exactly solvable, a clear picture emerges as to how the BCS theory must be
modified. The PI will work to quantify the differences and construct the
universal features of superconductivity in these materials that have defied
description in terms of the standard BCS theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
also supports training of graduate students seeking their PhD degrees in
theoretical physics. The PI will be involved with other educational and outreach
activities, such as continuing to revise his graduate textbook in theoretical
solid state physics, serving on the Editorial Boards of prominent scientific
journals, advancing initiatives within the American Physical Society at the
intersection of physics and race, and working to increase diversity in the
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research focused on
new methods for the transport and superconducting properties of strongly
correlated electron systems by using exactly solvable models, numerical
calculations, and renormalization techniques to establish the existence of
strongly coupled fixed points. The exactly solvable models allow new insight
into the 35-year old problem of superconductivity in doped Mott insulators such
as the high-temperature superconductors. The goal is to ascertain what new
features emerge from Mott physics in the superconducting state. Another goal of
the exactly solvable models is to determine if the physics they embody is
governed by a new strongly coupled fixed point in much the same way Fermi liquid
theory dictates the physics of simple metals. Success here could provide an
organizing principle in the physics of strongly correlated electron matter.
Finally, the focus on numerical calculations to determine the phase diagram of
the dilute electron gas in the presence of a periodic potential is aimed at
informing new experiments that have revealed novel insulating states that break
translational symmetry in Moire bilayer systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
also supports training of graduate students seeking their PhD degrees in
theoretical physics. The PI will be involved with other educational and outreach
activities, such as continuing to revise his graduate textbook in theoretical
solid state physics, serving on the Editorial Boards of prominent scientific
journals, advancing initiatives within the American Physical Society at the
intersection of physics and race, and working to increase diversity in the
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.