* 2111697
* Quantum Systems Manufacturing Workshop; Virtual; May 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2022
* April Brown, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2022
* USD 92,096.00

The emergence of quantum computing, communications, and sensing systems are
rapidly changing key sectors of the US infrastructure. Quantum systems are
revolutionary and enable new and more efficient means for controlling,
transmitting, and processing much larger information content than can be
realized in current systems. New opportunities await the widespread
manufacturing and use of these remarkable systems. During the last decade,
significant research on numerous physical quantum systems has been pursued, with
much progress towards the realization of high-performance, commercial quantum
systems. However, the state of the developing quantum technology ecosystem will
significantly benefit from focused advanced manufacturing research based on the
specific challenges to realizing high-performance quantum systems. This project
supports a two-day virtual workshop designed to disseminate information on the
state of the art of different quantum system technologies, to identify and
assess key challenges and opportunities in quantum system manufacturing and,
ultimately, to invigorate and engage the community of researchers implementing
quantum systems towards achieving manufacturing goals. Fundamental research in
quantum manufacturing will revitalize American manufacturing, grow national
prosperity and workforce, and reshape strategic
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum systems are based on the
processing of quantum bits, or qubits, which can be realized in numerous two-
state quantum systems, such as atomic states, spins, or photon polarizations. An
initial set of qubit technologies has been identified for establishing the
state-of-the-art and opportunities and challenges in manufacturing quantum
systems. These qubit platforms are superconducting devices, ion traps, photonic
devices, Si-based quantum dot and single electron transistors, point-defect
based materials and devices, and emerging two-dimensional materials and devices,
such as topological semimetals and insulators. Based on these considerations,
the Quantum System Manufacturing Workshop seeks a research agenda for the
community in the new area of quantum device manufacturing The goals of the
workshop are several: 1) identify and recommend manufacturing research actions
that will advance the success and utilization of current and future qubit
platform and systems; 2) enlarge and engage a larger research community in
computer science, materials, engineering, physics and beyond; 3) find synergies
and seed cross-disciplinary research connections. By articulating the state-of
the-art of quantum systems and identifying key challenges to manufacturing
quantum systems, this effort will both inform the diverse academic, industrial,
and national lab communities supporting research, development, and
manufacturing, and will provide a framework for future research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.