* 2111818
* STTR Phase I:  Toward the first novel multi-sensor smart wearable system for hot flash detection
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Andreas Tsiartas, LISA HEALTH INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,742.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program (STTR) Phase I project is to help women undergoing menopause.
Most women undergo menopause, a complex biobehavioral life stage that spans one-
third of their life, frequently accompanied by a complex array of symptoms
affecting their health, quality of life, relationships, and productivity. The
most common and disruptive menopause symptoms are hot flashes, affecting 80% of
women, and persisting for up to 10-20 years, with an average duration of 7
years. Unfortunately, there is a lack of adequate support for menopause symptom
management, with very few physicians receiving adequate training in menopausal
care and unable to provide appropriate care. Importantly, no current solution
exists on the market to automatically measure hot flashes and other menopause
symptoms over time, a critical limitation in tracking and managing womenâ€™s
health, and supporting wellness across this challenging life stage. In the U.S.,
over 50 million women ages 45-55 have hot flashes. The global market for hot
flashes is estimated at $9.5B annually and includes alternative, non-hormonal,
and hormonal treatment options, with the U.S. accounting for about half-or
$4.75B of the total global hot flash market. The proposed technology aims to
solve key scientific, technical, and commercial challenges, to build the first
novel cost-effective accurate wearable system for menopausal hot flash
detection. The proposed wearable system will be an integrated key component of a
broader mobile-based digital platform for managing menopause
symptoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Program
(STTR) Phase I project Phase I will allow the implementation and evaluation of
the effectiveness of using wrist-based multi-sensors, common noninvasive sensors
used in commercially available wearable devices, to automatically classify hot
flashes, in real-time and free-living conditions (e.g., during sleep and wake,
in the presence of noise signals). A combination of synthetic and real-world
data will be used to achieve the aims. The system targets &gt;90% accuracy in
hot flash classification, across different behavioral, physiological and
environmental conditions, against the gold standard method (expert evaluation of
fluctuation in sternum skin conductance).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.