* 2111881
* SBIR Phase I:  Handheld graphene-based sensors for rapid detection of Salmonella species in food processing facilities
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Isaac Young, NanoSpy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is faster and accurate detection of Salmonella species in food
processing plants. Salmonella bacteria are the most frequently reported cause of
foodborne illness. Food contamination in processing facilities can lead to
serious public health problems as well as costly recalls of millions of food
units. Rapid and accurate sensing technology is currently lacking for definitive
detection of Salmonella in food-processing plants, which delays initiation of
appropriate control measures and increases the likelihood of spreading
contamination and foodborne illnesses to consumers. This technology will enable
more frequent testing throughout the entire manufacturing process at reduced
costs. It is fully expected that this technology could be applied to the
detection of other pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
create and test a rapid (20 minutes), hand-held, sensitive (1 bacteria cell per
milliliter) platform to enable food-processing facilities to detect Salmonella
on site. The innovation of this technology lies in the ability to avoid
bacterial enrichment (22 to 48 hours to allow bacteria to grow), while still
sensitively and selectively detecting Salmonella species. The device uses a
testing cartridge to bring bacteria directly to a detection surface, which
consists of graphene printed or scribed on a test-strip and subsequently
functionalized with Salmonella-specific antibodies. Unique laser processing
induces a 3D-structured surface at the nanoscale level in graphene that becomes
highly conductive for biosensing and for antibody attachment, which are
desirable properties for enabling low detection limits and increasing test
sensitivity. These technologies can be combined into a portable platform to make
a user-friendly handheld biosensor and displaying quantitative counts of
bacteria. The integrated platform (test strip and cartridge) will be designed to
interface with existing portable electrical readers in much the same fashion
that diabetics monitor blood glucose levels at home with a blood test strip that
connects to a portable reader with a digital display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.