* 2111067
* The Influence of Student Characteristics on Responses to Academic Feedback
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Steven Pollock, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,190.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the way faculty
give undergraduates feedback about their academic performance. Feedback is
intended to promote student learning and achievement. However, relatively little
research has explicitly studied how STEM students interpret feedback and whether
feedback has its intended effects. This project will examine how students’
reactions to feedback are shaped by their self-perceptions, such as their
confidence in mastering STEM material and their feelings of being accepted in
the field. The project will test whether several types of feedback produce
equally beneficial outcomes for students with different self-perceptions. The
goal of the project is to build a knowledge base about the factors that affect
students’ responses to academic feedback. It is anticipated that this knowledge
may be incorporated into evidence-based STEM teaching practices at many types of
institutions. In addition, knowledge gained about how students’ self-perceptions
shape their reactions should be relevant to other aspects of STEM teaching and
course design, such as describing learning goals or the instructor’s teaching
philosophy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individuals vary in their academic self-
perceptions, with some feeling higher efficacy and belonging in the field than
others. Systematic differences also exist between students, with women on
average reporting lower efficacy and belonging in STEM than men. The impact of
these individual and gender differences on students’ reactions to academic
feedback will be examined in laboratory studies in which student volunteers
agree to complete representative STEM assignments that are evaluated by a person
who is communicating with the student online. The study will examine key
variables shown to affect responses to feedback in other contexts, such as the
gender of the evaluator, students’ self-efficacy, and whether students think the
evaluator knows their gender. As a second major goal, the project will also
evaluate specific theory-informed ways to deliver feedback with the goal of
maximizing the benefits of feedback for all students. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. This project is in the Engaged Student Learning
track, through which the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.