* 2111410
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: New Advancements to Enable Multi-Messenger Neutrino Astrophysics with the Radio Neutrino Observatory in Greenland
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Albrecht Karle, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2024
* USD 146,421.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Observations of high energy astrophysical neutrinos further our understanding of
the most powerful cosmic ray accelerators and explosive events in the universe.
Combining astrophysical neutrino observations with observations from other
messengers like photons, cosmic rays, and gravitational waves allows us to view
the most violent processes in the universe through multiple lenses and make new
insights into the physics that drives them. Neutrino observations with IceCube
have shown that the neutrino sky is complex and dynamic, revealing both an
unresolved, but steady, background of neutrinos and flares of neutrinos
associated with a blazar. The work performed under this award will establish the
first connection between a radio neutrino telescope and other multi-messenger
observatories, expanding our multi-messenger view of the universe to include the
highest-energy neutrinos. In addition, this work will enable a broad range of
interdisciplinary science, from glaciology to biology, and engage people from a
broad range of backgrounds from around the world in multi-messenger
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Radio Neutrino Observatory in Greenland
is currently under construction at Summit Station and is optimized to search for
the radio flash generated by neutrino interactions in polar ice, building on the
combined successes and expertise of earlier generations of radio detectors. Its
leading sensitivity, large footprint, and precision pointing will deliver
unprecedented measurements of the high-energy neutrino flux. RNO-G is also the
first ultra-high energy neutrino observatory with a view of the Northern sky. As
such it has unique capabilities for multi-messenger observations of the highest
energy neutrinos sources, including those initiated by lower-energy neutrino
observations made with IceCube. The work performed under this award will provide
the necessary upgrades to the RNO-G project, as it is being built, to realize
its potential as a state-of-the-art instrument fully integrated into the world-
wide network of multi-messenger observatories. This proposed program will
improve RNO-G's sensitivity and angular resolution and enable it to respond
rapidly to important targets, necessary advancements for multi-messenger
campaigns. This work will lay the groundwork to provide the broader multi-
messenger community high-quality event reconstructions shortly after the first
high-energy neutrino candidates are identified. Under this award, the proposal
team will (1) enhance neutrino pointing resolution through improved antenna
designs and coincident observations in multiple stations, (2) develop real-time
event processing capabilities, allowing for quicker turnaround on candidates and
increased trigger rates to improve sensitivity, and (3) enable RNO-G to respond
to incoming multi-messenger alerts from leading observatories, temporarily
boosting sensitivity in the alert direction. The team will use these advances to
conduct the first searches for multi-messenger point sources and transient
sources with RNO-G.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.