* 2111704
* SBIR Phase I:  Preclinical Validation of an Ocular Antioxidant Enhancing Gene Delivery Vehicle to Target Dry Macular Degeneration
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2021
* Ramaswamy Ramkumar, OCULOGENEX
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 10/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop and commercialize a gene therapy
to reverse the effects of dry age-related macular degeneration in over 200
million people worldwide over the age of 50. This therapy may prevent loss of
vision and independence by helping people retain their ability to drive, handle
finances, see faces of loved ones, and live independently. Not only would this
improve the quality of life in patients with macular degeneration, but it would
also decrease the economic burden of visual disability on the US healthcare
system. The proposed therapy is a durable treatment that can potentially last a
lifetime and be delivered into the eye with an in-office procedure. No
treatments currently exist for this disease. This technology will meet an unmet
need for hundreds of millions of patients with no other treatment options.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to optimize the design and dose required to safely reach the
retina with desired expression levels and elicit pan-retinal protection from
light-induced retinal degeneration. The proposed AAV-mediated modifier therapy
is an epigenetic regulator that modulates gene expression involved in neural
stem cell renewal rather than replacing various genes associated with macular
degeneration. The proposed SBIR Phase 1 technical plan addresses the various
tests for optimization of the delivery capsid, which will deliver an episomal
gene that acts as an epigenetic regulator and boosts innate antioxidant genes,
reduces cellular senescence, repairs DNA damage, and increases the expression of
anti-apoptotic genes in retinal cells. In this SBIR Phase 1 study, we will
conduct in vitro (retinal pigment epithelium cells) and in vivo experiments to
determine the dosage, safety and efficacy of the treatment for subsequent
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.