* 2111012
* SBIR Phase I: Development of a tracking system for computer assisted surgery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Kamran Shamaei, MONOGRAM ORTHOPAEDICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve accessibility to robotic total
knee arthroplasty (TKA). Robotic TKA can improve implant positioning accuracy,
enhance early functional rehabilitation, and reduce postoperative pain and time
to hospital discharge. However, disruption in the operating room caused by
current positional tracking systems impedes robotic utilization in TKA
procedures. This Phase I project focuses on developing an inside-out tracking
system that would free up valuable space in the operating room, eliminate line-
of-sight concerns, possibly eliminate secondary incisions, and reduce the
robotic system's overall cost. The distributors may be able to integrate this
inside-out tracking system into any navigated or robotic surgical system that
requires tracking bony anatomy (knee, hip, shoulder, or ankle arthroplasty and
spinal or cranial procedures). This innovation targets the global orthopedic
surgical robotic device market. The implementation of inside-out tracking may
significantly improve the usability of surgical robots, improving their
accessibility and, ultimately, improving outcomes for TKA
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to develop an inside-out tracking system prototype that is
appropriate for surgical bone tracking. Legacy commercial embodiments of inside-
out tracking systems are not sufficiently compact and do not possess the
necessary processing power for surgical applications. Recently, technological
advances have made small form factor cameras with sufficient processing power to
enable the realistic development of an inside-out tracking system for surgical
robotic use accessible to developers at low cost. In this Phase I project, the
team will demonstrate the feasibility of such a system through the following
technical objectives: bench test commercial cameras and develop software to
capture and process positional data in real-time; integrate an inside-out
tracking system into a surgical robotic TKA system, and demonstrate the
feasibility of an integrated system in a cadaver study to determine surgeon
usability. Successful completion of this project may identify hardware and
software that demonstrates the performance necessary for surgical applications
and confirm the system's usability with surgeon users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.