* 2111412
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Uniform Inorganic Nanoparticles Using Jet-Mixing Reactors
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Barbara Wyslouzil, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 749,504.00

Nanoparticles have unique optical, magnetic, electronic, and catalytic
properties that could lead to advances in computing, energy storage, chemical
manufacturing, and healthcare. However, for those advances to be realized,
nanoparticle syntheses must be translated from small laboratory-scale batch
processes to commercial scale manufacturing processes. There have been several
advances in continuous manufacturing of polymer nanoparticles; however,
inorganic nanoparticles (i.e., metals, semiconductors, ceramics) are more
difficult to manufacture because they often require high temperatures and inert
environments. This award develops a high temperature and/or air-free scalable
nanomanufacturing process for inorganic nanoparticles using catalyst and
semiconductor quantum dots as model systems. These materials have high
commercial potential (market capitalization of more than $1 billion per year)
and are applied across industry sectors from healthcare to electronics. These
materials have import for national security and global leadership because they
are used in new kinds of computing important for American competitiveness, such
as spintronics and quantum computing. This work also trains a diverse workforce
for emerging careers in scalable nanomanufacturing with input from companies
engaging in scale up processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses a
critical need for scalable processes for manufacturing inorganic nanoparticles.
Currently, many of these materials are manufactured in batch processes that
limit nanoparticle uniformity, and thus control of their size-dependent
properties. Building upon successful polymer nanoparticle synthesis in jet
mixing reactors via a nanoprecipitation route, this research develops inorganic
(metal, semiconductor) nanoparticle manufacturing in air-free and/or high
temperature jet-mixing reactors and provides accompanying scaling laws for their
scale-up. As model systems the project studies CdS, MnS, and PbS quantum dots
and Cu alloy catalysts, which are oxygen sensitive, require high temperatures
for synthesis, or exhibit different morphologies depending on temperature.
Concurrently, the project develops methods to integrate jet-mixing reactors in
series to enable manufacture of core-shell nanoparticles composed of different
materials. Such hybrid materials offer potential for multifunctionality or
tunable properties. Currently, hybrid nanoparticles are manufactured in batch
systems that are difficult to scale. This work also investigates methods of
thermal control using fluid flow (as opposed to external heating and cooling) to
enable rapid control in high temperature manufacturing processes. This is
accomplished by interdisciplinary interactions within the team of experts in
reactor design, nanoparticle synthesis, COMSOL modeling, and nucleation and
growth theory. The project advances knowledge in the understanding and control
of continuous scalable nanomanufacturing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.