* 2111010
* Increasing Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Justice in Coastal Conservation Organizations and Projects Nationwide
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Nicole Lekus, Restore America's Estuaries
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2023
* USD 99,997.00

Restore America’s Estuaries (RAE) proposes two series of workshops, with
estimated attendance of 100 people per series that will provide the knowledge,
skills, and pathways to make meaningful improvements in the area of Diversity,
Equity, Inclusion, and Justice (DEIJ). The series will be divided into two
tracks: one for coastal conservation grantmakers and one for coastal
conservation project implementers. Each track will include content informed by a
Working Group comprised of representatives of diverse, well-respected
organizations within these target sectors. The first-hand input from people who
work in these sectors will ensure the appropriateness and applicability of these
workshops. Information will be gathered and developed into content by a
consultant with expertise in DEIJ and supported by RAE in contextualizing this
around coastal conservation. By aligning the funding sources with the demand for
funding, this series can help re-orient funding and projects to improve DEIJ in
coastal conservation work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Restore America’s Estuaries
(RAE) seeks to build upon a recent workshop effort to create broader and deeper
impact around Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Justice (DEIJ) issues across the
coastal conservation sector and coastal communities nationwide. The current
proposed workshop supports the following vision: “America’s estuaries, bays, and
coasts are resources for all people and should be safe, accessible, and enjoyed
by all; efforts to restore and expand these resources must ensure that costs and
benefits of any project are equitably distributed across all communities and
that historic inequity of these costs and benefits are remediated through
expanded investments.” This project will advance the DEIJ vision through
engagement with two audiences: grantmakers and project implementers. RAE
proposes the following workshop objectives: 1) Create a group of leading
grantmakers and implementers of coastal restorations and conservation to commit
to improving DEIJ in their operations. 2) Ensure coastal conservation
grantmakers are equipped with knowledge and tools to help them address barriers
related to DEIJ issues in their grantmaking processes, and provide them with a
pathway to an improved degree of inclusivity and effectiveness. 3) Ensure
coastal conservation project implementers are equipped with knowledge and tools
to help them address barriers related to DEIJ issues in their efforts to plan,
launch, and conduct their projects, while also supporting efforts to better
incorporate DEIJ principles in these projects. 4) Facilitate sharing of
information among participants to help them implement improved processes. 5)
Promote best practices and lessons learned to the coastal conservation
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.