* 2111261
* Improving the STEM Preparation of K-5 Pre-service Teachers through a Project-based, Interdisciplinary Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Megan Bang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,881,288.00

The elementary teacher workforce is predominantly female and white, even though
the K-12 student population is becoming increasingly diverse. Research shows
elementary teachers take few college courses in physics, chemistry, and
engineering, and only one third have had coursework in all the areas of science
they will teach. Furthermore, elementary teachers do not feel well-prepared to
engage students in the practices of science, or provide science instruction
based on students' ideas, or to incorporate students' cultural backgrounds into
science instruction. To address these issues, this project aims to serve the
national interest by diversifying the elementary teaching workforce and
preparing elementary science teachers to teach across the breadth of science
disciplines that are addressed in elementary science. Moreover, the project
seeks to connect scientific questions to underlying socio-economic issues that
can motivate student learning and take advantage of students' cultural ways of
knowing. Towards these ends this project aims to co-design a two-quarter
undergraduate course sequence that engages prospective elementary school
teachers in a project-based course of study featuring interdisciplinary science
content. The course sequence will incorporate contemporary issues, science and
engineering practices, and the ethics ("should we"? vs "can we"?) of science,
all situated within the economic, social, and political contexts in which
science and science decision-making always live. The project foregrounds content
that highlights the ways in which science has been used as both a means of
oppression of Black, Indigenous, and other people of color (BIPOC) and as a tool
for advancement. The design of the two-quarter sequence will satisfy both
elementary certification science content prerequisites and general "natural
world" graduation requirements for undergraduates at the University of
Washington Bothell (UWB). An online version of the course of study for any
undergraduate student and prospective elementary certification students and a
version of the courses for community colleges are also intended. Ultimately, the
project expects to produce a generalizable model for use in other
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of learning scientists specializing in
equity-focused science education and science faculty from across life, physical,
and earth sciences are collaborating to co-design four learning modules (two
5-week modules each quarter) for undergraduate students. The project uses a
mixed methods (surveys, exit tickets, interviews, observations) approach for
understanding student and faculty learning, as well as a longitudinal study of
pre-service teachers from an initial cohort into their first year of teaching.
Design-Based Research, wherein a project engages in iterative cycles of design,
implementation, research, and re-design, is being used in this study. The
project expects to engage 35 students in the first iteration of the study, and
then 70 students for two years in the two-quarter sequence after the course
sequence is redesigned. Of those 70 students, approximately 50 will become
elementary pre-service teachers who will enter UWB’s elementary teacher
certification program. Seventy students per year are expected to take the online
courses and 35 practicing teachers per year are intended to participate in the
summer summits. In addition to the materials developed through this project, the
principal investigators will research three questions. (1) What shifts in
science content learning, identities, and understandings of science/science
pedagogy occur in undergraduate pre-service teachers as a result of the new
course sequence? (2) What shifts in science pedagogy occur in university faculty
as a result of engaging in the co-design of the courses? (3) What are essential
design principles and practices of this model of co-design and implementation
that can be disseminated to wider audiences and contexts? The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship (Noyce) Program is
providing co-funding for this IUSE: EHR project to support the project's pre-
service teacher preparation goals, which are well-aligned with Noyce Program
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.