* 2111059
* Narrow-Stencil Numerical Methods for Approximating Nonlinear Elliptic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Thomas Lewis, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 119,972.00

The project will develop new computational methods for simulating various
applications in astrophysics, fluid mechanics, image processing, wave
propagation, geometric optics, biology, and combustion theory. The project will
focus on how to reliably and efficiently approximate solutions to a class of
abstract problems that can be used to model various phenomena relevant to the
applications. The methods will be proven to yield accurate answers and will also
be simple to implement. The project will involve activities towards mentoring
and broadly training graduate students so that they are prepared for both an
industrial career or a career in academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will formulate, analyze, and test new narrow-stencil finite difference and
discontinuous Galerkin methods for approximating viscosity solutions of fully
nonlinear PDEs such as the Monge-Amp√®re equation, the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
equation, and the stationary Hamilton-Jacobi equation as well as solutions of
second order elliptic PDEs in non-divergence form. The project will explore and
extend the novel analytic techniques the PI recently developed to prove the
admissibility, stability, and convergence of a simple non-monotone narrow-
stencil finite difference method for stationary Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
equations. Another objective is to formalize an abstract convergence framework
based on the notion of generalized monotonicity rather than standard
monotonicity, as the new methods do not require the use of wide-stencils. The
new narrow-stencil methods are easy to formulate and implement and have higher-
order truncation errors than monotone methods when first-order terms are present
in the PDE. Another goal of the project is to use fully nonlinear ideas to
motivate new analytic techniques for approximating positive solutions of
nonlinear reaction diffusion equations; these will help eliminate the need for a
comparison principle assumption when approximating fully nonlinear
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.