* 2111176
* Collaborative Research: Combating Cosmogenic Argon Isotopes in LEGEND
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Green, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 340,000.00

Neutrinos are electrically neutral and have non-zero mass, although their mass
is very small. These properties raise the possibility that neutrinos are their
own antiparticles (i.e. Majorana particles). If a neutrino is, indeed, its own
anti-particle then this would shed light on the reason why matter dominates over
antimatter in our universe and would point to new physics at energies far beyond
those of our largest collider-accelerators. If neutrinos are Majorana particles,
then double-beta decay without the simultaneous emission of neutrinos, or zero-
neutrino double-beta decay (0νββ), becomes possible. The PI will search for 0νββ
in an upcoming experiment. The ultra-rare nature of the decay, and the extreme
sensitivity sought by the experiment, require backgrounds to be strictly
controlled. For example, the experiment must be constructed with ultra-pure
materials, be deployed underground, and make use of advanced techniques to
discriminate signal from background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LEGEND experiment
will use germanium detectors enriched in the isotope Ge-76 to conduct a search
for 0νββ. LEGEND hopes to achieve 10 ton-years of exposure with backgrounds
reduced by over an order-of-magnitude compared to what has been previously
demonstrated. This project aims to address the leading background contribution
to the LEGEND experiment. For example, the presence of trace amounts of
radioactive Ar-42 in the liquid argon bath in which LEGEND’s Ge detectors will
operate will interfere with the counting of real 0νββ events. The PI will
perform measurements in liquid argon in order to develop tools to accurately
estimate the impact of this source of background and also develop analysis tools
to remove it from the data. The PI also aims to develop a robust and validated
background model that can be integrated into the LEGEND data processing
framework. The goal is to produce reliable energy spectra which can be used for
background estimation and fitting, and accurately model pulse shape
discrimination techniques which can be used to suppress backgrounds arising from
Ar-42.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.