* 2111050
* NSF-BSF: The Study of Nuclear Physics with Intermediate Energy Probes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ralf Gothe, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,392,603.00

Although ninety-eight percent of the mass of ordinary matter is due to the
strong subatomic force, the present theory of that force (Quantum
Chromodynamics) is still not fully understood. This award supports the study of
the strong force by probing the substructure of matter through experiments at
the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab) in Newport News,
Virginia, and the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) in Switzerland. The research
helps to address overarching questions about describing neutrons and protons in
terms of their quark and gluon constituents, interactions that arise when two or
three bodies are present in other media, the properties of dense nuclear matter,
and the structure of nucleons. Answering these and related questions is a
complex task that requires the dedicated experimental observations and careful
testing of theoretical predictions against measured observations that are the
goal of this project. This research will help discovery in and advance
understanding of nuclear physics, and will promote teaching, training, and
learning. The preparation of junior scientists plays a central role in the
supported activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nuclear physics research program
at the University of South Carolina (UofSC) is based at the Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility (JLab) in Newport News, Virginia, and the Paul
Scherrer Institute (PSI) in Switzerland. At PSI, the group is performing the
MUSE experiment, which will address the proton-radius puzzle in simultaneous
measurements of the electron-proton and muon-proton elastic cross sections with
positively and negatively charged leptons. Each of the four sets of data will
allow the extraction of the proton charge radius. In combination, the data test
possible differences between the electron and muon interactions and additionally
two-photon exchange effects. The group’s program at JLab will continue to
provide crucial high precision, polarized and unpolarized observables that will
address present problems in strong QCD. The elastic and transition form-factor
will trace the evolution from meson baryon to dressed-quark degrees of freedom,
establish the early onset of precocious scaling that further manifests the
three-quark structure of baryons, and address the dynamical mass generation and
confinement problem. The cross-sections for lambda deuteron elastic scattering
will provide new and independent constraints on the two- and three-body hyperon-
nucleon force, which is essential to understand the properties of neutron stars.
The cross-sections for J/ψ photoproduction off the deuteron will give a direct
estimate of the J/ψ-N cross-section and a very first glimpse into the gluon
structure of deuterons. Completing meson-photoproduction measurements will
settle in an almost model-independent way lingering problems in N* physics and
verify the SU(6)×O(3)-predicted three-quark baryon structure. The properties of
hadrons are modified in the medium and bound proton electromagnetic form factors
may differ from those in the vacuum, as revealed for the first time by the
group's earlier measurements. The experiments on nuclear targets at MAMI and
JLab, respectively, will confirm or refute these results. The observations of
such phenomena are potentially transformative in how we view hadrons and their
interactions in nuclear matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.