* 2112635
* AI Institute for Engaged Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Gautam Biswas, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephanie Teasley
* 09/30/2026
* USD 7,860,833.00

Emerging breakthroughs in AI create significant and timely opportunities for
accelerating innovation relevant to pressing national challenges in STEM
education. Advances in AI are enabling new levels of interactivity, engagement,
and inclusion. Driven by a vision in which AI supports and extends the
intelligence of teachers and learners, the NSF AI Institute for Engaged Learning
will design, develop, and investigate AI-driven narrative learning environments
that create engaging story-based, collaborative problem-solving experiences. The
Institute will conduct foundational AI research in natural language processing,
computer vision, and machine learning, as well as in AI ethics. Building on
these foundational advances, the Institute will conduct use-inspired AI research
on narrative learning environments with rich AI-driven virtual agents and
powerful multimodal sensing capabilities to understand how students learn and
collaborate in rich story-based problem scenarios. The Institute will provide a
robust infrastructure to support at-scale implementations of AI-driven narrative
learning environments. It will create a nexus for distinctive innovations in in-
school and out-of-school STEM education. Its research vision will be to empower
diverse learners to become the next-generation STEM workforce by creating
generative, collaborative AI-driven narrative learning environments that deeply
engage learners in schools, at museums, and within their own communities. This
vision will be informed by connections with diverse stakeholders to ensure that
the Institute’s learning environments are ethically designed and promote
diversity, equity, and inclusion. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NSF AI Institute
for Engaged Learning will produce transformative advances in STEM teaching and
learning by bringing together a team of diverse researchers from four
universities (North Carolina State University; Indiana University, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Vanderbilt University), as well as an educational
non-profit organization (Digital Promise) which will bring educational
practitioners, policy makers, and product developers into the work. The
Institute’s partners include a national network of K-12 schools, museums, and
non-profit organizations. The Institute will create narrative learning
environments that generate interactive stories dynamically tailored to the needs
and interests of individual students and small groups and in multiple settings
(classrooms, after-school programs, and museums). The Institute’s research has
three complementary thrusts, to create: (1) narrative learning environments that
generate engaging interactive story-based problem scenarios that elicit rich
communication, require coordination, and spark collaborative creativity; (2)
embodied conversational agent technologies with multiple modalities for
communication (speech, facial expression, gesture, gaze, and posture) to support
engaging learning interactions. Embodied conversational agents will be driven by
advances in natural language understanding, natural language generation, and
computer vision; and, (3) an innovative multimodal learning analytics framework
that analyzes parallel streams of multimodal data derived from students’
conversations, gaze, facial expressions, gesture, and posture as they interact
with each other, with teachers, and with embodied conversational agents. Woven
throughout the Institute’s activities will be a strong focus on ethics, with an
emphasis on creating AI-augmented learning that is deeply informed by
considerations of fairness, accountability, transparency, trust, and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.