* 2112285
* SBIR Phase I:  Using electromyography (EMG) signals for advanced human-machine interface of amputees and bionic upper limb prosthetics
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Tyler Hayes, ATOM LIMBS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel human-machine interface
and machine learning system for upper limb prosthetic control. More broadly, the
project aims to develop comprehensive, non-invasive, neural interfaces for
human-robotics control. This resesarch and development deepens scientific
understanding of how to decipher motor control signals from peripheral nerves
and their innervated muscles. The team also pursues technological and form
factor understanding of highly-usable human-attached robotics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to deliver solutions to the problem of today’s
underdeveloped prosthetics for those who suffer from upper extremity limb loss.
The primary research objective is to discover a set of hardware, firmware, and
software that enable real-time human-robotic controls. This research ranges from
machine learning training platforms, to electromyography and sonomyography input
systems, to industrial design that reduces the stigma associated with
prostheses. Technical results of this project include the foundation for deep
learning training approaches, mature signal transfer methodology, and arm band
design that ensures real-time signal processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.