* 2112842
* Quantum Computing with Cs Atoms in a 3D Optical Lattice
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Quantum computers are built around quantum bits, or qubits. Unlike classical
bits, which can be either 0 or 1, qubits can be in quantum superpositions of
these two states. Furthermore, two qubits can be quantum entangled. An example
of an entangled two qubit state is 00+11, where the system is in a superposition
of both qubits in state 0 and both qubits in state 1. With N qubits, a system
can simultaneously be in 2^N unique states at once. Such entanglement gives a
quantum computer its power, allowing some properly framed problems that are
intractable on classical supercomputers to be solved with as few as 60 qubits.
For this project, the troup will be working on a new method to entangle neutral
atom qubits, a platform that has seen the most dramatic advances in the last few
years. These qubits are identical, they can be well isolated from their
environment, and their internal states can be precisely controlled and measured,
all critical qubit features. The experimental system is unique, in that it is
possible to densely trap 3D arrays of atoms, which allows for superlative
connectivity among qubits and a high density of quantum information. The
entangling procedure could also be applied in more common 1D and 2D neutral atom
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will implement a variant of a two-qubit
Rydberg gate for entangling neutral atoms. One ground qubit state will be
excited to a high lying Rydberg state by a two-photon transition using an
ultraviolet (UV) photon and a microwave photon. This approach has most of the
advantages of using a Rydberg S state, which are reduced sensitivity to
photoionization and electric fields, isotropic dipole-dipole coupling, and a
simple fine structure. It avoids the use of high visible light powers that can
cause photoionization, spontaneous emission, and large, unwanted ac Stark
shifts. The large dipole matrix element for the microwave part of the transition
allows for fast gates. Although the UV plus microwave Rydberg excitation
technique could be used for any neutral atom array, it will be developed here
for atoms trapped in a 3D optical lattice. Toward this end, the group will
implement an “anti-addressing” technique that is able to select which atoms to
entangle while minimally affecting the two-qubit gate fidelity or the
surrounding quantum information. The goal is for each atom to be selectively
entanglable with any of 24 surrounding atoms, a very high connectivity. The gate
will be implemented on significantly colder and better localized atoms than
previous Rydberg gates, which should help to reach the two-qubit gate fidelity
goal of 0.999. Other experimental modifications, including implementing gray
molasses for the initial loading and increasing the volume of atoms that can be
accessed using one and two qubit addressing techniques, will raise the number of
addressable qubits in the 3D array to &gt;250.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.