* 2112455
* CREST Center for Dynamic Multiscale and Multimodal Brain Mapping Over The Lifespan [D-MAP]
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Robin Morris, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2026
* USD 5,000,000.00

Center for dynamic multiscale and multimodal brain mapping over the lifespan
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and
Technology (CREST) program supports the enhancement of research capabilities of
minority-serving institutions through the establishment of centers that
effectively integrate education and research. CREST promotes the development of
new knowledge, enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty,
and an expanded presence of students historically underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines. With National Science
Foundation support, Georgia State University establishes the Center for dynamic
multiscale and multimodal brain mapping over the lifespan [D-MAP] to study the
links between brain development across the lifespan. The Center aims to
understand brain structure and connectivity across multiple scales with three
synergistic research studies. The proposed work will promote undergraduate
development in preparation for STEM education and careers; create opportunities
for graduate students to work in multidisciplinary environments; and develop
education and training modules that can be integrated into existing graduate and
undergraduate curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of links between early
brain development, adulthood, and senescence throughout the lifespan is an
important and understudied area. Subproject 1 (Unimodal Brain Dynamics) develops
methods to advance understanding of time-varying brain connectivity and the
evolution of whole brain connectivity patterns over time. New methods are needed
that can incorporate explicitly spatial information into dynamics, estimate
potential nonlinear relationships, and integrate dynamic information across
scales. These methods will be applied to study the short and long-term dynamics
of reading acquisition. Subproject 2 (Multimodal Data Fusion) develops novel
methods to lead the field in multivariate approaches to model linked changes in
multi-modal measures and their trajectories over the lifespan. Key contributions
include the incorporation of network subspaces, flexible approaches to identify
links between data with mismatched dimensionality, and the development of
multimodal models that leverage deep learning to capture more complex
relationships. Initial emphasis will be on multimodal MRI and EEG/MEG data. The
focused application is to study the multimodal signatures of cognition and mood.
Subproject 3 (Predictive Neuroimaging) focuses specifically on approaches to
leverage lifespan data for individualized prediction. The subproject exploits
large open data repositories to develop predictive fingerprints of development
and aging along multiple dimensions. Anticipated contributions include novel
predictive multimodal models that evolve both within and among individuals,
advanced visualization approaches to enhance interpretability, and development
and use of neuroinformatics infrastructure for reproducible large N brain
imaging data analysis of various populations. The focused application will be to
use neuroimaging to predict aspects of linguistic
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.