* 2112597
* Collaborative Research: Rift dynamics during the formation of the Carolina Trough and Blake Plateau
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Nathan Bangs, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 549,554.00

In this project scientists will investigate the deep layers of sediments and
bedrock offshore the southeastern United States to better understand how the
Atlantic Ocean started opening approximately 190 million years ago. In Early
Jurassic, the Atlantic Ocean began to form as the continental margin of the
southeastern United States rifted from northwest Africa. Rifting occurred by
mechanical stretching of the crust and lithosphere, potentially with extensive
heating and volcanism, before the Mid-Atlantic Ridge started to accommodate
extension by seafloor spreading. Old fault lines and sutures of the Appalachian
basement may have been reactivated during this continental stretching phase, and
lava flows may have filled the early rift basin. Whether this episode of
volcanism was a cause or consequence of the breakup between North America and
Africa is not yet clear. This question can be addressed with new marine
geophysical data that will cover parts of the margin from the continental shelf
to the adjacent abyssal plain, a distance of approximately 400 km. With seismic
images of the deep sediments and basement, scientists can determine the
relationship between basement faults and lava flows on the Carolina Trough,
along the coast of the Carolinas, and Blake Plateau, farther south along Georgia
and Florida. These two sections of the Atlantic continental margin are of
particular interest because the Blake Plateau is much wider than the Carolina
Trough. Either the Blake Plateau forms a block of continental crust that did not
stretch much during continental rifting, or it is a plateau that largely
consists of volcanic rock that formed during rupture of the supercontinent
Pangea. The marine geophysical expedition will involve two vessels, the R/V
Marcus Langseth and the R/V Neil Armstrong, and ocean-bottom seismometers that
will be used to record seismic waves to map subseafloor basement structure. The
investigating team will invite students and early-career scientists from other
universities to participate in the expedition, and two short courses will be
organized to engage early-career scientists in the analysis and interpretation
of the data. Although this study focuses on the southeastern United States
margin, results will inform ongoing and future studies at other continental
margins worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The asthenosphere beneath
continental rifts can produce large volumes of melt in the presence of deep-
seated thermal anomalies, or due to decompression beneath thinning lithosphere.
The interactions between lithospheric plate extension and the generation and
delivery of magma in this setting are not yet well known. The team of scientists
will conduct an active-source seismic investigation of the rifted margins of the
southeastern United States to better understand the feedbacks between tectonic
extension and magmatism during continental breakup and the onset of seafloor
spreading in the central Atlantic Ocean. The continental margin of Blake Plateau
is much wider than the adjacent margin of Carolina Trough to the north,
suggesting that extension and rupture of continental lithosphere progressed
differently at these two adjoining rift segments. Differences in mantle
temperature anomalies, mantle melting, and structural inheritance of the
continental lithosphere may all have influenced these two contrasting styles of
rifting. The investigators seek to address the following three hypotheses: 1)
The Blake Plateau Basin stretched much wider than the Carolina Trough Basin
before breakup due to a difference in lithospheric thickness. 2) During rifting,
the magma supply kept pace with extension of Blake Plateau crust, whereas the
continental crust rapidly thinned without extensive magmatism beneath the
southern Carolina Trough. 3) At the time of rifting, the deep mantle beneath the
Blake Plateau was significantly hotter than the mantle beneath Carolina Trough,
which would affect the lithospheric rheology, and the degree of mantle melting.
To assess how rift-related processes affected crustal structure and sediment
stratigraphy, the science team will gather approximately 4500 km of 2-D seismic
reflection data and 900 km of ocean-bottom seismometer (OBS) refraction data
with the R/V Marcus Langseth. During this expedition, 39 OBSs from the national
Instrument Center (OBSIC) will be deployed with the R/V Neil Armstrong. Images
of seismic velocity and reflectivity will provide new insights into the sediment
stratigraphy, the geometry of basalt flows and crustal-scale faults, and the
thickness and composition of igneous crust. The active-source seismic data and
geochemical analyses of existing basalt samples will be used to infer past
deformation and the emplacement of intrusive and extrusive crust at the Carolina
Trough and Blake Plateau. Students and early-career scientists from other US
institutions will be invited to engage in the acquisition and analysis of marine
seismic reflection and refraction data on the R/V Neil Armstrong or R/V Marcus
Langseth. These sea-going participants will obtain experience in the acquisition
and on-board processing of seismic reflection and refraction data. In addition,
two week-long short courses on OBS refraction data analysis and on processing of
multichannel seismic (MCS) reflection data from this project will help train the
participants in the use of these new seismic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.