* 2112322
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-cost needle guidance system for bedside lumbar puncture
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Cassidy Wang, ETHOS MEDICAL, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Chinchoy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve the quality and efficiency of
bedside spinal access procedures by developing a needle guidance system that
interfaces with existing ultrasound machines. Lumbar punctures (LPs) are
performed to diagnose and treat neurological conditions such as meningitis. The
traditional LP technique requires practitioners to manually feel for spinal
landmarks to form a mental image of the anatomy before blindly inserting the
needle into the spine, aiming for a small target containing spinal fluid. This
methodology can be challenging, costly, and time-consuming and is highly
dependent on practitioner experience and patient body type. Up to 42% of
procedures fail to access the target. Failed cases require radiological
intervention, increasing the cost of care, lengthening patient stay, and
exposing patients to radiation. Hospitals in the United States lose an estimated
$2 billion annually due to inefficiencies and failures in LPs. The proposed
needle guidance system will enable bedside spinal access procedures to be
performed under real-time ultrasound imaging, significantly improving first-
attempt success rates. The guidance technology can further be applied in other
clinical segments, improving the quality of care across a variety of needle-
based procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project aims to accomplish two primary objectives: 1) Complete
development of a needle guidance system designed to interface with existing
ultrasound machines; and 2) Develop an AI-powered anatomy detection software
feature for the guidance system. These combined objectives will generate a
functional, intuitive, and accessible solution that minimizes barriers to
adoption while maximizing clinical and operational value. The proposed research
involves conducting an array of safety and reliability studies to investigate
the performance of the guidance system under realistic conditions. In developing
a robust anatomy detection software feature, a spinal ultrasound data set will
be created from a variety of non-patient volunteers. The data will be analyzed,
processed, and used to train a machine learning model for anatomy detection. It
is anticipated that the results of this project will demonstrate a sufficiently
safe and efficacious system that can consistently guide a needle to an intended
target with an error of less than 3 millimeters. The anatomy detection feature
is expected to perform with at least 93% sensitivity and 85% specificity in
identifying five key spinal landmarks; this level of performance would
significantly reduce the knowledge barrier to performing ultrasound-guided
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.