* 2112093
* SBIR Phase I:  An intelligent mental health care companion for kids
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Beth Carls, ONESEVENTEEN MEDIA, PBC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to proactively identify and resolve mental
health issues for children ages 10 - 18 before treatments and consequences
become more acute and significantly more costly. This project innovation
proposes bringing care to children at the onset of need using chatbot companions
tailored deliberately and precisely to each child’s mental healthcare needs.
Optionally, a child can be paired with live chat therapists and coaches no
matter where the child is — at home, school, or when on their own. The system
leverages proven mobile device-accessed Cognitive Behavioral Therapies in tandem
with machine learning (ML)-enabled technologies that learn from a variety of
interactions with the child to detect and digitally triage their experiences of
loneliness, anger, anxiety, and depression and to alert adults when intervention
and treatment are deemed necessary. Without appropriate care, these symptoms
frequently increase in severity over time and become more difficult to treat.
Intervening early can help slow or halt mental illness, reducing for parents,
schools, and society the practical and financial burdens associated with
reactive, generalized mental healthcare treatments while nurturing children into
happier, healthier adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to build a system to determine the nature
and severity of a child’s mental health needs through real-time, early
detection. Research reveals children face more barriers than adults when
obtaining mental healthcare, especially in rural, marginalized, and low-
socioeconomic-status communities. Due to a severe shortage of child behavioral
health practitioners across the country, children frequently wait up to a decade
between the onset of mental health symptoms and treatment. This project seeks to
eliminate the delay between when children first experience mental or emotional
needs and when they receive appropriate care, ensuring they flourish—not
flounder—during those crucial developmental years. Leveraging ML algorithms and
proprietary question weighting, the project focuses on: 1) algorithm development
to determine the most effective combination of chatbot and live chat counselor
engagements to understand a child’s immediate issues and provide resolutions for
the child and their parent(s); 2) improvements to ensure the responses are fit
for purpose, recognizing and flagging appropriate conversations for human
interaction; and 3) refining the frequency and content of notifications; such
as, adaptive motivational messages and recommendations to counselors for
tailoring interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.