* 2112862
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Stochastic Axon Systems: From Spatial Dynamics to Self-Organization
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Skirmantas Janusonis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2024
* USD 550,821.00

At the microscopic level, the axons and dendrites that form the connections of
the brain all operate in a dense and active meshwork of thin fibers. These
fibers originate in the brainstem, weave through brain tissue in individually
unique trajectories, and release serotonin, a chemical signal that dates back to
the origin of all animals. This project focuses on the fundamental computational
principles that guide the self-assembly of this pervasive, but enigmatic matrix.
In order to understand its deep structure, the project brings together an
interdisciplinary research team that bridges experimental neurobiology, multi-
particle physics, supercomputing, and applied mathematics. The project will
develop a theoretical framework to understand how the uncertainty of individual
fiber trajectories can lead to predictable fiber densities in brain regions. It
seeks to ultimately explain the development of the fiber matrix in the human
brain and to compute the distribution of fiber densities in arbitrary (extinct,
altered, or theoretically designed) brains, given their shape and other spatial
properties. The study will advance both fundamental and applied neuroscience:
the serotonin-releasing matrix has profound effects on perception and cognition,
is affected in many mental disorders, and shows remarkable regenerative
capabilities. In addition, the results of the project may suggest biologically-
inspired innovations in artificial neural networks whose current architectures
do not include meshwork-like components. The project presents an excellent
training opportunity in interdisciplinary neuroscience for two graduate
students, a postdoctoral researcher, and undergraduate research assistants at
three institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All neural processes in the brain are
physically embedded in a dense matrix of thin fibers (axons) that release
serotonin (5-HT). This matrix supports perception and cognition, and its
abnormalities have been associated with a number of mental disorders and
conditions, including depression, autism, and exposure to psychoactive drugs.
The project will develop a rigorous model of the stochastic process that
underlies the behavior of single serotonergic fibers and leads to their large-
scale self-organization. The structure of the stochastic process and its
parameters will be determined based on high-resolution microscopy images in
transgenic mouse models. The predictive power of the model will be validated
with supercomputing simulations in brain-like 3D geometries. In addition, the
study will examine if the model can be applied broadly across the vertebrate
clade by extending it to shark brains. The project brings together an
interdisciplinary team and will advance the fundamental understanding of
stochastic axon systems. Methodologically, it will also contribute to the theory
of anomalous diffusion processes and may suggest innovations in artificial
neural networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany
(BMBF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.