* 2112926
* RI: Small: Using and Gathering Data for Efficient Batch Reinforcement Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Emma Brunskill, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Imagine if we could provide each child with the right support, at the right
time, for helping them learn best, or to ensure a diabetes patient is being
given the best interventions to help them manage their chronic condition over
time at home. Unfortunately such personalization is expensive. More scalable
computerized approaches can lack the real-time information needed to provide
effective personalization, or the ability to specialize interventions. However,
the huge rise in more user-friendly software tools means that it is now possible
to do such targeted personalization in a broad array of settings. This research
will develop new methods for leveraging existing data, and create algorithms to
acquire new data in a way that is compatible with the limitations of common
systems. This work could help enable personalized interventions across a much
broader array of applications than is currently benefiting from such approaches.
The research will be particularly focused on the technical challenges arising
from areas like education and healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this research will create data efficient algorithms and
statistical estimators for leveraging past datasets about decisions made and
their outcomes, and for acquiring new batch data that might lead to better
results to create decision policies-- mappings from features describing the
current context to a particular decision or intervention. In particular, the
project will center on developing new algorithms that optimize policies with
data efficient, minimal assumption lower statistical bounds on their future
performance; bound the benefit of gathering a budget of additional data; and,
inspired by insights from optimal experimental design, create algorithms for
constructing non-adaptive policies that can be used to gather data that then can
be leveraged to identify a near-optimal decision policy. The research will focus
on both settings where a single decision is made for a particular context, and
where a sequence of decisions are made and the decisions made impact the next
context observed (common in sequential decision making under uncertainty
processes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.