* 2112468
* Collaborative Research: Genomics of speciation and evolution of ecological traits in a geographic radiation of island kingfishers
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Shannon Hackett, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 421,064.00

How and why species diversify is a central question of biology and the process
of speciation is how all biodiversity is created. Islands provide an excellent
setting in which to study speciation in wild populations due to their discrete
geography and well-characterized geologic record. The Indo-Pacific, from
Southeast Asia to Polynesia, is the cradle of speciation theory and home to
numerous geographic radiations of widespread, rapidly evolving species
complexes. This project will synthesize genomics and state-of-the-art trait
datasets to reveal processes that promote rapid radiations in nature.
Specifically, it will use a widespread, species-rich genus of island kingfishers
(Aves: Todiramphus) as its study system. This project aims to make broadly
applicable and generalizable predictions about the speciation process. The
outcomes of this project will be a model for future speciation research in the
Pacific and serve as a springboard for pioneering new ways of studying complex
phenotypes and their interactions with nature. This project will engage the
public through virtual and face-to-face experiences. The researchers will create
virtual collections experiences (VCEs) that highlight the associated natural
history collections at the Museum of Southwestern Biology and The Field Museum.
These online tools will reveal how data are collected from specimens and used to
address the project’s research objectives. The VCEs will be developed as
education modules for grades 9–12, complete with lesson plans and student
learning outcomes. The researchers will development a highly multisensory
exhibit at The Field Museum, playing on the project’s themes of color evolution
that will reach an estimated 500,000 people in Chicago. An educational workshop
will be held at the Museum of Southwestern Biology that will provide hands-on
training and experience in biodiversity science to Native American and Hispanic
students from UNM and New Mexico’s rural-area institutions. It will showcase
professional opportunities in STEM with a focus on museum-based biodiversity
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speciation genomics addresses the roles of
ecology, gene flow, and genomic architecture in the formation of species. This
project proposes an integrative study of systematics, biogeography, plumage
diversification, and ecological adaptation to test multiple hypotheses of the
factors that promoted rapid diversification in a diverse and widespread
radiation of island kingfishers. Todiramphus kingfishers occur across the entire
Indo-Pacific and their diversification rate rivals those of “classic” adaptive
radiations. This study system provides replicated instances of sympatry and
isolation, as well as divergent ecologies required for a synthetic study of
diversification. The project will generate diverse datasets including whole
genomes, ecological niche models, and phenotypic traits, to study how these
factors facilitated rapid radiation on islands over the last 10 million years.
The proposed research will leverage this unique geographic context to provide
novel insights into the multifaceted process of speciation by (a) quantifying
the presence and extent of gene flow and how novel changes in genomic
architecture influenced diversification; (b) assessing how extrinsic traits
(plumage coloration, biogeography, and relative niche conservatism) promoted or
inhibited species divergence in the clade; and (c) through a novel test of the
abundance-niche-center hypothesis in the context of genomic and phenotypic
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.