* 2112233
* STTR Phase I:  Porous Walled Hollow Glass Microspheres (PWHGMs): A novel sustained drug delivery platform with unique flexible capabilities
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* William Hill, SPHEROFILL, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 275,391.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop completely new technology for
extended-release drugs. More than half of people told to take medicine just
twice daily have trouble remembering to take both doses on time, and some drugs
require dosing three- or four- times daily. This NSF project aims to create a
new drug delivery system capable of programmed release over days to even weeks.
The first drug product will be a treatment for malaria, which affects over 300
million people each year. Children are the most vulnerable; every 30 seconds, a
child dies from malaria. Current treatments require multiple pills taken four
times a day for several days. The proposed research could be transformative by
enabling a cost-effective treatment taken once a day or possibly just once. The
project has an enormous potential impact as the technology could create an
entirely new market for drugs and drug delivery strategies impossible with
current knowledge. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project focuses on a novel drug delivery platform with
unprecedented capabilities. Current technology has limited ability to package
and control the release of challenging drugs that are: labile, peptide- or
nucleic acid-based, very hydrophilic, or very hydrophobic. The microscopic
ceramic microspheres invented in the USA for national defense form the core of
the technology, which is now repurposed to advance the national health and
welfare. They have a thin, porous shell and a large, hollow interior that can be
loaded with solids, liquids, or even gasses. The microspheres can then be
sealed, and the payload released over time. This project's overall goal is to
develop the drug delivery platform by focusing on a predicate proof-of-concept:
achieving extended, controlled release of the anti-malarial drug Artemether over
one day or longer. Challenges include developing novel ways of reliably loading
and sealing the microspheres with a waxy hydrophobic drug, new methods of
analyzing the product, and optimizing the drug's programmed release over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.