* 2112137
* SBIR Phase I:  Scaling and Tailoring the Destruction of Emerging Contaminants with the Plasma Water Reactor
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Selman Mujovic, PURAFIDE, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impacts of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project are the promotion of water equity and the protection of U.S. water
supplies. Pollutants persist in air, food, and water. Current technologies
either produce hazardous waste or are ineffective, and therefore there is a
strong public health motivation to proactively destroy prevalent pollutants and
convert waste streams into value streams. Plasmas can convert contaminants into
harmless fundamental compounds, but previous plasma-based water purifiers could
not scale. This project explores the feasibility of custom and scaled plasma-
based water treatment. The resulting platform technology provides immediate
relief to institutions and individuals suffering from contaminated water
supplies. It will yield an increasingly positive impact on the environment due
to the production of reclaimed water, the elimination of waste, and the
reduction of carbon footprint and energy use. It will also promote resource
recovery, public health, sustainability within the water-energy-food nexus, and
water equity for socioeconomically disadvantaged communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project manipulates geometry and power
to achieve effective, efficient, customized, and scaled plasma-based water
treatment. This project uses close-packed water streams to amplify plasma
propagation. This geometric approach minimizes energy consumption and maximizes
the plasma-water interface, enabling previously inaccessible commercial flow
rates. This project will investigate plasma-based destruction of relevant
pollutants in advanced water treatment trains used for potable reuse. Due to
their toxicity, persistence, prevalence, and relevance, 1,4-dioxane,
N-nitrosodimethylamine, and per-/polyfluoroalkyl substances will be used as
indicator compounds to probe various water qualities and meet the following
goals: 1+ log reduction of contaminants, concentrations below maximum
contaminant levels or health advisory limits, and a practical flow rate of
&gt;0.5 gallons per minute that fulfills 0.5-log reduction of 1,4-dioxane.
Kinetics and surrogate parameters are evaluated in reverse osmosis permeate and
concentrate, granular activated carbon effluent, and anion exchange effluent and
regenerant. For each water matrix, plasma performance is modeled as a function
of water quality and energy consumption and operational costs are compared to
established water reuse processes. These novel experiments will advance the
technical and financial feasibility of customized and scaled plasma-based water
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.