* 2112650
* CREST - Center for Multidisciplinary Research Excellence in Cyber-Physical Infrastructure Systems (MECIS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Jianzhi Li, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2026
* USD 5,000,000.00

Center for Multidisciplinary Research Excellence in Cyber-Physical
Infrastructure Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers of Research Excellence
in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the enhancement of research
capabilities of minority-serving institutions through the establishment of
centers that effectively integrate education and research. CREST promotes the
development of new knowledge, enhancements of the research productivity of
individual faculty, and an expanded presence of students historically
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
disciplines. With National Science Foundation support, The University of Texas
Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) will establish a Center for Multidisciplinary Research
Excellence in Cyber-Physical Infrastructure Systems (CIS). The Center addresses
current gaps in the planning, design, and operation of CIS by proposing
innovative theoretical, computational, experimental, and empirical solutions
spanning from micro (molecule)- to macro (system)-scale, which also yield
practical solutions valuable for industry. The Center advances and transforms
the much-needed research and education at the nexus of automation, sensors, and
artificial intelligence (AI), as integral parts of the “NSF’s 10 Big Ideas,”
anticipating the revolutionary cyber-physical infrastructure systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center research is articulated into three subprojects. The
first subproject focuses on future transportation infrastructure which will be
transformed by autonomous vehicles and unmanned aerial vehicles. Subproject 2
designs and embeds sensors in cyber-physical infrastructure systems to perform
automated tasks and monitor infrastructure health. The third subproject develops
effective information technology architectures for big data management and
decision making in the design and operation of unmanned aerial vehicles and
infrastructure. The Center:&lt;br/&gt;• provides undergraduate STEM students
with cutting-edge cyber-physical infrastructure systems research experience;
&lt;br/&gt;• integrates research and education and develops a pathway from High
School through graduate programs in STEM; and, &lt;br/&gt;• strengthens the
institution’s educational and research infrastructure establishing a platform
for a doctoral program in engineering thereby contributing to a more diverse
scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;The Center’s research and education activities
will develop an underrepresented workforce equipped with the skills to address
complex societal problems. The Center will partner with the public and private
sectors to advance technology transfer and product development in cyber-physical
infrastructure systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.