* 2112025
* Particle Theory for High-Energy Collider Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Marco Guzzi, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Nikolaos Kidonakis and
Marco Guzzi at Kennesaw State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project focuses on aspects of theoretical particle physics relevant to the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) and future high-energy colliders. By colliding protons at
higher energies than have ever been previously explored, physicists expect to
learn more about the fundamental particles of matter and their interactions.
Among such fundamental particles, the top quark is the most massive elementary
particle that has been discovered, and thus it is a central part of the physics
program at the LHC. Another particle, the so-called "Higgs boson", is involved
in the mechanism through which many of the elementary particles gain their
masses, and the determination of the properties of the Higgs boson is a high
priority. Likewise, a precise estimate of the structure of the proton is
critical in understanding the details of proton-proton collisions. All of these
questions will be investigated by Professors Kidonakis and Guzzi. In particular,
this research will involve state-of-the-art calculations which will improve
theoretical predictions for the production of top quarks and the Higgs particle,
and which will increase our knowledge of the structure of the proton. The
project will thus advance the national interest by promoting the progress of
science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of elementary particles and their interactions, and the search for
new physics. The results of this research will be widely disseminated through
publication in refereed journals and presentations at international conferences
and workshops. This project will also have significant broader impacts. It will
involve students as well as a postdoctoral researcher in fundamental research,
and thereby provide critical training for junior physicists in this field.
Outreach activities in the wider community will promote knowledge of physics to
the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the goal of the research
project is to develop and implement formalisms that can improve theoretical
predictions of higher-order QCD corrections for a large number of processes at
the LHC and future colliders as well as the determination of parton distribution
functions (PDFs) in the proton. Resummations of soft-gluon corrections will be
performed for total and differential cross sections for processes involving top
quarks, including processes with three-particle final states in single-particle-
inclusive kinematics such as top production in association with electroweak and
Higgs bosons, and other processes in the Standard Model and in models of new
physics. Soft anomalous dimensions will be calculated for various processes to
three-loop accuracy. Moreover, these precision calculations will be used
together with selected high-precision hadron collider measurements in dedicated
global QCD analyses to constrain heavy-flavor PDFs. Heavy-flavor schemes and
factorization theorems in hadronic collisions will be studied, and the impact of
processes that involve heavy-quark production in association with a vector boson
on the determination of heavy-quark PDFs will be explored. All of these
calculations are important for precision studies of the top quark and the Higgs
boson, for the exploration of electroweak symmetry breaking and the search for
new physics at the LHC and future colliders, as well as for deeper knowledge of
the content of the proton, which is a dominant source of uncertainty in
precision hadron collider physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.