* 2112458
* I-Corps: Human toxicity assay using synthetic embryo-like structures
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Jianping Fu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a controllable and scalable microfluidic technology in which
synthetic human embryo-like structures may be derived from human stem cells for
quantitative toxicity testing. The development of the proposed technology
addresses the need for a cost-effective and highly predictive assay platform to
determine embryo toxicology effects. The current assay is conducted using animal
models such as rats or mice. These animal tests are costly and have ethical
issues and limited predictive powers. The proposed technology offers human-
relevant, “organism-level” toxicity testing. The method allows quantitative
measurements and perturbations and is compatible with live imaging and high-
throughput screens. The proposed technology may use disease- and patient-
specific stem cells for disease modeling, and also may allow screening using
stem cells derived from different age and racial/ethnic groups, thus modeling
responses to pharmacological and chemical compounds of diverse
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a controllable and scalable microfluidic technology in which
synthetic embryo-like structures derived from human stem cells may be utilized
for embryo toxicity testing. The proposed microfluidic device allows precise
positioning of human stem cell colonies in prescribed locations within the
microfluidic device. In addition, the proposed device allows precise temporal
delivery of soluble factors to drive these human stem cell colonies to develop
and organize into multicellular structures whose molecular and cellular features
bear significant similarities to early post-implantation human embryos. The
proposed technology has been shown to be controllable, reproducible, scalable,
and compatible with live imaging and immunocytochemistry, which may allow easy
adoption into the existing high-throughput toxicity screening pipelines. The
technology is designed to provide high-content phenotypic and morphological
profiling of the effects of pharmacological compounds on embryo development
based on colorimetric/fluorescent reagents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.