* 2112680
* Probing New Physics at the Large Hadron Collider and Gravitational Wave Interferometers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Peisi Huang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 149,999.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Peisi Huang at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large Hadron Collider
is a vast underground machine that scatters beams of protons against each other
to study the fundamental constituents of matter, known as elementary particles.
Given huge amounts of data from the Large Hadron Collider and generations of
colliders before it, we currently have a fairly robust understanding of the
elementary particles and the forces between them --- knowledge encapsulated
within the so-called Standard Model of particle physics. However, there is
overwhelming evidence that there is new physics beyond the Standard Model.
Professor Huang's research aims to utilize the current and future experimental
probes to advance our understanding of this new physics. As such, Professor
Huang's research advances the national interest by promoting the progress of
science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. This project is also envisioned to have
significant broader impacts. The proposed research will provide training
opportunities for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students.
Professor Huang will also aim to increase participation in STEM by making a
special effort to involve women, other underrepresented minorities, and first-
generation college students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More technically, the
proposed research will involve theoretical calculations and utilize data from
ongoing experimental programs, including the Large Hadron Collider and
Gravitational Interferometers, to advance understanding of fundamental physics
beyond the current paradigm. First, Dr. Huang will investigate how to maximize
the discovery potential of the Large Hadron Collider, with a focus on Higgs
physics. Second, Dr. Huang will leverage gravitational wave observatories to
probe new physics beyond the Standard Model, focusing on establishing a
connection between gravitational wave physics and flavor physics. Third, Dr.
Huang will build new physics models to address the matter-antimatter asymmetry
in the universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.