* 2112162
* SBIR Phase I:  Reducing Emissions and Cost in the Production of Conventional Cementitious Materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Cody Finke, BRIMSTONE ENERGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to reduce cost and environmental impact associated with Portland
cement, the most common general-purpose cement. A new process for making
Portland cement has not been introduced in nearly 100 years, and its production
accounts for for 5.5% of global greenhouse gas emissions, with 60% from the rock
and the remainder from the fuel used in the process. This project proposes a
different process that can reduce emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently
cement is made via the thermal decomposition of limestone to produce lime and
CO2. This project advances a technology based on selective extraction of calcium
from non-carbonate rocks for conversion into cement. The process also produces
amorphous silica as a byproduct. Because calcium is not associated with
carbonate, the emissions associated with manufacturing process are reduced. This
research will be focused on thermal decomposition of the calcium-bearing
compound in the process stream to make calcium silicates as a basis for the
cement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.