* 2112296
* SBIR Phase I:  Haptic Glove for Real-Time Speech Comprehension
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2022,11/30/2022
* Sriraman Damodaran, SUBTLE TECHNOLOGY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project provides new tools to the deaf and hard-of-
hearing populations. Over 466 million people in the world with have hearing
loss. This project will advance a technology to convert speech and other sounds
in the environment to information that can be comprehended through the sense of
touch. It has the potential to supplement existing techniques such as lip-
reading and serve as a non-invasive, cheaper alternative to interventions like
cochlear implant surgery. Moreover, the research conducted herein will lay the
groundwork for future devices leveraging touch-based communication, such as a
wearable that converts digital input to touch-based information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to develop a way of converting auditory speech to information that
can be perceived through the skin. The key research objectives include 1) the
development of a touch-based language that intuitively represents words, similar
to Braille; and 2) the development of a computerized glove that converts
auditory input to the coded touch-based language and transmits it to the skin.
This project will develop a mathematical formula to facilitate the efficient
translation of auditory information into touch-based signals, and conduct
research aimed at maximizing the discriminability of auditory signals perceived
via touch. This will be used to guide electrode placement in glove development
for sending signals to the skin. The anticipated results are the development of
a basic prototype capable of converting speech to
touch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.