* 2112202
* STTR Phase I:  Standardized and reproducible culture and activation of endothelial cells in microfluidic devices for drug screening applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Chiara Federici, BIOCHIP LABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program (STTR) Phase I project is to develop a microfluidic assay for
applications related to drug discovery/screening, personalized medicine, drug
toxicity assessment, evaluation of patient clinical status, and predicting
patient-specific responses to certain therapies. The proposed platforms allow
drug testing under specific physiological conditions to investigate how certain
drugs or drug combinations might affect specific cells. Currently available
platforms are extremely complex and rely on costly, labor-intensive, time-
consuming, and low-throughput fabrication methods, hampering the translation
potential of such systems into a commercial setting. Moreover, standardization
and analytic validation of such platforms are needed for reproducible and
reliable sample testing, facilitating the process of regulatory approval. This
project will significantly help standardize and validate a high-throughput
platform for deployment at scale. This project will help reduce operational
costs for preclinical drug discovery/screening studies and lower the drug
failure rate, as patient-specific testing will be
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Program
(STTR) Phase I project proposes to develop a standardized and validated
microfluidic platform integrated with human endothelial cells for drug
discovery/screening purposes. Since the traditional in vivo and in vitro
techniques that are employed in the preclinical stage of drug development are
extremely costly, labor intensive, time-consuming, and can still lead to high
failure rates, there is an urgent need for physiologically relevant in vitro
assays for preclinical assessment of new drug candidates, particularly in the
cardiovascular disease and blood disorders spaces. Microfluidic platforms allow
for precise control of gas and flow conditions at a size scale equivalent to
that of human microvasculature and offer physiologically relevant vascularized
environments for in vitro testing. To ensure accuracy, reliability, and
robustness of the assay, research objectives include a comprehensive and
systematic approach to standardize the culture and activation of endothelial
cells under physiologic flow conditions. Furthermore, standardized both short-
term and long-term activation of endothelial cells via disease specific
activators (e.g., heme, TNF-α, etc.) will be established to better mimic in vivo
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.