* 2112062
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-Low-Cost Distributed Spectrum Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Alexander Wulff, DISTRIBUTED SPECTRUM LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2022
* USD 251,904.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to apply low-cost radiofrequency (RF) sensing
hardware to detect, monitor, and localize transmitters in industrial and urban
environments. This technology can solve key problems in manufacturing and
logistics operations such as finding RF transmitters that are interfering with
operations or monitoring the health of radio systems. These activities are
required in modern industrial environments as increasing numbers of critical
systems rely on radio communications to operate. In urban environments,
automating the tasks of detecting, monitoring, and localizing transmitters can
simplify the management of large-scale radio networks and gather critical data
on wireless device usage. Increased instances of intentional jamming and the
rollout of new communications standards such as 5G make these tasks critical to
the modern city. Traditionally, such monitoring tasks are conducted manually
with expensive spectrum monitoring equipment. Automated installations also
utilize expensive sensors, making automated spectrum monitoring only feasible in
safety-critical areas such as around airports. Lower-cost sensors can be
installed permanently at a high density for almost any application, allowing
cities and smaller industrial customers to deploy persistent monitoring
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to deploy high-density networks of low-cost sensors,
determine the efficacy of existing detection and localization algorithms as
applied to the network, and evaluate novel machine-learning (ML) algorithms for
similar tasks. This project will also mitigate the technical risk of deploying
such a system by characterizing how well commodity software-defined radio (SDR)
hardware can perform across a variety of operational environments. No high-
density and large-scale test networks of inexpensive radio hardware have been
deployed for the purposes of industrial and urban spectrum monitoring, so data
gathered throughout this SBIR Phase I project will be useful in evaluating the
viability of this approach. By evaluating ML algorithms for signal detection and
localization, this project can help determine how effective machine learning
models can be at ingesting RF data from low-cost sensors and synthesizing
actionable outputs about the radio environment. The result of this project will
be an analysis of the detection and localization performance of a variety of
algorithms across different environments and sensor node
densities.&lt;br/&gt;â€ƒ&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.