* 2112366
* SBIR Phase I: Development of Transcutaneous Electrical Spinal Cord Neuromodulator for Home Use
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Parag Gad, SPINEX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/28/2022
* USD 255,568.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to build a non-invasive device that can deliver sufficient electrical
signals to activate the intrinsic circuits controlling bladder and sphincter
function. This technology will reactivate the previously-dormant neural
circuits. Current medical approaches focus on management of symptoms, rather
than restoration of function. Indeed, they often completely obliterate one
function of the bladder (sensation, storage or emptying) in order to facilitate
the other. Noninvasive spinal neuromodulation offers a different approach, with
a focus on functional restoration, not functional
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a condition that impacts
the quality of life of millions of Americans. Urinary incontinence, recurrent
urinary tract infections and dependence on catheters for bladder emptying are
some of the bladder problems experienced by people with paralysis. The company
seeks to stimulate the spinal cord in a noninvasive manner called Transcutaneous
Electrical Spinal Cord Neuromodulation. In preliminary studies, it was
demonstrated that this therapy can reduce detrusor overactivity to increase
bladder capacity and reduce episodes of incontinence, and facilitate retraining
of the sensory component of bladder control to improve sensation of fullness.
This project will focus on a reconfiguration of the device to make it compatible
with home use. This reconfiguration includes designing a portable device for
home use, testing and confirming electrical safety of the more compact design,
and comparison of waveforms with prototype devices. This device has the
potential to become a novel therapy for the treatment of Neurogenic Lower
Urinary Tract Dysfunction (NLUTD). If successful, for the first time, this
technology will give NLUTD patients a modality to improve their bladder symptoms
without the side effects of medications or risks of invasive
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.