* 2112359
* SBIR Phase I:  Colloidal Quantum Dot Image Sensors for Low-Cost Short-Wave Infrared Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Matthew Ackerman, QDIR, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a low-cost infrared imaging device
that enables real-time monitoring of agricultural products for crop management
and product quality inspection. Handheld and drone-mountable spectroscopic tools
are gaining traction, but their limited spectral range fails to directly measure
the unique identifiers of crop maturity and quality such as oil and sugar
contents. Furthermore, this innovation, as a platform technology, will address a
broader need of the infrared community for lower cost detector arrays and enable
system integrators to develop camera systems to increase the safety of driver-
assisted vehicles, improve the reliability of advanced manufacturing techniques,
and enhance national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a photodetector array
produced using infrared-tunable semiconductor nanocrystals, or colloidal quantum
dots. Unlike crystalline semiconductor technologies, these colloidal quantum dot
inks are fashioned into photodetector devices directly on the electronic
circuits using inexpensive solution coating techniques, which enables the
development of a small pixel pitch focal plane array with a spectral range from
1000-2500 nm and pixel resolution greater than 640x512 to address market
opportunities in low-cost imaging systems. The Phase I project objective is to
develop a colloidal quantum dot detector array that competes on performance with
existing technologies for shortwave infrared sensing and is compatible with
vacuum packaging techniques by controlling the impact of engineering factors
such as surface chemistry, reagent concentration, and process temperature on the
performance and thermal stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.