* 2112799
* SMEFT, Collider, Neutrino, Axion, and Dark Matter Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Joel Walker, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 405,000.00

This award funds the research of Professors James B. Dent, William Shepherd, and
Joel W. Walker at Sam Houston State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors
Dent, Shepherd, and Walker work to connect advances in theoretical physics to
experimental results, with a focus on the properties of subatomic particles such
as neutrinos and hypothetical particles called "axions". They will also study
the properties of the mysterious "dark matter" which provides 80% of the matter
in the universe, and generally study the physics that emerges from large
underground particle colliders. They will explore scenarios for new physics by
developing new experimental search strategies, new data interpretations, new
software tools, and new theoretical models. As a result, this project will
advance the national interest in fundamental science by exploring and connecting
each of these research areas in particle physics. Significant broader impacts
will also be realized through the close supervision of undergraduate research
students at Sam Houston State University, a primarily undergraduate institution
that serves a diverse population. The PIs will seek to guide students in
developing their analytical, numerical, and creative skills through
participation in journal publications and conference presentations, thereby
creating a foundation for graduates to thrive in doctoral programs at major
research universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, possible
signatures of physics beyond the Standard Model at the Large Hadron Collider
will be investigated through indirect effects encapsulated by the Standard Model
Effective Field Theory, through the exploration of a new scale-invariant jet
clustering algorithm, and through the development of public software tools that
will facilitate such analyses. The PIs will also study coherent elastic
neutrino-nucleus scattering, with an emphasis on the Mitchell Institute Neutrino
Experiment at Reactor (MINER) collaboration. Dent and Walker are members of
MINER and will continue to contribute to the simulation and analysis framework
efforts, with the expectation of providing theoretical interpretation as data is
generated. Axion and axion-like particles will be investigated through possible
interactions in the liquid noble and solid-state detectors used in dark matter
and neutrino experiments (such as XENON, SuperCDMS, and MINER), including novel
enhancements from optics-like Bragg and Borrmann mechanisms in crystal
detectors. This includes the exploration of the feasibility of a new
experimental program to search for axions and axion-like particles through
photon disappearance experiments in solid state detectors. The dark matter
studies within this project will focus on novel signatures for low mass dark
matter including plasmon excitations and the neutrino background for such a
signal, the Migdal effect with possible avenues toward its experimental
calibration, and inelastic dark matter models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.