* 2112394
* SBIR Phase II:  Identification of disease resistance traits to improve the productivity and sustainability of soybean cultivation
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Alex Schultink, Fortiphyte, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 991,857.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve the productivity, environmental
sustainability, and profitability of soybean cultivation. Soybean cultivation is
a major driver of rainforest deforestation, motivating improved yields for
environmental sustainability. In addition, current commercial soybean varieties
are highly susceptible to Asian soybean rust, an aggressive fungal disease that
is especially severe in tropical and subtropical climates and can decimate
soybean yield. This disease is controlled by chemical fungicides that are
expensive, pose risks to the environment and human health, and are becoming less
effective as the pathogen develops tolerance to over-used chemicals. This
project will enable the development of soybean varieties immune to this disease.
This will reduce the need for fungicide use in soybean cultivation, reduce yield
loss caused by the pathogen, and improve grower profitability. In addition, this
technology can be expanded to other crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will result in the identification of new plant disease resistance traits
with activity against the pathogen that causes Asian soybean rust. The typical
plant species has hundreds of immune receptor genes which surveil for the
presence of invading pathogens. Plant breeders routinely use plant immune
receptor genes to develop new disease-resistant crop varieties. However,
traditional methods to identify and translate these traits are time-consuming.
The proposed work utilizes a rapid gene discovery platform to accelerate
identification of new disease resistance traits. This project will identify and
test several resistance traits. The identification and cloning of these
resistance gene sequences will allow them to be quickly moved into elite soybean
varieties, resulting in significant time and labor savings relative to
traditional breeding. These traits can be stacked together to confer durable
resistance against a broad range of Asian soybean rust
strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.