* 2112633
* AI Institute for Collaborative Assistance and Responsive Interaction for Networked Groups (AI-CARING)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Reid Simmons, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 7,980,446.00

People collaborate with one another in work, home, and social settings, and
these interactions change over time based on the capabilities, roles,
responsibilities, norms, and interpersonal relationships of those in the group.
Human-AI Interaction (HAI) systems can provide assistance in managing group
collaborations by providing timely information about the status, context, and
needs of group members, and by interacting on their behalf with other such AI
systems. The area of home care for aging adults is a prime example of a complex
assistive setting inspiring this research. Older adults, family caregivers,
medical professionals, friends and neighbors often collaborate to respond to
changing needs. To assist in such settings, HAI systems need to: (a) model the
physical, mental, and social capabilities and needs of people by integrating
data across many sensory modalities; (b) detect physical, cognitive, social and
psychological changes in user capabilities and needs; (c) understand the dynamic
relationships and capabilities across the support network; and (d) adapt
interactive behaviors in order to assist the user most effectively. This project
will develop approaches in human-AI interaction that learn personalized models
of human behavior and how they change over time, and use that knowledge to
better collaborate, communicate, and assist the user. To drive these
innovations, the Institute will serve as a nexus point for collaborative efforts
across academia and industry. In addition to advanced research, these
collaborations will actively build the next generation of talent for a diverse,
well-trained workforce through a wide range of workforce development, education,
outreach, broadening participation, and knowledge transfer programs designed to
disseminate knowledge about, and enthusiasm for, the development of interactive
AI systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AI Institute for Collaborative Assistance
and Responsive Interaction for Networked Groups (AI-CARING) will develop a
discipline focused on personalized, longitudinal, collaborative AI --
characterized by the design, development, and deployment of interactive,
intelligent HAI systems embedded within communities of users over extended
periods of time (months and years). Envisioned HAI systems will take the form of
virtual assistants embedded in common consumer devices (e.g., cell phones, smart
speakers) that will interact with users via speech, gesture, visual, auditory,
and mixed reality interfaces. HAI systems will establish personalized
longitudinal models of user abilities, goals, values, and interpersonal
relationships based on aggregated sensor observations and the history of past
interactions. Building on such models, networked teams of agents will provide
coordinated assistance through personalized and value-driven interactions that
operate in accordance with usersâ€™ personal and social norms. Researchers in
computing, social sciences, and healthcare will collaborate to design, develop,
and deploy HAI systems that include sample-efficient techniques for user
modeling and personalization, robust methods for longitudinal human-AI teaming,
socially-conscious and dignity-preserving AI methodologies, explainable systems,
novel guidelines for experimental design, and novel benchmarks and metrics for
these areas. Co-design approaches, research demonstrations and long-term field
evaluations will involve households (instrumented with different types of
sensors) that include older adults with cognitive and physical impairments,
their family, informal caregivers, professional health providers and community
partners. AI-CARING systems will reinforce daily routines, recognize changes in
behavior, provide team support for caregivers, scaffold planning for
interactions with professionals, and provide ethical encouragement and feedback
regarding an individual's varying abilities. These fundamental capabilities will
scaffold responsive and personalized Human-AI Interaction that will transform
our day-to-day experiences with AI systems. The long-term impact of this work
will go beyond caregiving, extending to any application that includes long-term
Human-AI Interaction through speech, gesture, visual and mixed reality
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.