* 2112631
* CREST Center for Geospatial and Environmental Informatics, Modeling and Simulation
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Yuxia Huang, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 11/30/2026
* USD 1,619,553.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
supports the enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. CREST promotes the development of new knowledge,
enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded
presence of students historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics disciplines. With National Science Foundation
support, Texas A&amp;M University, Corpus Christi establishes the Center for
Geospatial and Environmental Informatics, Modeling and Simulation. Growing
population demands, threats from storms, and sea encroachment put coastal
communities at the forefront of engineering and scientific efforts to reduce
vulnerabilities for their long-term prosperity. Improving coastal resilience is
a cost-effective approach to prepare for increasingly uncertain coastal
environments. The modeling and simulation capabilities developed by the Center
will provide guidance to communities to rebound more quickly from a disaster
event and to reduce negative human health, environmental, and economic impacts.
The Center will recruit and support underrepresented minority students to pursue
degrees in STEM fields with a focus on coastal resilience and expand the
university’s education and research capacity. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Center
articulates three research subprojects addressing the challenges of coastal
resilience by developing new approaches that integrate remote and autonomous
sensing with geospatial computing, Artificial Intelligence/deep learning, and
big data analytics for comprehensive coastal zone monitoring at different
scales. The focus is on improving resiliency to extreme coastal hazards and
episodic and persistent events (e.g., hurricane and sea-level rise). Subproject
1 develops new approaches integrating remote and autonomous sensing with
geospatial computing and artificial intelligence to improve coastal zone
monitoring and resiliency decision-making. It generates detailed and accurate
geographic information systems data for characterization of the built and
natural environment. Subproject 2 contributes to the understanding of the urban
water cycle and the resilience of water infrastructure through integrated
characterization, simulation, and assessments. Subproject 3 investigates how
emerging data sources and advanced geospatial computing can be applied to
evaluate, assist, and improve a coastal community’s physical, behavioral, and
social health after disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.