* 2112199
* SBIR Phase II: Use of Robotic Inspection and Data Analytics to Localize and Visualize the Structural Defects of Civil Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Diar Sanakov, InnovBot LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 874,830.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to produce two robotic systems for ground
survey applications and inspection of vertical surfaces to detect and visualize
both surface flaws and subsurface embedment in concrete structures using a
camera and a ground penetrating radar (GPR). The instrumentation may reduce the
time, difficulty, and cost to layout gridlines in civil infrastructure and make
it possible to automate data collection at difficult-to-access locations with
minimum human intervention. The use of the robotic inspection systems may allow
the evaluation and inspection tasks to be performed faster, more thoroughly,
with minimal safety risks to workers, and at a lower cost by eliminating the
need for scaffolding and blocking traffic. The proposed research and development
may advance the state-of-the-art robotic technology and produce climbing
machines, vision-based accurate positioning, and 3D Ground Penetrating Radar
(GPR) imaging software as a holistic solution to improve the way GPR data is
collected, interpreted, and visualized. The solution can be extended to other
non-destructive testing (NDT) applications and may help make the national
infrastructure (e.g., bridges, tunnels, dams, and buildings) more secure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project seeks to improve the accuracy and robustness of vision-based positioning
and 3D GPR imaging algorithms while developing new software functions and
integrating them into two robotic systems deployed to inspect both ground
surfaces (e.g., bridge decks and highway pavement) and vertical surfaces (e.g.,
building facades and bridge foundations). The intellectual merit of this project
is the automated 3D GPR data collection and imaging method that combines robotic
control and vision-based accurate positioning with GPR signal processing for
locating the subsurface defects and embedment (rebar, pipes, fractures, voids,
delamination, etc.) in concrete structures. This method enables the robots to
scan the surfaces in arbitrary and irregular trajectories rather than along
gridlines to locate subsurface targets and discover the areas of delamination.
Tagging the GPR measurements with accurate position information in a
synchronized way at each sampling step enables high-resolution 3D GPR
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.