* 2112321
* SBIR Phase I:  Climate analysis at scale through mapping biomass, water restoration, and soil carbon sequestration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Troy Carter, EARTHSHOT Labs PBC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to scale nature-based climate mitigation. The
Phase 1 project will create and manage comprehensive data sets and models
representing the current and proposed future state of ecosystem health as
measured by aboveground biomass growth in forests, the health and carbon
sequestration in soils, and the restoration of groundwater in arid or otherwise
degraded environments through the restoration of hydrological function. Through
its open source and community-oriented approach, the project intends to be a
valuable resource for organizations mitigating loss of biodiversity, soil
health, forest cover, and groundwater due to extractive land use practices. The
information provided by this technology will be useful for landowners,
governmental authorities, researchers, and financial
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize recent advances in
remote sensing, cloud compute infrastructure, and machine learning to predict
the highest leverage land-based interventions for managing and enhancing the
hydrological cycle, protecting forests and increasing reforestation efforts, and
building soil health and resiliency through soil organic carbon sequestration.
The highest impact water interventions will be determined using random forest
algorithms improved through the use of soil models that include porosity, rates
of runoff, and texture. The forest-based interventions for conserving and
increasing above-ground biomass will be based on historic land use change and
disturbance regimes as monitored through satellite imagery and coupled with
potential sequestration rates achieved through restoration and improved forest
management. Soil health and carbon sequestration modeling will be accomplished
using historic soil sample data over an 80 year period and the associated
environmental covariates in addition to research into rates of soil
sequestration by land management type. This will enable the training of a random
forest-based model to predict the highest impact land use interventions to
enhance or restore soil organic carbon. These models will be combined to create
an interactive land viewer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.