* 2112863
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dissolved organic nitrogen uptake by harmful algal blooms in the Chukchi Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kevin Arrigo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 51,680.00

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) happen when the growth of colonies of algae threaten
human and/or ecosystem health. Some HABs involve algae that produce potent
neurotoxins that can harm shellfish, marine mammals, seabirds, and other
critical resources. In the past 15 years, toxic HABs have been observed in the
Pacific Arctic Ocean and pose a potential threat to Indigenous and other local
communities that depend on hunting and fishing for food. This project
supplements data collected during a research cruise led by scientists from the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) to better understand the factors
promoting these blooms. The team is determining whether algae that form HABs are
better than other algae at using dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) for growth by
characterizing different nitrogen compounds in the Chukchi Sea and how quickly
various algae species take up these compounds. The investigators are
collaborating with the broader WHOI team to communicate the research results and
their implications for Alaskan communities and coastal management via brochures,
public lectures, radio interviews, and discussions with Indigenous communities,
local scientists, and local officials. The project is also training one
undergraduate student through the Stanford Undergraduate Research in Geoscience
and Engineering program and two graduate students at Stanford
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project complements other measurements
collected during a research cruise led by scientists from the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI). The principal cruise goal is to better
understand the factors promoting these blooms. This project is examining the
hypothesis that the preference for DON over dissolved inorganic nitrogen by
dinoflagellate HAB species contributes to their success in July and August in
the Chukchi Sea, an area that is known to be nitrogen-limited in the summer. The
investigators will sample DON concentrations across the Chukchi Sea and relate
them to HAB distributions. A series of 15N-labelled tracer incubations will be
conducted onboard the research vessel to measure bulk uptake rates of nitrate,
ammonium, urea, and dissolved free amino acids by the entire phytoplankton
community. Nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry, which measures individual
cell isotopic composition, will be used to determine single-cell nitrogen uptake
rates from the same incubations. Nitrogen uptake by HAB species and HAB-
dominated communities will be compared to that of diatom species and diatom-
dominated communities, as diatoms are traditionally considered the dominant
bloom-forming phytoplankton in the Chukchi Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.