* 2112519
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Food And Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Timothy Pugh, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 25,162.00

The study of social inequality in past societies has helped archeologists
understand the development of social structures. Earlier civilizations with
sociopolitical hierarchies often had complex infrastructure designed to organize
movement of people and resources. For example, impressive constructions like
temple pyramids and causeways, connected local residents to important buildings
while also legitimizing the authority of governing entities or individual
rulers. Sociopolitical powers also influence the way natural resources are
supplied to a population. The doctoral dissertation project examines social
differentiation in households through the recovery and analysis of animal bones
at a site in an early stage of social complexity development. Examining animal
(faunal) remains, which primarily survive in archaeology as bones, help to
determine if these products were unevenly allocated within residences during the
period of initial urbanization in the region. This project contributes to
ongoing discussions on the origins of states by outlining the cooperative nature
of an archaic state. The research thus highlights dynamics of an ancient
community by studying the way neighborhoods were organized demarcating unity and
hierarchy. This project supports the training of a doctoral student from an
underrepresented minority in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal bones in
archaeological deposits are often interpreted as preserved remnants of animals
that people consumed in the past. This study aids in answering the central
question of whether status differentiation in the form of elite to nonelite
members (commoners) at the site were clearly defined through diet. By analyzing
patterns in species distribution, the project will: (1) identify amounts of
local and non-local animals; (2) reveal the presence or absence of difficult to
acquire vs. common organisms; and (3) determine the quantity of dissimilar
proportions of fauna amongst households. The doctoral student will excavate
several household structures and their refuse disposals. Faunal samples will be
catalogued, weighed, and counted using common zooarchaeological quantification
units. Quantitative data will be statistically analyzed and graphically modeled.
Coupling this zooarchaeological investigation with examinations of household
structural design and building material, residential location, and associated
artifacts is essential to being able to recognize social identities among the
prehistoric people. Such an approach also provides contextual support for social
inequality in an ancient population while furthering the progressive
understanding of a contemporary and relevant issue: socioeconomic control over
the distribution of natural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.