* 2112846
* RUI: Precision Cosmological Tests of Varying Fundamental Constants
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Grin, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 135,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Daniel Grin at Haverford
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are in the era of precision cosmology, where
measurements of ancient light (the so-called "cosmic microwave background") have
yielded a consensus picture in which the contents of the universe include
mysterious dark matter and dark energy. The best framework for understanding
dark matter and dark energy involves new ideas in theoretical particle physics
which imply that the fundamental ‘constants’ of nature actually vary in space
and time. Professor Grin will develop new methods of testing these scenarios,
using data from the cosmic microwave background as well as from other
anticipated future measurements. Such research serves the national interest by
strengthening fundamental science within the United States. This work will also
have significant broader impacts. The PI will supervise undergraduate research
and lead curricular programming that promotes the representation and
participation of first-generation and lower-income students in physics courses
and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the PI will explore beyond-
the-standard-model scenarios (based on string-inspired models) in which the
fine-structure constant and electron mass are dynamical variables rather than
constants. The work is motivated by puzzling observations of high-redshift
quasars. The PI will compute cosmic microwave background statistics in these
models, developing the relevant perturbation theory, implementing it in new
cosmological Boltzmann codes, developing new statistical methods, obtaining
constraints, and conducting forecasts for future ground-based experimental
efforts. This work will be applied to compute the non-Gaussian map signatures of
these models, conducting forecasts and possibly tests for such phenomena with
current data. The PI will also determine the impact of varying fundamental
parameter models on observations of the high-redshift 21-cm emission line from
neutral hydrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.