* 2112754
* Collaborative Research: Learning and Distributional Feedback Control for Fabrication of Advanced Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ali Mesbah, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 354,392.00

This grant will support research that will advance the scientific knowledge as
well as the design of algorithms to enable the fabrication of advanced
materials. This will in turn catalyze scalable and economically viable precision
manufacturing contributing to the advancement of technology, and national
prosperity. Scalable and cost-effective manufacturing of advanced materials with
desired quality increasingly relies on the ability to predict and control
processes at the molecular scale. Examples of such molecular processes include
self-assembly processes that are central to the manufacturing of materials that
have unique optical, electrical, and mechanical properties with up to
subnanometer precision, or nucleation and growth processes in defect-free
manufacturing of multi-layer films. While model-based control of molecular
processes is well-recognized for enabling fabrication of advanced materials,
existing approaches may not be amenable to real-time implementations with modest
computational resources, especially given the fast and uncertain dynamics of the
molecular processes. Thus, there remains a critical need to achieve fast non-
equilibrium shaping of the distribution of state variables governing molecular
processes, towards defect-free and scalable manufacturing of advanced materials.
The physics-based online learning and feedback control framework, grounded on
recent theoretical and algorithmic breakthroughs in stochastic control and
machine learning, will enable optimal feedback control of the distributions of
system states in real-time subject to the physical constraints. In addition to
its far-reaching scientific impact cross-cutting machine learning, control and
manufacturing, the project will also demonstrate the potential for precise
control of distributions that will serve many emerging engineering applications
--from controlling neuronal populations to swarm guidance and probabilistic
motion planning. Besides fostering collaborative research between UC Santa Cruz
and UC Berkeley, the research will lead to a multitude of educational and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s key scientific merit
lies in bringing innovative systems-theoretic and learning-based distributional
control approaches for molecular processes governed by multidimensional partial
differential equation models that exhibit highly nonlinear and uncertain
dynamics. The effort includes online learning of the complex dynamics of
molecular processes and closing the loop with minimum energy optimal control of
the population distribution over a finite time horizon via real-time feedback.
Contrary to the existing state-of-the-art, the research will not make any
parametric approximation of the dynamics or of the distributional shapes.
Instead, it will exploit the structural properties of the underlying nonlinear
equations for learning and online adaptation of the dynamic macroscopic
features, and to synthesize feedback. The project will deliver computational
benchmarks and an open source numerical toolbox to provide a quantitative
demonstration of the improvements achieved over the existing state-of-the-
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.