* 2112663
* Distributed Quantum Computing and Metrology with Alkaline Earth Atom Arrays
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jacob Covey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The nascent field of quantum technology is poised to profoundly affect many
aspects of life by drastically improving computing power, sensor resolution, and
timing accuracy while offering a new approach to cryptography that leverages the
laws of quantum mechanics. Quantum entanglement – by which quantum particles
cannot be described individually even when separated over great distances – is
the central resource in quantum information science. While increasing the scale
of locally entangled systems remains an outstanding challenge, an attractive
alternative is to use non-local means of entanglement generation such as optical
photons to “connect” locally entangled systems together. The goal of this
project is to advance the size and utility of large-scale quantum systems
through entanglement generation between remote arrays of individually controlled
atoms. This program will train new generations of diverse scientists and
engineers in disruptive quantum technology that is commercially viable and will
advance the leadership and economic development in quantum science in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will address the challenge of
realizing many-body entangled states at a scale beyond classical tractability.
The system proposed will consist of arrays of alkaline-earth(-like) ytterbium
atoms in optical tweezers. Record-size distributed Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger
states – with application to quantum computation and metrology – between two
separated atomic array sub-systems each containing ~20-30 qubits will be
demonstrated. Entangling operations within each sub-system will be performed via
highly excited Rydberg states. Additionally, logically encoded qubits containing
several physical qubits will be developed. Based on this architecture, gate
teleportation between logically encoded qubits will be pursued as a route toward
fault-tolerance. This research will merge the toolbox of precision optical
metrology with those of quantum computation and communication and will enable
the use of programmable many-body entanglement for quantum-enhanced metrology
and distributed quantum computing and networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.