* 2112946
* Determinants of amphibian genomic diversity: Integrating traits, phylogeny, and geography
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lisa Barrow, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 08/31/2024
* USD 970,175.00

Genetic differences between individuals and populations of the same species are
essential for organisms to adapt and survive in changing environments. Surveying
genomic variation within species, and determining what factors influence that
variation, are thus important goals for managing wildlife populations and
conserving biodiversity. Amphibians are key contributors to many ecosystem
processes, but they are one of the most threatened vertebrate groups. They are
also lacking from many comparative studies of genomic variation because they
have large, complex genomes. This project will investigate the factors that
influence genomic variation within amphibians and will produce new genome-scale
data for several dozen frog species sampled across the United States. Broader
impacts include training early-career scholars including a postdoctoral
researcher, two graduate students, and six undergraduate students in field
sampling, genomic sequencing, bioinformatics, and statistical analysis. The
project will also contribute to research infrastructure by archiving searchable,
multi-purpose amphibian specimens and tissues at the Museum of Southwestern
Biology for future uses. A new undergraduate course in Biodiversity Informatics
will be developed to engage students with natural history collections and
biodiversity databases, provide computational training, and offer hands-on
research experiences through collaborative projects that leverage the amphibian
genomic data produced by the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses key questions about the determinants of genetic diversity, thereby
advancing knowledge about the origins, distribution, and evolutionary history of
global biodiversity. Two complementary approaches to data collection encompass
several complex factors that affect genetic diversity – life history and
ecological traits, phylogenetic history, population history, and current
environmental variation – and provide insights into the scale at which these
factors influence diversity within species. The first approach will combine data
repurposing, machine learning, and phylogenetic comparative methods to identify
important predictors of genetic diversity for global amphibians using open-
access museum, trait, and genetic sequence databases. These results will shed
light on the importance of species traits, phylogenetic history, and geographic
range characteristics for predicting genetic diversity across hundreds of
amphibian species. The second approach will produce new high-resolution, genome-
scale data for more than 40 frog species in the United States, sampled
strategically across geographic space to test predictions about the influence of
population history and current environmental variation on genetic variation
within species. By integrating traits, phylogeny, and geography, this research
will uncover the determinants of amphibian genomic diversity and establish a
framework to address this fundamental aspect of biodiversity across different
taxonomic and spatial scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.