* 2112558
* Better Scientific Software Fellowship Program
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Shelly Olsan, Krell Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 54,266.00

Addressing the scientific software challenges facing the nation requires broad
collaboration to foster practices, processes, and tools to improve software
developer productivity and software sustainability. Both of those are key
aspects of ensuring the integrity of computational results and increasing
scientific productivity. The Better Scientific Software (BSSw) Fellowship
Program, launched in 2018 with support from the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE),
provides recognition and funding for leaders and advocates of high-quality
scientific software. This project will enable NSF to collaborate in sponsorship
of the BSSw Fellowship Program and participate in managing the program. The
project will be piloted in the current year with NSF support of one BSSw Fellow
and one Honorable Mention, with the goal of expanding in future years to 2 or
more BSSw Fellows and Honorable Mentions. The BSSw fellow will receive a stipend
that can be used for various activities that promote improved scientific
software, such as organizing a workshop or creating a tutorial. Both the BSSw
fellow and the honorable mention receive travel support to work with scientific
community members and form a cohort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science
Foundation (NSF) and DOE are leaders in advanced computing, pushing the growth
of computational and data-enabled science and engineering as an essential driver
of scientific and technological progress. Moreover, NSF and DOE researchers have
developed a wide range of high-impact scientific software for advanced modeling,
simulation, discovery, and analysis. The country faces a software crisis,
however, due to disruptive changes in computer architectures and increasing
complexity in next-generation computational science. NSF partnership in
sponsoring the BSSw Fellowship Program will enable a more robust approach toward
pioneering the future of advanced computing ecosystems in support of American
leadership in science and engineering. An important element of the project is
exploring the feasibility to expand the program to more fully address the NSF
scientific community. The BSSw Fellowship Program enhances workforce development
and pathways to the NSF and DOE software communities, though nurturing a network
of people who advance software practices as a fundamental aspect of increasing
overall scientific productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.