* 2112267
* STTR Phase I:  Point-of-Care Skin Cancer Imaging Device
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Negar Ebadi, RADIOSIGHT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program (STTR) Phase I project is to develop an affordable tool to
image the skin over its depth while offering large contrasts between normal,
malignant, and benign tissues. Such a device will be an invaluable assistance to
dermatologists and dermatologic surgeons and significantly enhance the current
state of skin cancer detection and management. The proposed system will be
integrated in a single framework, resulting in a compact (handheld) and real-
time imager at a low manufacturing cost. This will make the proposed technology
comparable in cost to dermoscopic imaging, facilitating its widespread use and
application. The proposed device will also be able to identify tumor margins in
the millimeter-wave images of skin lesions. This capability will simplify the
tumor removal surgery to a single-layer excision procedure. The proposed imager
will be used by dermatologists and dermatologic surgeons prior to biopsy or
tumor excision, facilitating the detection and removal of tumors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Program (STTR)
Phase I project is focused on developing a fully-integrated ultra-wideband
millimeter-wave imaging system for the first time. This will be realized by
employing the synthetic ultra-wideband imaging approach, where several
disjointed, adjacent imaging sub-bands are integrated to collectively form an
ultra-wide imaging bandwidth. Each sub-band contains a transmitting and a
receiving element that operate only within that specific sub-band. In this
research, the RF front-ends of sub-band phased-array antennas will be developed
and integrated with the transceiver components of the imaging system on a single
chip. The developed phased arrays will be configured to radiate and collect RF
frequencies over different frequency sub-bands, while forming independent beams
with separate phase-shifting operations. Therefore, electronic beam-steering can
be used for scanning the target region. In addition, a novel method for tumor
margin identification in 3-D millimeter-wave images is proposed in which
a-priori information about the statistical distribution of the dielectric
properties of tissues is employed. This will result in a more accurate
segmentation of the dielectric properties at a low computational cost. The
ultra-wide bandwidth of the proposed imager will result in significantly higher
image resolutions compared to the state-of-the-art millimeter-wave imaging
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.