* 2112172
* STTR Phase I:  Rapid Point-of-Care Sterilization of Personal Protective Equipment for Frontline Healthcare Workers (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Julie Lundstrom, RUSH RIVER RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2024
* USD 255,961.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer, Phase I project is to improve public health. During the COVID-19
pandemic, personal protective equipment (PPE), including filtering facepiece
respirators (FFRs), have been critical to containing disease spread and
protecting first responders and healthcare workers on the frontlines. Shortages
of FFRs have led public health agencies to provide guidance in favor of FFR
decontamination and re-use as a crisis capacity strategy. This project seeks to
develop a cost-effective approach to support sterilization and re-use of
personal protective equipment at the point-of-care. The technology seeks to
develop and evaluate a simple, low-cost, sterilization receptacle for the
effective, automated decontamination of FFRs. The aim is to enable first
responders and healthcare workers to sterilize FFRs and prepare them at the
point of care for re-use within minutes. This capability can be useful both in
the current and potential future pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase
I project seeks to harness high voltage pulsed electric fields (PEFs) for
decontamination and re-use of FFRs. In addition to killing bacteria and fungi,
PEF has been observed to rapidly inactivate enteric viruses within seconds of
exposure. PEF can also be used to electrically recharge FFR mask fibers prior to
re-use. The filtration efficiency of N-95 FFRs is improved by an intermediate
layer of charged polypropylene electret fibers that trap small particles through
electrostatic or electrophoretic effects. A prototype will be constructed and
evaluated on FFRs inoculated with respiratory viruses, including SARS-CoV2, in a
clinical virology lab to directly demonstrate sterilization and recharge
efficacy. The project will establish whether such a system will allow multiple
sterilizations and fiber recharging cycles without affecting FFR function or
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.