* 2112727
* Experimental Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Heidi Schellman, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 06/30/2024
* USD 440,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers to
these and other open questions about the universe, how it came to be, and why it
is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to
use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM). The Standard Model predicted that there were actually
three different kinds of neutrinos that were distinguishable through the
different interactions that they did undergo whenever there was an interaction.
But recent measurements have totally changed our picture of neutrinos. We now
know that neutrinos do have a mass and because they do they can actually change
from one type to another. Detailed measurements of neutrino interactions such as
those in this project form one of the most promising ways to probe for new
physics beyond the Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Oregon State Group
is studying how neutrinos and antineutrinos interact with normal matter in the
MINERvA experiment at Fermilab, and are engaged in R&amp;D for DUNE, the next
generation, long baseline neutrino experiment with endpoints at Fermilab in
Illinois, which provides the neutrino beam, and the Sanford Underground
Laboratory in South Dakota, which is home for the detectors. Principal
investigator Schellman is coordinator of the Computing and Software effort for
the overall DUNE project. This includes development and implementation of the
experimental computing model and assembling the international scientific and
technical team that will be responsible for processing the data from the
ProtoDUNE experiments at CERN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create
computing infrastructure useful across the fields of Particle and Nuclear
Physics and will train young scientists in advanced computing techniques for
analyzing petabyte data samples, skills that are valuable across the US economy.
The PI supervises scientific outreach activities through The Oregon State
Physics Department that reach substantial numbers of people in urban and rural
communities every year. The OSU neutrino group attracts a large fraction of
women and underrepresented minorities to its research
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.