* 2112595
* CREST Center for Research and Education in Quantum Leap Science and Technology
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Doyle Temple, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2026
* USD 4,999,998.00

Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
supports the enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. CREST promotes the development of new knowledge,
enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded
presence of students historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics disciplines. With National Science Foundation
support, Norfolk State University intends to establish a multidisciplinary CREST
Center for Research and Education in Quantum Leap Science and Technology (CREQS)
for development of new quantum-based technology and for the education of the
21st century quantum science workforce with emphasis on the production of
scientists and engineers from groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. The proposed center will expand access to science education for
students underrepresented in STEM fields; foster outreach to the local community
and introduce quantum related science to the general public. Successful
implementation of this work will advance discovery in emergent quantum
technology and result in the development of K12, undergraduate and graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the CREST Center for Research and
Education in Quantum Leap Science and Technology is to investigate and develop
materials, phenomena, and manufacturing techniques for fabrication of next-
generation quantum devices. This goal is intended to be accomplished using three
synergistic research thrusts. Thrust 1 will focus on discovery and synthesis of
new topological quantum materials including chiral structured semimetals that
are predicted to host Dirac, Weyl and Majorana fermions. The work will include
an intensive materials synthesis effort, combined with fundamental
investigations of their magnetic, optical, and transport properties. Thrust 2
will explore quantum plasmonic effects that involve spin angular momentum
transfer from light to matter, as well as strongly confined and structured
optical fields which can result in new ways for light and matter to be
controlled at the nanoscale. Thrust 3 will focus on integration of quantum- and
nanomaterials into nanoscale devices by combining the fundamental materials
properties knowledge obtained in Thrusts 1 and 2 with the advanced manufacturing
facilities available in the NSU 6,000 square foot class 100/1000 cleanroom. This
will allow development of novel techniques for integration of fermionic quantum
materials, spintronic magnetic materials, and materials with unforeseen
properties into high precision quantum devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.