* 2112556
* CREST Center for Biological Signatures and Sensing (BioSS) Phase II
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Arnold Burger, Fisk University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2026
* USD 5,000,000.00

Center for Biological Signatures and Sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers of
Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the
enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving institutions through
the establishment of centers that effectively integrate education and research.
CREST promotes the development of new knowledge, enhancements of the research
productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded presence of students
historically underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics disciplines. With National Science Foundation support, Fisk
University strengthens the Center for Biological Signatures and Sensing (BioSS).
The Center develops sensor technology that increases the knowledge and
development of biological, chemical, and nuclear sensors for biological
applications. Each of three research areas engages a multidisciplinary team of
natural scientists partnering with mathematicians and computer scientists to
develop or adapt new tools to solve high profile biological problems. The Center
enhances Fisk University curricula to include emerging topics in biological
sensors and materials science. The project provides research experience,
professional development, mentoring and career guidance for a diverse and new
generation of students in the emerging areas of sensor technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center articulates three research subprojects
addressing biological sensing modalities that are the basis of the next
generation of sensors serving a multitude of applications. Subproject 1 focuses
on genetic signatures and sensing of cellular identity and function in dopamine
neurons in actively proliferating mammalian cells. This team uses various
combinations of genetically encoded sensors, transcriptional profiling, and
microfluidics to determine epigenetic modifiers of gene expression, and
therefore of cellular function and behavior. Subproject 2 develops biochemical
mechanisms of metal sensing from structure-function relationships of proteins to
cellular homeostasis. This team integrates biophysical, biochemical, and
computational approaches to reveal the molecular basis for protein-metal
interactions and their role in the regulation of fundamental biological
processes, extending previous work focused on manganese to include iron, copper,
and zinc. Subproject 3 develops and implements novel radiation sensors for
biological applications. This team continues the material discovery component
and further develops dual-energy x-ray absorptivity handheld sensors and micro-
cameras providing chemical specificity, detection of biogenetic molecules, and
other assays involving gamma and neutron spectroscopy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.