* 2112710
* Dissecting the Rate Theory for Protein Folding Dynamics via Advanced Single-Molecule Fluorescence Experiments
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Victor Munoz, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2025
* USD 811,115.00

Proteins are biological nanomachines that perform most cellular functions
through their ability to self-assemble into specific structures and change shape
on cue. The mechanisms that govern protein operation determine every aspect of
molecular and cell biology and are also essential for developing tools to
predict, engineer, and design biological function. The keys to these mechanisms
are in the rates at which proteins fold and unfold. However, there still is not
a unified rate treatment that can: 1) integrate analytical theory and molecular
simulations; 2) rationalize the puzzlingly simple rate patterns observed in
conventional experiments; and 3) be directly used to analyze modern single-
molecule experiments. This project will demonstrate a novel approach to
empirically dissect folding rates. It will also provide answers to many
outstanding issues in the field, including how the rates depend on various
physical factors and protein fold/structure, the connections between rate and
mechanism, and how heterogeneous these mechanisms truly are. Capitalizing on the
special characteristics of the University of California Merced, a Hispanic
serving institution with over 60% of first-generation students, the project will
help develop a robust pipeline for underrepresented minorities in the STEM
workforce at all levels and produce graduates that can pursue cross-disciplinary
STEM careers in academia, government laboratories or industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effective bridge between predictions of theory and
simulations and the analysis of experiments in protein folding is a rate
treatment that describes rates as diffusion on the free energy surface obtained
by projecting the energy landscape into a few order parameters. To effectively
test this treatment, experimentalists must resolve the distribution of
microscopic behaviors that inform on the rateâ€™s properties, a feat that has not
been yet fully achieved. The goal of this project is to experimentally dissect
the rates of protein folding-unfolding transitions. This will be done using an
approach designed to track the stochastic changes that individual protein
molecules undergo along their reactive transition paths, and hence resolve the
key rate terms: barrier, diffusion coefficient, and curvature of wells and
barrier top. The approach combines advanced single-molecule fluorescence
experiments, maximum likelihood analysis of photon trajectories, and diffusive
kinetic models. This approach will be applied to fast-folding proteins
representatives of three basic archetypal folds. The experiments will directly
test protein folding rate theory, connect with molecular simulations, and
promote a paradigm shift in how experimental rates are
interpreted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.