* 2112586
* Applying error management theory to understand the evolution of decision-making in plant defense
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2025
* Eric Yip, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

Despite their reputation for passivity, plants, like animals, have evolved a
remarkable capacity to perceive and respond to information about threats in
their environment. Unlike animals, however, it is unknown how plants prioritize
different information and assess risk to 'make decisions' about how to respond.
This research project will use error management theory to evaluate how tall
goldenrod plants (Solidago altissima) assess threats of herbivory from cues that
they receive from the environment. It is already known that tall goldenrod can
perceive and respond to two different airborne cues to initiate defenses before
herbivores arrive: (1) a mate-attracting chemical (pheromone) from a key
damaging herbivore species and (2) volatile chemicals released from neighboring
tall goldenrod plants that are being attacked by generalist insects. Greenhouse
and field experiments will be conducted to determine cue thresholds, what genes
are triggered by different cues, and the costs and benefits of responding when
cues are matched versus mismatched with the type of damage received. Ultimately
the cost of making an error in not responding will be measured by reduced
reproductive output due to herbivore damage. The results will reveal whether
tall goldenrod takes a bet-hedging approach and allocates defenses to minimize
costly errors in favor of less costly errors. By exploring plant defenses from
this novel perspective, this research will significantly broaden our
understanding of how plants make decisions and provide insight on the evolution
of plant defenses against herbivores. Interactions between plants and herbivores
are the backbone of terrestrial ecosystems, so understanding how plants 'decide'
to defend themselves has applications from crop protection to control of
invasive species. The project will support training and mentorship of students
and a postdoctoral researcher, as well as public outreach initiatives through
established programs at The Pennsylvania State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solidago altissima is among the few plant
species known to detect and alter its defenses in response to two volatile
chemical cues: one from neighboring plants, one from the mating activity of a
key, specialist herbivore. Greenhouse and field experiments will test error
management theory to elucidate costs and benefits of the defensive strategies of
genotypes of S. altissima following exposure to cues that are matched and
mismatched with key herbivore damage. Subsequent phytohormone and transcriptomic
analyses of plant tissue from these experiments will identify key mechanisms
underlying defense responses of the genotypes following exposure to cues and
insect damage. Under the various experimental scenarios, the effectiveness of
defense responses of the genotypes against herbivores will reveal evolutionary
selection pressures that have encouraged plants to minimize responses to false
alarms or insects that do not do substantial damage that would reduce fitness,
while prioritizing responses against more damaging foes. The research from this
project will provide key insight into how plant defenses evolved to handle
multiple threats and has significant potential to inform development of novel
management tactics while providing an intriguing topic that will help engage
middle- and high-school students and the general public in the novelty and
significance of chemical communication between common plant and insect
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.