* 2112980
* RAPID:  Dual-Doppler Analysis of the Boundary Layer in Category-4 Hurricane Laura
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Karen Kosiba, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 98,876.00

Hurricane Laura made landfall in southwestern Louisiana in August 2020 as a
high-end Category 4 storm. The landfall represented a unique opportunity to make
scientific measurements of one of the strongest storms to hit the United States.
Two Doppler on Wheels mobile radars captured fine-scale details of the low-level
winds of the hurricane, including the eyewall. This award is for analysis of the
radar data in relation to scientific questions about the lowest levels of a
hurricane, known as the hurricane boundary layer. This data has particular
relevance to the hurricane forecasting community, as measurements of properties
that are important for accurate numerical modeling are difficult to conduct.
Thus, the data may have significant relevance to forecasting of future hurricane
landfalls, which is important for public safety and the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to analyze dual-Doppler
data collected in the eyewall of Hurricane Laura to improve understanding of
hurricane boundary layer structure in an intense hurricane. Multiple hours of
continuous dual-Doppler data were collected in the inner bands and eyewall of
Laura, which is a unique dataset for major hurricane landfalls at or near peak
intensity. The researchers will derive 3D wind structure very near the surface
(&lt;100m above ground level) as a function of time, along with Turbulent
Kinetic Energy (TKE), Momentum Flux, and the Momentum Exchange (Drag)
Coefficient (Cd). The main questions to be addressed using these data include:
1) How do hurricane boundary layer roll characteristics and associated TKE,
fluxes, and Cd vary as a function of background wind speed and location in the
hurricane, and 2) How do hurricane boundary layer structures affect measured
wind gusts?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.