* 2112938
* Post-Selection Inference for Survival Outcomes in Precision Medicine
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ian McKeague, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,989.00

Recent breakthroughs in biomedical technology produce massive amounts of data on
individual patients. Typically, however, only a relatively small number of
features, if any, may be predictive of the clinical outcome, especially when the
outcome is a survival time. A central aspect of scientific discovery in this
scenario is to detect significant predictors among a large set of covariates. In
addition, in studies where treatment assignments are observed, an essential goal
is to develop strategies for precision medicine. To achieve this goal, it is
important to identify covariates that interact with the treatment. As the
resulting model fits play a role in informing clinical decisions and guiding
future research, it is crucial to provide inferential guarantees for the
selected covariates. This is the post-selection inference problem in a nutshell.
The overarching goal of this project is to develop a unified hypothesis testing
procedure that can be used to detect variables that are predictive of survival
outcomes under right censoring, as well as to identify significant treatment-by-
covariate interactions of survival outcomes that can be used in making optimal
treatment decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will develop new methods
of post-selection inference for screening high-dimensional predictors of
survival outcomes and use those methods to design new classes of treatment
selection policies. The problem is challenging, not only because of nonregular
asymptotic behavior (of test statistics and estimators), but also because of the
presence of censoring. The plan involves construction of a semi-parametrically
efficient estimator of the slope parameter (in an accelerated failure time
model) corresponding to the maximal marginal correlation between each predictor
and the survival outcome, and devising a calibration of a regularized version of
this statistic to furnish a formal screening test that will detect significant
associations. Further, methods of constructing and assessing the effectiveness
of optimal treatment policies based on the detected associations will be
developed. The resulting procedures are expected to be more powerful and
efficient than existing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.