* 2112793
* A Geometric Approach for Generalized Encrypted Control of Networked Dynamical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jun Ueda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 378,570.00

This grant focuses on establishing methods to enhance cybersecurity for
networked motion-control systems utilizing somewhat homomorphic encryption.
Industry 4.0 will transform the conventional automation systems to efficient
cyber-physical systems by taking advantage of todayâ€™s information technology.
Rapidly transforming automation system architecture introduces cybersecurity
risks that did not exist in the past. While protection of cyber-physical systems
at the communication level has been extensively studied, there is a void in the
study of protection at the motion control level. Allowing malicious system
identification and data breach attacks to a motion controller would result in a)
leaking of controller architecture, gains, and models, b) interception of motor
commands and monitoring signals, and c) system disruption due to falsification
of controller gains. The projected approach will encrypt control algorithms,
sensor signals, model parameters, and feedback gains, and perform necessary
computation of motion commands to servo systems in the ciphertext space without
a security hole. The project in particular studies encrypted motion control
systems including unilateral remote assembly systems and bilateral teleoperation
systems. Success of this research project will foster innovation by changing
current motion control practices for configuring networked automation systems,
which would have a positive impact on the advancement of the future
infrastructure and factory automation. The project will transform the current
education in system dynamics and control to that with a clear and strong
emphasis on cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct
unique interdisciplinary research covering system dynamics, control,
communication, and cybersecurity engineering. The encrypted control framework
configures motion systems with improved robustness against data breach and
system identification attacks. Factors that limit performance in terms of
computational load and signal quantization will be characterized. In particular,
security parameters such as cryptographic key lengths associated with somewhat
homomorphic encryption will be determined by analyzing the trade-off between
security and computational stability. Expression tree methods will efficiently
characterize how different algebraic expressions of the control scheme impact
the integrity of somewhat homomorphic encryption. Dynamic key management and
attack detection based on disturbance observation will be developed as
additional security measures. Efficacy of the technique will be demonstrated
using the networked control platform. In the future, the encrypted control
framework may be combined with multilayered security measures with monitoring of
process behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.