* 2112491
* SBIR Phase II:  Optimizing emergency department nurse scheduling via a novel operational intelligence platform
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Stephanie Gravenor, Medecipher, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,688.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve emergency clinical care.
Emergency Departments are facing complex nursing utilization problems, fueled in
part by scheduling systems built on flawed assumptions. Escalating nursing
shortages and burnout must be addressed as fatigue is rampant. With hospitals
facing significant revenue losses, there is no room for inefficient use of
nurses. Nurse shifts must be intelligently sequenced in a way that optimizes
available assets and balances complex sets of tradeoffs. The proposed solution
uses artificial intelligence (AI) and operations research to predictively right-
size clinical resources. The platform will be packaged as a cloud-based solution
that reduces nursing staff churn, decreases patient wait times, reduces
healthcare delivery costs, and improves revenue. Sophisticated mathematical
approaches beyond what is available in the calendar and an Excel spreadsheet –
specifically this project’s constraint-based algorithms, simulation methods and
machine learning – will be the turning point in optimizing emergency department
operational performance. This will improve the health system’s patient care,
operational, and financial outcomes while reducing effort, waste, cost, and
nurse burnout. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project addresses the multi-
stage emergency department nurse staffing problem by increasing scalability and
usability. The proposed solution scales a set of multi-objective optimization
algorithms based on operations research, sophisticated data science and queueing
theory models to create an end-to-end decision support platform. The platform
will provide longitudinal decision support for emergency department nurse
staffing: nurse managers will use it daily for flexing decisions, monthly for
schedule planning and assignment, and annually for budgeting. Objectives
include: (1) Data science: refine and automate the forecasting, adapt the
optimization model, generate and maintain input files, automate output files;
(2) Front-end: create UI components, create service layer/API, wire service
layer and UI, develop integration and component testing; (3) Back-end: implement
container orchestration system, upgrade security, implement data ingest
protocols, support development operations; and (4) Validate recommendation and
create client ROI calculator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.