* 2112770
* 2021 Multi-Petawatt Physics Prioritization (MP3) Workshop
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Jonathan Zuegel, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 12/31/2022
* USD 45,000.00

This award supports organization of the 2021 Multi-Petawatt Physics
Prioritization (MP3) Workshop planned to be held in the summer of 2021 and
intended to bring together U.S. and European research communities to discuss and
prioritize the frontier science goals and corresponding experiments enabled by
multi-petawatt laser systems over the next ten to twenty years. The MP3 workshop
will bring together leading experts to:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Establish the most
important goals and flagship experiments of promising new science enabled by a
new generation of ultra-intense and powerful lasers; &lt;br/&gt;(2) Identify
common interests and joint strategies for developing diagnostics needed for the
flagship experiments;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Discuss a vision for the optimal next-
generation high-intensity laser facility to address the frontier science
goals.&lt;br/&gt;The MP3 organizing committee will reach out to and invite
individuals from groups traditionally underrepresented in science to participate
in both the series of pre-workshop topical working group meetings and the in-
person workshop, as well as focus travel support and other assistance to
encourage their participation. Webcasting the workshop online will also enable
involving a broad range of individuals and institutions to expose
underrepresented and minority populations to the MP3
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop organizing committee will lead a
series of virtual working group meetings that focus on the most compelling
science questions in four topical areas of multi-petawatt physics:&lt;br/&gt;-
High-Field Physics and Quantum Electro-Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;- Laboratory
Astrophysics&lt;br/&gt;- Particle Acceleration and Advanced Light
Sources&lt;br/&gt;- Laser-Driven Nuclear Physics&lt;br/&gt;The working groups
will solicit white papers for potential scientific goals and flagship
experiments and discuss them during virtual meetings with the aim of identifying
their scientific impact and readiness with particular attention to experimental
diagnostics and facilities needed to realize them. A series of virtual meetings
for each topic will enable sufficient time, broad participation and
opportunities for diverse research communities to mix such that the resulting
synergy will provide new ideas and interdisciplinary proposals. This process
will culminate in a workshop to discuss and prioritize the top science goals and
corresponding experimental programs identified by the working groups, and to
recommend coordinated plans for future exploration by U.S. and European research
communities. This award is supported by the Office of International Science and
Engineering, the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the Division of
Astronomical Sciences, and the Division of Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.