* 2112699
* Fundamental Interactions and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Marc Kamionkowski, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,460,685.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Marc Kamionkowski, David
E. Kaplan, Surgeet Rajendran, Jared Kaplan, and Ibrahima Bah at Johns Hopkins
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search to understand the fundamental laws
of physics is at an exciting but uncertain time. While we eagerly await the
discovery of new physics at the Large Hadron Collider or with the next decade of
dark-matter searches, existing null results have forced theorists to discard old
prejudices and think deeply about entirely new ideas for fundamental physics and
novel experimental avenues to seek new physics. This effort is also advanced by
the development of new mathematical tools to help understand the structure of
the theories (called "quantum field theories") in terms of which most models of
fundamental physics are constructed. This effort is now also advanced by
exciting new discoveries concerning the largest-scale structure of the Universe
and new fossils from the Big Bang that have been discovered in the cosmos. The
research to be conducted under this grant tackles central problems at the
juncture of theory and experiment in particle physics and cosmology and in the
formal mathematical tools that are the foundation of physical theories. The work
of this group of researchers will advance new ideas for cosmological
observations and fundamental-physics searches, and they seek to propose new
mechanisms and models that may ultimately help in the grand synthesis of the
laws of nature. Theoretical research along these lines advances the national
interest by optimizing our investment in major experimental facilities in their
quest to understand new physical laws. This research will also proceed hand in
hand with the training of students and postdocs who will become scientific
leaders in subsequent generations. These professors will also remain vigorous in
their quest to communicate the excitement of particle physics and cosmology to
the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, Professors D.
Kaplan and Rajendran will develop new non-accelerator directions for exploring
the fundamental laws of nature while pushing to pursue a deeper understanding of
the phenomena we see. Professor Rajendran will do related work on new ideas for
dark-matter detection and on the development of new gravitational-wave
experiments aimed at opening vast areas of discovery space. Professor
Kamionkowski plans to develop a suite of new early-Universe probes with
forthcoming observations, and will study novel models to account for the Hubble
tension. Professor J. Kaplan plans to study the role of locality in the AdS/CFT
correspondence and to use holography to understand new gravitational phenomena.
Finally, Professor Bah will work on the geometric engineering of QFTs and study
a new class of “topological stars” and their possible phenomenological
consequences. There is also much overlap between the boundaries of the different
research interests of these researchers, and novel ideas will emerge from
collaborations that result from these intersections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.