* 2112653
* Dense Extended Hydrocarbon Framework Materials (3D Polymers)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Choong-Shik Yoo, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2024
* USD 561,738.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric solids made of simple
hydrocarbons are primarily in one-dimensional (1D) chains and less frequently in
2D polymers like graphene. While research efforts aimed at the development of 3D
hydrocarbon polymers have resulted in low-density covalent-organic and metal-
organic frameworks, the synthesis of dense 3D hydrocarbon framework polymers
with high strength and high chemical energy density has not been achieved. These
extended solids, when made of low Z elements, are intrinsically hard yet light,
e.g., diamond and c-BN, and often exhibit superior thermal, mechanical,
chemical, and electro-optical properties and constitute a new class of novel
materials. With this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor Choong-Shik
Yoo and his research group at Washington State University (WSU) will investigate
pressure-induced transformations of dense solid mixtures of first- and second-
row elemental solids, aimed at development of dense extended framework materials
(EFM) amenable to the stabilization at ambient conditions. This research will
provide exceptional education and training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students and postdoctoral researchers through significant hands-on
experience in cutting-edge experimental technologies at WSU, large-science user
facilities (APS, LCLS, XFEL), and DOE national laboratories (LLNL, LANL, SNL).
The multidisciplinary nature of this project also provides students unique
experience in working across many academic disciplines, often on large-scale
high-profile research, with ample opportunities of enabling
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dense framework structures are ubiquitous at high
pressures, but often formed at formidably high pressures and become unstable
upon releasing the pressure. As a result, only a few systems have been recovered
at ambient conditions, limiting the materials at the realm of fundamental
scientific discovery and advocating an exciting new research area to understand
and, ultimately, control the stability, bonding, structure, and properties of
low Z extended solids. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, will use large
compression, dense solid mixtures, and kinetic controlled processes to control
the structure, bonding and stability of extended framework materials (EFM) made
primarily of covalent C/H/N/O single bonds. The proposed research efforts will
be focused on three-specific solid-state chemical reactions under pressures: (A)
Copolymerization to stoichiometric high-strength EFM; (B) Redox chemistry to
nonstoichiometric interstitial-filled multifunctional EFM; and (C) Interface
chemistry to nm-scale EFM encapsulated in low-dimensional carbon and BN. Through
scientific discoveries and innovative materials developments, the proposed
research will exploit the structure-property-functional relationships of various
forms of EFM, elucidate the basic principles governing dense solid-state
chemistries, and demonstrate the revolutionary capabilities of multifunctional
EFM sustainable to extreme mechanical, thermal and chemical conditions. The
proposed research strategy involves application of a broad range of
complimentary scientific approaches from solid-state materials chemistry,
condensed matter physics, physical chemistry, materials science and engineering,
thus achieving the impact well beyond the subject matter of this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.