* 2112253
* STTR Phase I:  A cost-effective means of culturing large volumes of microalgae for land-based oyster farming.
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Taylor Pryor, Maine Shellfish Developers LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to improve shellfish production at scale and in an environmentally
sustainable fashion, using oyster farming as a launching pad. Today, most
oysters are farmed nearshore under ecological stress. This project advances the
culturing of microalgae using internal waste streams and those from other food
industries. The focus of this project is to process one of the most abundant,
sustainable, and freely available industrial food wastes, spent yeast from
breweries, to facilitate algae production at scale onshore and indoors. Although
currently used primarily by the food and chemical industries, the less costly
algal product could also energize areas of food and feed, nutraceuticals,
pharmaceuticals, biofuels, biomaterials, and bioremediation
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance the use of off-
the-shelf bioreactors and a novel substrate which, along with CO2, form plant
tissue heterotrophically in the dark as leaves do photosynthetically in the
presence of sunlight. The proposed substrate enables production at scale of the
single-celled microalgae that comprise much of the nearshore bivalve diet. The
yeast is fermented with both agriculture-grade vitamins and plant-based
commodities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.