* 2112880
* Particles, Strings and Gravity in a Dynamical Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Mina Aganagic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 970,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Mina Aganagic, Raphael
Bousso, and Petr Horava at the University of California at Berkeley.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first two decades of this century, we have
witnessed dramatic progress in our understanding of the fundamental laws of the
Universe from the shortest to the largest scales, firmly based on the principles
of quantum mechanics (which describes the subatomic world) and general
relativity (which describes gravitational forces acting at large distance
scales). While string theory may represent the dominant paradigm for unifying
these two principles, many important puzzles and open questions still remain.
Professors Aganagic, Bousso, and Horava will attempt to provide answers to some
of these open questions and puzzles, with the goal of deepening our
understanding of the quantum-mechanical Universe. Specifically, these professors
will investigate the properties of quantum-mechanical theories of gravity by
using the newly found connection between such theories and the rapidly
developing interdisciplinary field of science known as "quantum information
theory", as well as by using more traditional methods that have been successful
in describing all the non-gravitational forces in nature. The results of this
research are expected to have implications for the puzzles associated with the
quantum-mechanical behavior of black holes, possible short-distance
generalizations of Einstein's general theory of relativity, and the structure of
the evolving Universe at largest distances. In addition, Professors Aganagic,
Bousso, and Horava will work on the relations of string theory and quantum
gravity to pure mathematics. Such research is expected to have a broad impact
not only in particle physics and cosmology, but also in neighboring areas of
physics and beyond. This research thereby advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in its most fundamental form. The universal
nature of this research also serves as an excellent vehicle for supporting the
education of young researchers (students and postdoctoral scholars), and
provides a natural platform for further increasing diversity and inclusion in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, Professor Aganagic will develop
her program of categorifying quantum knot invariants using little string theory
in six dimensions and its low-energy limit known as Theory X. She will also
pursue categorification of Chern-Simons gauge theory on general three-manifolds.
Professor Bousso will expand the AdS/CFT holographic dictionary by studying the
kink transform. He will examine the Euclidean path integral in semiclassical
quantum gravity, using his recently proposed gravity/ensemble duality. In
addition, he will attempt to strengthen the Quantum Focussing Condition, and
will revisit the notorious measure problem in the landscape cosmology of string
theory. Professor Horava will apply nonrelativistic completions of relativistic
quantum field theories to the puzzles of technical naturalness (such as the
Higgs mass hierarchy problem and the cosmological constant problem). He will
work to identify new classes of short-distance completions of relativistic
supersymmetric Yang-Mills gauge theories in higher dimensions, using
nonrelativistic Aristotelian supersymmetry at short distances. He will use the
recently discovered topological nonrelativistic quantum gravity of Perelman's
Ricci flow to study puzzles of quantum gravity, such as topology-changing
transitions and quantum completeness. He will study string theory in its
covariant formulation in the novel regime far from equilibrium, as described by
the Schwinger-Keldysh formalism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.