* 2112665
* AI Institute for Learning-Enabled Optimization at Scale (TILOS)
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2026
* Henrik Christensen, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2026
* USD 8,618,179.00

Improved optimizations of energy-efficiency, safety, robustness, and other
criteria in engineered systems offer the promise of incalculable societal
benefits. However, challenges of scale and complexity keep many real-world
optimization needs beyond our reach. The mission of The National Artificial
Intelligence (AI) Institute for Learning-enabled Optimization at Scale (TILOS)
is to make impossible optimizations possible, at scale and in practice. The
institute (a partnership of University of California, San Diego, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, National University, University of Pennsylvania,
University of Texas at Austin and Yale University) will pioneer learning-enabled
optimizations that transform chip design, robotics, communication networks, and
other use domains that are vital to our nation’s health, prosperity and welfare.
In TILOS, research, education, outreach and translation are holistically driven
by what makes the nexus of AI/ML and optimization uniquely challenging at the
leading edge of practice. Industry partners will interact closely with TILOS on
both foundational research and its use-domain application. TILOS will build an
openly accessible program of continuing education with long-term, lifelong
learning and skills renewal as its central tenet. This institute will also
broaden participation, building on the visible successes at its partner
institutions that have reached underserved demographics from K-12 onward.
Through these efforts, TILOS will discover, educate, and translate into real-
world practice a new nexus of AI, optimization, and use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TILOS is organized around multiple virtuous cycles that
unify AI and optimization, use domains, and the translation of AI-optimization
breakthroughs into practice. A first virtuous cycle of AI and optimization,
where each enables and amplifies the other, is at the heart of TILOS.
Foundational research will pursue five main pillars: (i) bridging discrete and
continuous optimization; (ii) distributed, parallel, and federated optimization;
(iii) optimization on manifolds; (iv) dynamic decisions under uncertainty; and
(v) nonconvex optimization in deep learning. A second virtuous cycle of
challenges, inspirations and data-enabled validations connects the foundational
research in AI-optimization with use-domain expertise. The initial use-domain
foci bring diverse optimization challenges but inspire shared solutions with
commonalities such as physical embeddedness, hierarchical-system context,
underlying graphical models, safety and robustness as first-class concerns, and
the bridging of human-guided and autonomous systems. A third virtuous cycle is
one of translation and ever-tighter connections to the leading edge of practice.
TILOS will leverage industry partnerships to accelerate impact via open
standards, data sets and “data virtual reality”, and open source that
democratize access to research enablement. Roadmaps of optimization formulations
and progress metrics will draw researchers together and toward shared research
goals. A fourth virtuous cycle with industry and the institutional partners
spans both workforce development and the broadening of participation. Workforce
development will identify and teach the skills and mindsets needed at the nexus
of learning, optimization and practice, so as to provide skills renewal for the
existing workforce as well as onramps for underserved demographics such as
veterans or those seeing a career change. Broadening of participation will be
pursued via the institute’s partnerships with community organizations and middle
and high school educators, via tiers of engagement that span exposure,
experience and environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.