* 2112894
* Theoretical-Computational Framework for Modeling of Composite Materials with Thin Coatings and Two-Dimensional Reinforcements
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sofia Mogilevskaya, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 301,741.00

Thin coatings and two-dimensional reinforcing sheets are key elements of modern
composite materials. They are used for prevention of damage, increase in
durability, and enhancement in performance of components and structures in
aerospace, automotive, biomedical, and many other industries that are of
particular importance to the US economy. For example, the use of graphene
nanoplatelets or polymer nano coatings in ceramics or metals produces
lightweight composites with superior mechanical strength that are indispensable
for fabrication of portable electronic devices, medical implants, and solar
cells. Despite remarkable progress made in the last decade, however, accurate
predictive modeling of materials with thin and ultrathin layers remains a
challenging task. This award supports research that will deliver an efficient
theoretical and computational framework that will potentially facilitate
simulation-based design and optimization of composite material systems and
significantly enhance the accuracy of their analysis. In addition, the project
will support efforts to attract and inspire students to pursue research in
simulation-based engineering and train graduate and undergraduate students in
the cross-disciplinary areas of composite mechanics, surface science, and
computational methods. It will also leverage institutional programs to support
education and outreach to students at all levels, with special focus on women
and low-income students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in surface
chemistry and related technological developments enable the design and creation
of composite materials with unprecedented mechanical properties. Of particular
interest are composites with thin coatings or two-dimensional reinforcements.
The objective of this research is to develop novel methodologies to model the
coatings and/or reinforcements through interfaces of zero thickness and
specially designed jump conditions. The research approach will consist of
formulating novel higher-order interface models, developing new classification
of interface morphologies, and establishing their connections with lower-
dimensional plate and shell theories. The interface models will be integrated
into new finite element and boundary element formulations characterized by high-
regularity basis functions. Lastly, these implementations will be validated with
the help of experimental data available from collaborators on real-world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.