* 2112457
* CIF: Small: Statistical Signal Processing of Social Networks with Behavioral Economics Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Vikram Krishnamurthy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 492,068.00

Social networks are ubiquitous. There is strong motivation to understand
important sociological phenomena in social networks by constructing novel
engineering models, algorithms and analysis. This project contributes to
fundamental research in understanding the interaction between statistical
inference, human decision making and information flow in social networks. The
research addresses three interrelated themes. The first theme develops novel
algorithms for detecting a change in the strategies of human decision makers
that share information over a social network, for example, identifying reactive
behavior to viral content on Twitter. The second theme models and analyzes how
humans interacting over a social network can result in sociological phenomena
such as the glass-ceiling effect and segregation. The third theme studies
efficient polling algorithms in large-scale social networks where only a
fraction of nodes can be polled to determine their decisions. For example, which
nodes should be polled to achieve a statistically accurate estimate of
sociological phenomena such as the emergence of the glass-ceiling effect? The
theoretical claims and findings in this project will be validated via extensive
analysis of real-world social network datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops novel engineering models, algorithms and analysis to understand
the interaction between statistical signal processing, behavioral economics
(human decision making) and network science (information flow in social
networks). The project conducts fundamental research in three interrelated
themes. The first theme studies multi-agent information fusion and change
detection with behavioral economics constraints (anticipatory decision making
and rational inattention); the goal is to understand how information fusion is
achieved among human decision makers. The second theme investigates how
sophisticated agents interacting over a social network give rise to the
important sociological phenomena of the glass-ceiling effect and segregation.
The glass-ceiling effect refers to the barrier that keeps certain groups from
rising to influential positions in society, regardless of their qualifications.
In a social-network context, the investigator explores how individual traits
like preferential attachment and homophily leads to the glass-ceiling effect.
The third theme studies the design of statistically efficient network polling
algorithms. In large-scale social networks, only a fraction of nodes can be
polled to determine their decisions. Which nodes should be polled to achieve a
statistically accurate estimate of sociological phenomena such as the glass-
ceiling effect? Some nodes may be reluctant to reveal their true opinion. This
may lead to incorrect polling estimates. How can this be compensated for? The
theoretical claims and findings in this project will be validated via extensive
analysis of real-world social-network datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.