* 2112887
* Large Sample Analysis of Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods in Bayesian Statistics From a Frequentist Perspective
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Qian Qin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,354.00

This project concerns Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), which is a class of
computer algorithms that are widely used to simulate complicated probability
distributions. In the field of statistics, probability distributions are often
used to model uncertainty about unknown parameters that one wishes to estimate,
for example, the average household income of a large nation, or the difference
in average life expectancy between two demographic groups. The estimation
procedure is based on a data set, which is usually a sample collected from an
underlying population through a survey or experiment. MCMC is widely regarded as
an extremely powerful tool for high-quality estimation, but not enough is known
about its reliability when the sample is massive. This project aims to study the
mathematical properties of various MCMC algorithms in large sample settings.
Results of the research are expected to advance understanding in the performance
of MCMC algorithms that are applied to modern data sets in fields such as
economics, biology, and astronomy. Undergraduate and graduate students involved
in the research efforts of this project will receive training in probability
theory as well as mathematical and applied statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this project focuses on MCMC algorithms that are used to explore
posterior distributions in Bayesian statistical models. From a frequentist
perspective, the data set associated with a Bayesian model is assumed to be
generated from an underlying distribution. The Markov transition kernel of an
MCMC algorithm can thus be regarded as a statistic, i.e., observable random
element, no different from a classical vector-valued statistic, e.g., a sample
mean. Just like with any statistic, it is important to understand the asymptotic
behavior of an MCMC transition kernel when the sample size of the data set
grows. This project aims to develop general theories for the problem using
techniques from classical large sample theory in conjunction with those from
Markov chain theory. Special attention will be given to data augmentation
algorithms, which are a broad class of practically relevant MCMC algorithms that
exhibit rich and meaningful large sample properties. The project will also
involve studying the mixing times of MCMC algorithms in the large sample regime,
which is crucial to the effectiveness of MCMC-based inference in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.