* 2112259
* SBIR Phase I:  Flexible Internet of Things (IoT) Smart Label Powered by Organic Photovoltaics
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Adam Barito, NANOFLEX POWER CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 02/28/2023
* USD 255,929.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will create a low-cost, flexible, Internet of
Things (IoT) Smart Label that is self-powered in all lighted conditions. This
Smart Label can be directly attached to packages, shipments, buildings, or worn
as a medical device, enabling real-time data with improved accuracy. Sensing
labels and asset trackers are extensively used to control inventories and
monitor the freshness, quality, safety, and shelf life of perishable goods, as
well as pharmaceuticals, foods, healthcare samples, and more. Existing
radiofrequency identification (RFID) smart labels have no energy storage or
energy harvesting capability. Current asset trackers have rechargeable
batteries, with some powered by silicon-based photovoltaics which have poor
indoor light performance. This project integrates organic photovoltaics (OPV)
into flexible smart labels for continuous power supply under indoor and outdoor
light, allowing frequent transmission of data to the cloud. OPV technology will
be uniquely tuned to the common indoor light spectra to deliver light-to-
electricity performance values over 20%, twice the indoor light performance of
the best commercially available silicon photovoltaics. This program will combine
flexible OPV with flexible hybrid electronics (FHE) to create a low-cost,
flexible, thin, light-weight, and credit-card-sized IoT device with onboard
sensors and radios for continuous wireless
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will develop a continuously-operating flexible IoT
device for flexible IoT smart labels on packaging, asset tracking, and in
retail. The current limitations to a completely flexible, OPV-powered IoT device
are: (1) OPV has not been specifically tuned to the light emitting diode (LED)
spectrum; (2) OPV has not been attached to FHE before; and (3) IoT-Smart-Label-
integrated OPV has not existed in production before. Attaching the FHE to OPV is
the most significant technical risk, so the goal of this project is to validate
flexible OPV-powered IoT smart labels as a viable product, delivering three
proof-of-concept prototypes. To achieve this primary goal, the objectives are
divided into groups based on eight key elements: (1) develope OPV sheet for
printed electronics integration, (2) demonstrate printed device circuits and
antenna on the backside of OPV sheets, (3) determine ideal power management chip
for conversion to flex-compatible form factor, (4) place and integrate silicon
chips, (5) integrate and test the flexible batteries, (6) package/laminate the
entire flex label, (7) demonstrate wireless data transfer from the flex IoT
device to the cloud, and (8) develop roadmap for manufacturing scale-up in Phase
II, including an estimate of scaled-up product cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.