* 2112474
* Neo-sex chromosome evolution and impact on speciation-with-gene flow in oceanic island birds
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* John Uy, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 898,039.00

A major goal of evolutionary biology is to determine the genetic changes
responsible for speciationâ€” the formation of new species. Most species are
formed when two populations that evolve in different geographic regions
accumulate genetic differences that make them reproductively incompatible with
one another. Sometimes, however, species come into geographic contact before
speciation is complete and produce partially fertile hybrids. These natural
hybrids have mosaic genomes that allow the determination of which genes and/or
chromosomes are responsible for reproductive incompatibility. Previous work in
many animals and plants has shown, for instance, that sex-limited chromosomes
play outsized roles in speciation. In the Solomon Islands, two honeyeater bird
species hybridize and produce partially fertile hybrids. These hybridizing
honeyeaters are of particular interest because they possess both old and new,
recently evolved, sex-limited chromosomes. The honeyeaters therefore present a
rare opportunity to address important questions in the genetic evolution of new
species, the evolution of new sex-limited chromosomes, and the role of sex-
limited chromosomes in speciation. The project will educate undergraduate
students in integrative biology through direct involvement in field work then
training in cutting-edge computational approaches. Through educational
initiatives, the project will also help promote conservation in a remote island
threatened by clear-cut logging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project has
three major aims. The first aim is to characterize the lineage-specific
evolution of neo-sex chromosomes in two species of honeyeaters using comparative
genomics analyses of ultrahigh quality genome assemblies. The second aim is to
characterize the history of speciation, secondary contact, admixture, and
natural selection using population genomics analyses of samples of each species
and of their hybrids. The third aim is to investigate behavioral and genetic
factors that may impact the direction and genomic distribution of gene flow
using field data on mate-choice and parentage. Together, these aims combine
genomics and field approaches to provide novel insights into the interaction of
genome evolution and the origin of species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.