* 2112697
* Moduli Spaces and Galois Theory in Arithmetic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2020,05/31/2023
* John Doyle, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 05/31/2023
* USD 92,448.00

Arithmetic dynamics is a relatively new discipline that brings together two
major areas of mathematics: number theory, traditionally the study of the
integers and integer (or rational) solutions to polynomial equations, and
discrete dynamical systems, where one studies the long term behavior of
functions under repeated iteration. This project will further develop and
combine two facets of arithmetic dynamics: one is geometric in nature, using
geometric objects (moduli spaces) to classify dynamical systems with specified
dynamical behaviors, and the other is algebraic, understanding algebraic
symmetries (Galois theory) associated to dynamical systems. The fields of number
theory and, to some extent, arithmetic dynamics have found uses in cryptography
and related areas. The PI will continue outreach activities with the aim of
using cryptography as a means of introducing a more general audience to
interesting mathematics. This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and
Number Theory program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of arithmetic
dynamics is heavily motivated by analogies between arithmetic geometry and
dynamical systems. One important such connection is that preperiodic points for
endomorphisms of projective space play a role similar to torsion points on
elliptic curves (or, more generally, abelian varieties). The focus of this
project is to further investigate this analogy from the moduli-theoretic and
Galois-theoretic perspectives. The PI has been involved with the development of
the theory of moduli spaces that parametrize endomorphisms with marked
preperiodic points -- analogous to classical modular curves, which parametrize
elliptic curves with marked torsion points. Such moduli spaces have already
played a fundamental role in progress toward the dynamical uniform boundedness
conjecture of Morton and Silverman, a dynamical analogue of the Mazur-Merel
strong uniform boundedness theorem for torsion points on elliptic curves. In
order to make further progress on this difficult uniform boundedness problem,
the PI proposes to study the geometry of dynamical moduli spaces attached to
certain dynamically interesting families of functions (e.g., quadratic rational
maps with a critical point of a given period). The analogy between preperiodic
points and torsion points also lends itself to a dynamical analogue of Serre's
open image theorem, a finite-index result for the adelic Galois representation
associated to torsion points on elliptic curves. The PI proposes studying the
appropriate Galois representation attached to (pre)periodic points for rational
maps -- especially in the function field setting, where results will provide new
insights into the geometry of dynamical moduli spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.