* 2112286
* SBIR Phase I:  Extensible system for interoperability between permissioned blockchains
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Sophia Lopez, KALEIDO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2022
* USD 255,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to use blockchain to facilitate business
transactions. Industry analysts estimate there is $3 T of value locked in B2B
processes that could benefit from specific types of transactions. This project
proposes a new architecture to enable different types of transactions and across
blockchain protocols, while maintaining data security, privacy, and other
restrictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
develop a modular architecture to verify state transfers across different
blockchains (including those running different underlying protocols). The
research objective is to explore new architectures, including using an interop
coordinator based on state commitments submitted by decentralized groups of
interop agents. The interop coordinator will then validate their finality
according to the consensus specifications of the submitting chain. The interop
coordinator will act as the broker for proof requests and responses, as
decentralized interop agents from one chain submit requests for proof of a
particular transaction in another chain. The prover of the target chain will
build a cryptographic proof and forward it to the interop coordinator, to relay
the response to the requesting chain. Verification will be conducted by the
requesting agent using various methods to be investigated as part of this
research. The proposed project approach is distinguished from other
interoperability projects in its support for heterogeneous blockchain protocols
and the support for arbitrary types of transactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.