* 2112181
* STTR Phase I:  A simulation tool to teach cybersecurity and digital fluency practices
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Peter Johnson, CYBERSPARA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop an effective, engaging education
platform to teach cybersecurity awareness and best practices to protect against
cyber threats. Identity theft affects millions of individuals every year,
costing billions of dollars and severe personal difficulties to those affected.
Privacy education is essential to address the potential dangers facing the
billions of people using these platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project plans to develop an online
simulation product that engages citizens to experience cybersecurity simulations
that emulate various real-world cyberthreats while implementing evidence-based
learning research in digital media and instructional systems technologies. For
educational service providers, this solution will provide an effective
standards-based computer science and digital fluency learning approach to
cybersecurity for the school-age population. By using developmentally
appropriate instructional and teaching strategies, the solution plans to address
and measure effectiveness across a wide range of age groups, demographics and
education levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.