* 2112363
* SBIR Phase II:  A compact electrotactile sensory feedback system for upper limb prostheses
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Aadeel Akhtar, PSYONIC, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the current lack of useful, realistic
feedback in commercially available bionic prosthetic devices. There are
currently no prosthetic devices available to amputees that provide closed loop
control through sensory feedback. Without this type feedback, prosthesis users
tend to avoid manipulating certain objects because they run the risk of handling
them incorrectly or destroying them. Consequently, there is a market need for a
richly expressive sensory feedback system for upper limb prosthetics. The
proposed research seeks to develop a device capable of such feedback with
electrotactile stimulation. The expected outcomes of this research are: a
controller that can regulate both intensity and quality sensation and a user
study which evaluates the effectiveness of this device deployed with a sensation
controller for day-to-day manipulation tasks. These outcomes have the potential
to restore a significant amount of function to over 10 million upper limb
amputees worldwide and improve their quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to enhance a
portable, energy-efficient electrotactile stimulator, by integrating a control
system that will be able to regulate both intensity and quality of sensation.
The design and controller of this stimulator are unique. The stimulator will
integrate existing prosthetic hand systems. The sensation controller will
modulate stimulation parameters to compensate for changes in measured resistance
between the electrode-skin interface, thus reducing the likelihood of device
rejection due to discomfort. The sensation controller will also maintain a
consistent quality of sensation throughout usage. Upon completion of the Phase
II project, the prosthetic technology will be a market-ready sensory feedback
system that is compliant with regulatory standards for medical
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.