* 2112228
* SBIR Phase I: Operational Monitoring of Large-Area Critical Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Justin Oliveira, BOSTON GEOSPATIAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 253,550.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to lower the geohazard risks for assets
within critical infrastructure sectors such as energy, transportation, and
utilities. More specifically, the proposed technology will make measuring and
detecting ground motion with satellite radar more practical in applications
where the observed areas cover very long distances and traverse varying terrain
and land types. The innovation seeks to demonstrate that the combined processing
of multiple imaging frequencies and polarizations can improve the information
collected and that the fusion of global navigation satellite system (GNSS) data
can be used to aid insight. The efficacy of space-based satellite radar
interferometry in measuring shifts in spatially-sensitive structures such as
buried pipelines, foundations, and rail track ballast will be demonstrated over
very large areas and linear distances. The technology developed in this project
may have a positive impact on the aforementioned sectors by enabling monitoring
capabilities that are timelier and more cost-effective than traditional
approaches. The geospatial technology may also enable asset operators to be more
proactive when it comes to geohazard threats, lowering the frequency of fatal
and environmentally-damaging failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to address the key shortcomings
of space-based satellite radar interferometry as a means to monitor surface
motion threats to critical infrastructure assets. While interferometric
approaches for specific types of terrain have been well documented and
validated, approaches that produce coherent ground motion results over very
large areas with varying terrain and radar scattering mechanisms have not been
successfully deployed. Furthermore, combining multiple interferometric
observations together to decompose ground motion has received little research
attention despite being an important step in translating the relative line-of-
sight satellite observations into ground motion components relevant to asset
monitoring. This research effort seeks to demonstrate the efficacy of using
multiple imaging frequencies and polarizations and combining their
interferometric results to create a more continuous view of ground motion over
areas with varying degrees of vegetation. This project may also demonstrate that
combining both small baseline subset and persistent scatter interferometric
approaches can improve the density of resolved scatterers over areas where land
type variations create a diverse range of scattering mechanisms. The team also
seeks to demonstrate the use and accuracy of GNSS data in the reference setting
process as insights are translated into absolute motion components about the
geodetic reference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.