* 2112778
* CNS Core: Small: A Split Software Architecture for Enabling High-Quality Mixed Reality on Commodity Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Charlie Hu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 424,434.00

By blending the physical and digital worlds into a programmed experience, Mixed
Reality (MR) allows users to visualize and interact with digital information
such as 3D overlays and real-time data and has important applications in many
societal domains including education, remote working, military training, and
health care such as tele-medicine. Despite the tremendous potential of the MR
technology, the MR solutions available in today’s market are either enterprise-
grade which are costly or consumer-grade which can only support low-quality MR
content which leads to poor user experience. The high cost and/or low-quality of
current enterprise-grade and consumer-grade MR solutions lead to a fundamental
“content-adoption” dilemma faced by the MR industry: the lack of MR content has
limited the market penetration of custom-made MR headsets, and the low market
penetration of MR headsets in turn has hindered the development of MR content.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CSR project proposal will develop key
technologies to enable high-quality MR on commodity mobile devices like
smartphones, etc.., viewed by a simple see-through head-mount devices (HMD) with
a high-resolution camera for input and a projector for output such as Nreal
Light glasses. Such technologies will transform millions of smartphones
(equipped with the above inexpensive HMDs) into ubiquitous MR devices and in
doing so help the MR industry to overcome the “content-adoption” dilemma and
pave the way for wide adoption of the MR technology and its many important
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to create the first split
software architecture that enables high-quality MR applications to run on
commodity mobile devices; the capability to jointly optimize offloading multiple
Deep Neural Network (DNN)-based tasks constituting a complex, resource-intensive
application such as MR over the bandwidth-limited and time-varying wireless
network; the capability to jointly schedule multiple DNN-based tasks of
resource-intensive applications such as MR to efficiently share all local
resources such as the CPU, GPU, and other processors such as NPU on emerging
mobile devices; and the capability to support high-quality multi-player MR on
commodity mobile devices by scaling the split software architecture across
multiple mobile devices to efficiently share the limited global resources such
as the wireless network and the edge cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will have lasting impact on knowledge discovery, the computer industry,
and the society. Technically, this work anticipates having far-reaching impacts
outside the area of supporting AR/VR/MR on commodity smartphones by developing
general edge-assisted software architectures for enabling the class of latency-
sensitive 5G/6G applications on current and future mobile computing platforms
such as smart glasses. Developing the proposed technologies for MR have the
potential to fundamentally overcome the “deployment-content” dilemma faced by
the industry as well as fostering the proliferation and wide adoption of MR
technologies and its many societal applications. The importance of this work
will be further heightened by making smartphones an important enabler of
accessing information and new technologies like AR/VR/MR for people in both
developed and developing countries and hence being an important tool in
overcoming the “digital divide".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.