* 2112448
* Improving Data Literacy in Undergraduate Biology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kenwyn Cradock, Eastern New Mexico University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2025
* USD 390,794.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing data science
literacy for life science undergraduate students using new teaching materials
that will incorporate data analysis and visualization using computational tools.
Undergraduate biology laboratory exercises will be improved by requiring greater
critical and quantitative thinking in order to complete the exercises. These
data-centric laboratory enhancements will occur at all levels of student
learning. While the exercises will still illustrate the same biological
concepts, data science will be integrated with the exercises by including data,
descriptive statistics, spreadsheet applications, and data visualization tools
in the learning activities. In the first and second years of the biology
program, students will learn to manage, interpret, and visualize data. Students
will be trained in using basic computing tools. As students progress through
their biology training, the modules will integrate programming languages as well
as more sophisticated data analytic activities. The exercises will facilitate
the development and use of quantitative literacy and critical thinking that will
also help students gain a deeper understanding of the foundational biological
concepts. Findings from this project will guide further curricular improvements
in undergraduate biology courses and can potentially be adapted by other STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biology majors often avoid mathematics and
statistics courses that could aid them in advancing their understanding in
biological science while preparing them for data-rich careers in the
biotechnology industry. The goal of this project is to transform the current
biology curricula by introducing technology-enhanced data-centric laboratories
in which students apply mathematical and statistical concepts. Students will
benefit by learning how to use computational tools to visualize abstract
concepts in biology and by learning the fundamentals of data science. Such
changes will include the introduction of the concept of scale transformation, as
biology often occurs on a log scale, as observed in bacterial growth, viral
spread, the pH scale, and gene expression. Students will learn that log
transformations can normalize these data for basic statistics. Studentsâ€™
understanding and ability to apply and interpret data in a biological context
will be enhanced through the introduction of the practical application of
transformations and learning how to perform helpful parametric tests like
analysis of variance and regression with more complex software. Such
improvements will enhance biological concepts while also advancing quantitative
and technological reasoning skills. The study will assess student learning by
comparing pretests and posttests of biological and data understanding within
sections, among sections, and among years so that student progression can be
tracked as they advance through the curriculum. This project will lay the
groundwork for institutional STEM education improvements that can be implemented
in existing courses enabling adoption by other undergraduate institutions. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.