* 2112203
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Speech Therapy Through Speech Recognition with Error Identification
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Michael Young, VERBOSO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2023
* USD 250,293.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve outcomes for individuals with speech sound disorders (SSD)
by increasing access to care through technology augmented speech therapy.
Approximately 5% of children have a SSD, which places them at risk for reading
difficulties and processing challenges into adulthood. Speech therapy services
are needed to create changes in speech production skills for improved
intelligibility and interaction in functional activities of daily living.
However, less than 70% of children receive therapy due to difficulty with
accessing care and cost. This project develops artificial intelligence that can
recreate the feedback decisions that a speech-language pathologist makes in a
live therapy setting. This technology can then be applied to computer- and
tablet-delivered speech therapy. Because of the automation, the cost of
receiving services can be drastically reduced and children currently without
access can get high quality automated therapy at home.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop machine learning algorithms capable of speech sound error
identification for the purposes of automating speech therapy. Advances in
Automatic Speech Recognition technology have led to the exploration of
harnessing artificial intelligence as an aspect of technology-assisted endeavors
in speech sound error treatment. However, reliability of the existing technology
in its application to speech therapy is poor due to inadequate databases of
impaired pediatric speech. The objectives of this study are to: 1) Build a
database of impaired and accurate productions of the eight English consonants
most commonly in error; 2) use this database to develop and train algorithms for
identifying specific errors of segmented target phonemes; and 3) complete inter-
rater reliability tests of the trained algorithm with decisions from trained
speech-language pathologists to ensure adequate agreement of presence of error
and error type. By creating a novel training database and algorithm that has the
ability to accomplish these types of tasks, artificial intelligence can advance
to recreate the error-specific discrimination and feedback decisions that a
speech-language pathologist makes in a live therapy setting, serving as a
critically needed tool for addressing the barriers to engaging in adequately
frequent speech sound production practice sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.