* 2112590
* CREST-PRF: Access Control Framework for IoT Ecosystem with Smart Home IoT and Industrial IoT Case Studies
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Safwa Ameer, Ameer, Safwa
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 11/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions, and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Security and Privacy Enhanced
Cloud Computing (C-SPECC) at the University of Texas San Antonio. The goal of
this research is to fill the gap in Access Control in the rapidly growing
domains of smart home Internet of Things (IoT) and Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will systematically investigate smart
home IoT and Industrial IoT (IIoT) domains to develop formal scientific
foundations and models for Access Control (AC). The proposed work will design
and/or adapt appropriate access control-oriented architecture for each domain.
The AC requirements and challenges for the layers in each architecture will be
investigated and an AC framework described for the interactions between layers.
AC models for the interactions between each layer will be described. The PI will
develop teaching and mentoring skills, obtain additional specialization, and
obtain guidance with respect to the faculty search process. The proposed work
has the potential to establish an independent research pathway for the
postdoctoral research fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.