* 2112829
* Investigations in High Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Adam Leibovich, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 540,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Ayres Freitas and Adam
Leibovich at the University of Pittsburgh. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this project is to develop improved theoretical tools and calculational methods
for the robust interpretation of results from current and future physics
experiments. Advanced techniques for identifying potentially small new physics
signals from large backgrounds require excellent understanding of known
particles and interactions as well as the development of new methods to
calculate these processes. A wide variety of phenomena will be investigated,
from sub-atomic particles to gravity to cosmology. Professors Freitas and
Leibovich also plan to work closely with colleagues in high-energy experiments
and astrophysics to develop new search and analysis techniques for new physics
and to improve the precision and theoretical robustness of tests of our current
understanding of the Universe. Research in these areas thus advances the
national interest by expanding our knowledge of fundamental physical laws and
educating young scientists in cutting-edge calculational and analysis tools. The
broader impacts of this research program include the training and professional
development of several PhD students and a postdoc. Professors Freitas and
Leibovich will also help to organize workshops and summer schools to disseminate
results from modern research to a larger audience of students and young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this research program can be
divided into four main parts: (1) The development of calculational techniques
for higher-order corrections to electroweak precision observables, which are
relevant for planned future e+e- colliders as well as for several low-energy
precision experiments currently in development at JLab and MESA; (2) The
application of effective field theories, in particular Soft-Collinear Effective
Theory, for production of jets at the LHC, for fragmentation of partons into
hadrons, and for new physics signatures; (3) An investigation of a varied class
of dark sector extensions of the Standard Model, including light weakly coupled
messenger fields that could be more efficiently searched for with non-
traditional experimental setups rather than at high-energy colliders; and (4)
Calculations of precise gravitational wave physics using effective field theory
techniques. In this context it is important to check the consistency of a viable
model setup with a large range of experimental and theoretical constraints. This
research plan is guided by ongoing and planned experimental particle physics
efforts, and results will be made available to the experimental
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.