* 2112078
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Blockchain to enable safe and transparent distribution of perishable goods
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Neal Foster, ORGANICSMART, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,786.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide open and secure management of transactions
between multiple parties in a supply chain. The lack of transparent information
throughout the supply chain has eroded the trust and value of many perishable
products and the brands they represent. The proposed project addresses the
current issue of tracking and traceability of food products in a trusted manner.
Through the development of a hybrid blockchain that is sensor aware, all the
parties involved in the distribution of the goods will ensure that the food
quality is maintained by entering transactions into a secure blockchain. The
result is two-fold: consumers will be assured that they are getting the right
goods and suppliers can trust that their products are being delivered with
quality. While initially focused on the $2 billion food transaction market, the
commercial potential will expand to a broader range of products that require
secure traceability including consumer goods, home delivery and medical
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop the
core technology for the hybrid blockchain and test the functionality in a live
commercial setting. The technology represents the first-in-class solution that
leverages blockchain and DAGs (directed acyclic graphs) with integrated sensor
and hybrid datasets to address the perishable nature of food products. The
blockchain model will assume that a transaction is an event of data transfer and
that there can be many disjointed events even on a small-scale supply chain
network. For traceability, novel algorithms will be designed, making it feasible
to connect disjointed events using geometry and a pseudo-Boolean function on top
of a system that assigns a unique code. This implementation uses multivariate
time series and node features for the meaningful aggregation and disaggregation
of datasets, such as data collected by sensors and participating members.
Putting such multivariate time series on the graph where participants are nodes
with their pairwise relations as edges, the technology will address the novel
optimization problem for efficient real-time monitoring and assist in providing
further assurance of transaction integrity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.