* 2112904
* Operation of the Telescope Array Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Charles Jui, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 865,000.00

The Telescope Array (TA) Observatory is the largest detector of ultra-high
energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) in the northern hemisphere. An upgrade to the
observatory (TAx4) is currently underway that will double the number of deployed
surface detectors (SD) over an increased total instrumented area of
approximately 1800 square-km. An array of florescence detectors (FDs) overlooks
this SD array, providing important additional information on the detected
events. This award supports the cosmic ray physics group at the University of
Utah for one year of running the TA Observatory complex. The award supports the
team, including managerial, engineering and technical staff, who have sole
responsibility for facility maintenance, staffing observing shifts and handling
data, and maintaining compliance with Bureau of Land Management land use
regulations. The observatory supports auxiliary and test experiments, including
recently hosting a lightning mapping array. An extensive public education and
outreach program coordinated through the ASPIRE project receives millions of
online visits each year, and directed activities reach tens of thousands of
teachers and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent TA data analyses have
identified a “hotspot” of UHECRs above 57 EeV in the northern sky at 3.5 sigma
significance. The observatory has also seen indications of differences in the
cosmic ray spectral shape when comparing events within the hotspot region to
those outside, as well as an apparent declination dependence of the spectrum at
the highest energies. The source of the hotspot, however, remains unknown.
Inconsistencies between the measurements of TA and the Pierre Auger Observatory,
the largest UHECR detector in the southern hemisphere, are also apparent at the
highest energies, including in the studies of the width and shape of the Xmax
distributions. The additional data collected with the operation of the TAx4
upgrade, combined with the energy calibrations of the recently installed FDs,
will greatly improve the sensitivity of the instrument toward resolving these
important open questions in our understanding of the highest energy particles in
the Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.