* 2112208
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence for Competency-Based Medical Training
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Carisa Cooney, EDUMD, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to train physicians efficiently, assure high-
quality patient care, and provide the United States with a robustly competent
physician workforce. Current assessment practices require attending physicians
and surgeons to review tens-to-hundreds of data points, removing them from
clinical activities. Integrating a machine learning model in an existing
resident assessment system to predict performance can address trainees’ learning
needs and identify excelling, competent, and struggling residents months
earlier. This is vital to patient care: earlier identification of trainee
performance can benefit patient care faster than the current human-based,
semiannual process. Improved tracking and documentation of competence may be of
interest to multiple stakeholders including patients, hospitals, third-party
payers such as insurance companies or the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, and the residency accreditation entity, the Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education. Improved, automated assessment models using existing
trainee data help training programs facing increasing documentation burden, as
well as hospitals and third-party payers interested in reducing adverse health
events for the patients they serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will integrate an artificial
intelligence model to support resident physician training programs in
customizing training based on individual learners’ needs. Starting with plastic
and reconstructive surgery and one of the four training programs in the United
States engaged in time-variable training is an efficient way to create, test,
and assess the model’s efficacy. The created machine learning model will be
assessed for its predictive ability at different points during resident
physicians’ training and compared with attending physicians’ assessments of
trainees’ skills. Such models make time-variable training feasible enabling
adaptive, needs-based scheduling of various educational rotations. This has the
added advantages of keeping residents fully engaged in their training and
returning faculty physicians to clinical care faster, improving job satisfaction
and reducing risk of burnout. Ultimately, time-variable training and use of
their associated machine learning models will reduce the direct and indirect
costs of graduate medical education; accelerate the entry of new, fully
competent physicians into the workforce; and retain valuable physician educators
in the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.