* 2112898
* Collaborative Research: Plasma-enhanced Electrostatic Precipitation of Diesel Particulates using High Voltage Nanosecond Pulses
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Stephen Cronin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

The adverse health effects of diesel engine particulate emissions have been
firmly established by many toxicological studies over the past few decades.
These fine particulates smaller than 2.5 microns have been linked to premature
cardiovascular and respiratory deaths, as well as lung cancer. While
electrostatic precipitation was first demonstrated in 1824, thus far, use of the
technology to remove combustion particulates has been limited to large power
plants that can accommodate large secondary treatment devices. Reducing the
overall size of this technology is necessary to open up new applications for
electrostatic precipitation in mobile sources, such as ships and trucks. Our
approach to electrostatic precipitation using plasma (a superheated state of
matter) together with ultra-high frequency high voltage pulsing represents a
novel application of an old technology. Preliminary results have shown
significant promise in reducing particulate emissions, but the underlying
mechanisms are poorly understood. The goal of this project is to address these
knowledge gaps and identify the mechanisms for particulate removal in plasma
enhanced electrostatic precipitation. If successful, this approach will enable
development of much more compact electrostatic precipitators that could
potentially transform diesel particulate mitigation technology for mobile
sources. Further benefits to society result from outreach to high school
teachers in the Los Angeles area to improve STEM teaching for underrepresented
students. Outreach through professional societies will improve chemistry
teaching and provide research opportunities for undergraduate students, thus
improving scientific literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results by the
research team show that nanosecond high voltage pulsed plasma provides
significant enhancement over conventional electrostatic precipitators in
removing diesel engine particulates. However, the fundamental mechanism(s)
underlying this enhancement remain poorly understood. The overall goal of this
research is to explore the application of plasma enhanced nanosecond high
voltage pulsed discharges as a novel approach for electrostatic precipitation.
The specific research objectives designed to achieve this goal include: i)
spectroscopic examination of ion mobilities and species generated by nanosecond
high voltage pulse discharge, ii) characterization of size-dependent particle
charge distributions, iii) multi-physics computational fluid dynamics modeling
of nanosecond high voltage pulse electrostatic precipitation, and iv)
investigation of the role of streamers in the ESP process. Results from this
systematic study will provide mechanistic insight into the plasma enhanced
electrostatic precipitation process. Such information is necessary to design
systems to overcome current limitations and further improve particle removal
efficiency. The nature of this work is inherently interdisciplinary, involving
high voltage electronics, electrostatics, and fluid-dynamics, as well as
combustion and aerosol science. This project brings together researchers with
complimentary expertise to perform the research, as well as provide
collaborative training opportunities for the student
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.