* 2112548
* Collaborative Research: Entanglement, Geometry and the Physics of Fields, Strings and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Kabat, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

This Collaborative grant funds the research activities of Professors Sebastian
Franco, Parameswaran Nair, and Alexios Polychronakos at the City College of New
York, and Professor Daniel Kabat at the Lehman College of New York.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, Professors Franco, Nair,
Polychronakos, and Kabat will explore two fundamental concepts. The first of
these is "entanglement". This refers to the surprising correlations between
measurements carried out far from each other (sometimes referred to as "quantum
weirdness” or "spooky action at a distance”). The second of these is the
curvature of space and time, which is the source of gravitational forces
according to Einstein’s theory of gravity. The PIs will strive to relate and
unify these concepts by establishing connections and developing new mathematical
tools. These concepts will be explored in quantum field theory, the fundamental
structural framework for describing all known particle interactions, and in
string theory, the most promising direction for a full unification of quantum
mechanics with gravity. The results will be applicable to a wide variety of
physical systems including elementary particles, quantum fluids, and gravity.
This research will advance the national interest by maintaining US preeminence
in the exploration and understanding of physical laws, the central goal of all
research in physics. The project will also involve graduate students, providing
crucial research training for young scientists. Undergraduate students,
especially from underrepresented groups, will be integrated into various aspects
of the research, thereby further broadening the societal impact of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the research by Professors
Sebastian Franco, Parameswaran Nair, Alexios Polychronakos, and Daniel Kabat
involves the use of a number of new theoretical techniques, developed by the PIs
and collaborators, and applied to a variety of problems of current interest
including entanglement in field theory, gauge field dynamics, supersymmetry
breaking, dualities, and bulk reconstruction in AdS/CFT. Advances in one aspect
will inform developments in another since, remarkably, there is a common thread
of similar underlying mathematical and theoretical tools. Some of the topics
will be of direct relevance and proximity to observations, such as supersymmetry
breaking and quantum fluids, while other topics are focused on deeper conceptual
and mathematical questions, such as bulk reconstruction in the holographic
AdS/CFT correspondence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.