* 2112411
* SBIR Phase I:  Estimation of Detailed Plant Geometry for Robotic Farm Work
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Peter Sand, Modular Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 253,723.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will improve the economics of farming. Machines with good computer
perception of plant geometry can implement farming practices that reduce the use
of pesticides, fertilizer, water, and fuel. This will increase farm efficiency
and provide long-term benefits to the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop new
algorithms for estimation of plant structure from images. This is challenging
because agricultural fields are often densely packed with plants, such that
portions of each plant are hidden from view. Existing methods can estimate
missing geometry of man-made objects from obstructed views, but plants are
considerably more difficult, due to the complexity, variability, and visual
ambiguity of their geometry. The project will aim to achieve levels of detail
and accuracy not previously attained in plant imaging. To reach this goal, the
project will use rapid iterations of field data collection, algorithm
development, and field testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.