* 2112738
* CQIS: The Grasshopper Problem
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Olga Goulko, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,947.00

A grasshopper lands at a random point on a flat lawn of given area. It then
jumps once, a fixed distance, in a random direction. What shape should the lawn
be to maximize the chance that the grasshopper remains on the lawn after
jumping? The answer turns out to be far from obvious! In fact, this easily
stated yet hard to solve mathematical problem has unexpected connections to both
quantum information and statistical physics. A generalized version on the sphere
can provide insight into a new class of Bell inequalities, which are
experimentally verifiable mathematical expressions that capture some of the ways
in which the world described by quantum mechanics differs from our everyday
“classical” understanding. Additionally, a discrete version of the problem can
be used to model a system of spins, or microscopic magnets, interacting in ways
that may lead to interesting new results in statistical physics. Despite this
unexpected depth, the grasshopper problem can be easily understood without any
prior physics knowledge, and hence offers a great way to get students, as well
as the general public, interested in statistical physics and quantum
information. For the students, both graduate and undergraduate, who will be
working on the problem, it will also be a perfect introduction to computational
techniques for physical models, as the algorithms and existing codes are simple
to use and to build on. The project will thus contribute to training the future
STEM workforce, as the computational and analytical tools are broadly applicable
in different scientific fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
research is to explore the properties of the grasshopper problem and the
corresponding spin system using analytical and numerical methods, including
simulated annealing and parallel tempering, with focus on their connection to
Bell inequalities that involve random measurement choices. Bell's theorem is one
of the most fundamental theorems in quantum physics. However, much still remains
to be discovered about the full class of Bell inequalities, even for the
simplest case of spin measurements on two spin 1/2 particles. Studying more
general Bell inequalities can deepen our understanding of how much stronger
quantum correlations can be than any correlations possible using classical
models. This advances our knowledge of fundamental quantum physics and also has
important applications to Bell experiments, quantum communication, and quantum
cryptography, as random choices may help make cryptographic protocols safer and
more efficient. Besides this, the associated spin system represents a new class
of statistical models with fixed-range interactions, where the range can be
large. These models exhibit an array of unusual properties, such as complex
disconnected "ground state" spin configurations for certain values of the
jump.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.