* 2112284
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Surgical Navigation System for Total Knee Replacement
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Jonathan Greenwald, CAIRA SURGICAL CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,978.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program (STTR) Phase I project is the significant improvement in
orthopedic care associated with (1) the broad expansion of patient access to
improved procedures through significant cost reduction; and (2) better outcomes
through patient-specific surgical interventions. Existing advanced technology
for surgical navigation has failed to address the clinical needs and financial
realities for healthcare providers, resulting in a low adoption rate, despite
demand from orthopedic surgeons, hospitals, and patients for advanced technology
solutions. Less than 15% of joint replacement surgeries performed in the United
States today utilize advanced technology, despite superior clinical outcomes,
presenting a significant commercial opportunity to address an unmet market need
that will reach $5 billion globally by 2026. The proposed technology radically
reduces the cost of an advanced surgical navigation system and improves
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Program
(STTR) Phase I project focuses on developing leading-edge, low-cost surgical
navigation to help orthopedic surgeons achieve precise, personalized implant fit
and placement for all joint replacement patients. Existing navigation and
robotic systems for joint replacement have high upfront and recurring costs.
They add time and complexity to the surgical procedure and require additional
and larger incisions to accommodate invasive pins used to affix trackers to the
patient's bones. The proposed system utilizes advanced 3D scanning to map
patient anatomy and proprietary radar tracking technology to help surgeons fit
and place implants ideally for each patient. This phase I project aims to
achieve the following technical objectives: (1) validation of high resolution
radar tracking accuracy, (2) implementation of 3D scanning to register patient
imaging data to their anatomy, and (3) validation of a surgical planning system
to personalize the procedure to each patient using an anatomic computational
model of the joint and relevant soft tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.