* 2112798
* Elucidating Degradation Mechanisms of High-Potential Redox Electrolytes in Nonaqueous Redox Flow Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jianbing Jiang, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 416,184.00

Renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind energy, are promising
alternatives to reduce the energy and environmental risks associated with fossil
fuels. However, these naturally occurring renewable energy sources are
intermittent, meaning that the energy cannot be produced constantly or respond
to meet demand levels. Therefore, it is necessary to store energy for release
when needed. Redox flow batteries (RFBs) use solution-based materials for energy
storage and have attracted remarkable attention due to their low cost and
reliability, yet their widespread application is hindered by their low energy
density and instability. The objective of this proposal is to develop novel
metal-free compounds for RFBs to enhance their energy density. Specifically, the
investigators aim to develop a new family of compounds, namely bipyridine and
tetrathiafulvalene (TTF), with the necessary combination of (1) high solubility
in organic solvents, (2) extended redox potentials for high battery voltage, and
(3) high electrochemical reversibility for long cycling lifetime. Using the
research outcomes as the basis for outreach activities, the investigators will
engage a diverse body of students and the general public to enhance their
understanding of renewable energy science and, more broadly, chemistry for
sustainability. Furthermore, the proposed outreach activities will help the
public understand the connection between fundamental research in laboratories
and renewable energy in daily lives while increasing their scientific literacy
and will provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to
develop their science communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
project aims to achieve two goals: (1) design, synthesize, and characterize the
physical and redox properties of molecular, high-redox-potential, metal-free
bipyridine and TTF derivatives, and (2) investigate their application in
nonaqueous redox flow batteries (NRFBs) and elucidate their potential
decomposition mechanisms using in situ cyclic voltammetry as well as operando
UV-Vis and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopies. The investigator
hypothesizes that the electronic and steric properties of the derivates, as well
as their thermodynamics and electrokinetics, can be finetuned using molecular
engineering, thus improving their stability and cycling efficiency in NRFBs.
This research will advance the frontiers of knowledge in design principles that
guide the synthesis of redox-active compounds with high redox potentials, great
electrochemical reversibility, enhanced mass transfer coefficients, and high
electron transfer rates. The work done in this proposal will fill the knowledge
gap between the development of promising NRFBs and the lack of ideal redox
electrolytes, as well as generate key fundamental insights into ideal redox-
active compounds. The conclusions drawn from this research will have a profound
impact on battery performance enhancement design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.