* 2112103
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Suturing Device
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Lia Winter, WINTER INNOVATIONS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project improves outcomes following orthopedic ligament
and tendon reconstruction. More than 1 million surgeries to repair torn
ligaments and tendons are performed in the United States annually. However, the
failure rates are reported to be as high as 25% and the majority of failures are
attributed to a technical error, which costs the US healthcare system $2.5
billion each year. Stitching has been identified as a critical, technically
complex step in the surgery that, if improved, can be a way to reduce the
incidence of failure. Current stitching needles have serious limitations that
make stitching slow, tedious, and inaccurate. The two-part needle technology
proposed in this project fundamentally changes how stitching can be performed.
Better quality and faster stitching provides a societal benefit of improved
patient outcomes as well as commercial benefits of avoided costs associated with
failed surgeries and savings from reduced procedure
times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project supports development of a revolutionary suturing device that will
advance stitching capabilities for orthopedic ligament and tendon repair
surgery. The groundbreaking two-part needle design offers a value proposition of
improved speed and quality of stitching, two essential elements for clinical
success. This project has two overarching technical objectives: First,
prototypes will be constructed with variable characteristics, and force testing
will be performed to determine how each characteristic impacts functionality of
the device. Performance of the device with regards to forces experienced during
stitching will be compared to conventional needles. Second, prototypes will be
constructed and tested by potential customers to assess usability for the
intended purpose of creating specific stitch patterns. Speed of stitching and
biomechanical strength of the stitch patterns will be compared to patterns
created with conventional needles to quantify the value proposition. Successful
completion of the objectives will substantially advance the two-part needle
technology toward commercialization in orthopedics and provide a basis for
additional research of the two-part needle design for other surgical
applications that rely on stitching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.