* 2112796
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: Continuation of the XENON Program at LNGS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Luca Grandi, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2025
* USD 509,156.00

Identifying the nature of dark matter remains one of the most pressing problems
in physics today. The direct search for dark matter particles with the XENON
family of experiments using liquid xenon time projection chambers (LXeTPCs) of
increasing target mass and decreasing background has led to the most stringent
constraints on many different dark matter candidates, over a broad range of
mass, type of coupling, cross-section, and particle type. Building on the
success of the first multi-tonne LXeTPC, XENON1T, this collaboration has
expanded the scientific reach of this technology by building a new LXeTPC,
XENONnT, of larger target mass and with lower intrinsic background but re-using
infrastructure and already tested systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid xenon
detector technologies are unique training grounds for undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral scientists, in that they combine significant hardware
involvement with advanced data analysis skills. Technologies span from
sophisticated detector design to cyber-infrastructure and innovative data
analysis, with applications in other fields such as medical imaging and nuclear
nonproliferation. The entire project employs an open data policy to foster
benefits in other areas of research and education. the participating groups
facilitate and encourage public interest in science through targeted talks and
outreach activities with particular focus to support members of underrepresented
and underserved groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XENONnT experiment, with its
multi-tonnes fiducial mass and ultra-low background will reach a sensitivity to
various dark matter models more than an order of magnitude beyond current
knowledge. XENONnT will be sensitive to a variety of interactions, including
spin-independent, spin-dependent, and other couplings; to a variety of
particles, including WIMPs, axion-like particles, solar axions and dark photons;
and at the same time, XENONnT will cover particle masses ranging from kilo-
electronvolts almost up to the Planck mass. It will also be an observatory for
other highly interesting physics. Examples in neutrino physics include a
measurement of the Solar neutrino luminosity through pp neutrinos and a first
measurement of the Solar metallicity through boron-8 neutrinos. The detector
might also observe neutrinos from a Galactic supernova and potentially issue
early multi-messenger alerts to telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.