* 2112405
* SBIR Phase I:  Mining microbial diversity to culture new categories of cheese and other sustainable foods
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Nathaniel Chu, CROSS CULTURED FOODS PBC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to build a more sustainable food system by crafting cultured foods
leveraging microbial diversity. Growing awareness of the environmental and
health toll of animal products has persuaded many to seek plant-based foods, but
the search is often curtailed by unappetizing and expensive products. For
example, cheese is one of the best-loved foods in western cuisine, but by weight
it has a carbon footprint larger than chicken or pork and contains lactose,
which two-thirds of people cannot digest. To date, plant-based cheeses have
failed to achieve anything similar to the rich depth of flavor associated with
dairy cheeses. The proposed project will build a platform to rapidly develop
novel cultured foods from sustainable ingredients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will systematically mine microbial biodiversity for new strains
usable in creating cultured foods. A key technical hurdle to inventing new
cultured foods has been a lack of tools to profile complex microbial communities
and chemical mixtures. Using high-throughput methods from microbial ecology and
analytical chemistry, this work seeks to rapidly evaluate microbes for their
potential to create compelling flavors. This is an iterative process involving
the identification, isolation, optimization and combination of microbial strains
that are compatible with to process of making high-quality, plant-based cheeses.
The primary goals are to craft a new category of hard, aged cheeses that
captures the complexity and addictiveness of dairy cheese, while requiring far
fewer natural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.