* 2112072
* STTR Phase I:  Preliminary Design and Manufacturing of Mooring Line Connections for  3D Concrete Printed Floating Wind Turbine Anchors
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Pablo Zavattieri, RCAM TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I
project opens pathways to large-scale domestic manufacturing of low-cost energy
infrastructure needed to facilitate the clean energy transition in the United
States. The United States has a vast offshore wind energy resource that is
nearly four times the nation's current electricity use. This enormous potential
presents an opportunity to deliver clean and reliable electricity to the
country’s largest population centers while creating hundreds of thousands of
jobs to manufacture and service the wind plants. However, approximately 60% of
the offshore wind energy resource is in deep waters that require floating wind
turbines moored to seafloor anchors. With an installed cost of approximately $1
M each, lower-cost anchor solutions are needed to accelerate the deployment of
wind energy. This Phase I project uses advanced additive manufacturing methods
to cut the installed costs of wind turbine anchors. The additive manufacturing
technology also has strong future market potential in diverse renewable energy
technologies beyond anchors, including fixed-bottom offshore substructures,
floating wind platforms, wave energy devices, on-shore wind turbine towers,
small hydropower, and pumped hydro electric energy storage. This project
combines four cost-reducing innovations to create a low cost additively
manufactured anchor that will cut installed anchor costs by up to 80% compared
to conventional steel suction anchors – saving approximately $3M per floating
wind turbine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances the following
innovations: (1) the first-ever application of 3D concrete printing to floating
wind turbines, (2) an innovative concrete reinforcement system, (3) integrated
buoyancy chambers that aid transport and installation of the anchor, and (4) a
new mooring line connection method, the development of which is the primary
focus of the project. The project goal is to pave the way for the first-ever
seafloor embedment of the innovative concrete anchor by de-risking key aspects
of a mooring line connection solution capable of resisting extreme mooring line
forces of approximately 1,700 metric tons. The Phase I project scope includes
comparison and down-selection of mooring line connection concepts, preliminary
design of the selected design, fabrication of a section of the concrete anchor
using additive manufacturing at a scale of up to 2.5 meters in diameter, and
analysis of the cost effectiveness and production rates of the innovative anchor
and additive manufacturing process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.