* 2112709
* The Microphysics of Lightning: Observing the Optical Emission from Downward Terrestrial Gamma-ray Flashes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* John Belz, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 505,230.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terrestrial Gamma-ray Flashes
(TGFs) are bursts of high energy photons of sub millisecond duration that are
produced by lightning. The study of TGFs, both their initiation and propagation,
is of major interest to lightning researchers. The Telescope Array Surface
Detector (TASD), a 700 km2 cosmic ray detector located in the western desert of
Utah, U.S.A. is currently the world’s leading detector in the study of downward-
directed TGFs. This project will allow further investigation of the initiation
phase of downward TGFs by measuring their optical component using a high-speed
video camera and a photometer at the Telescope Array site. The results of this
project will improve our understanding of lightning, which in turn will improve
the ability to mitigate its negative effects and associated radiation hazards.
The outreach component of this work will allow scientists to describe the
microphysics of lightning to the public at a powerful and impactful level
through various communication venues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is known
that TGFs are produced inside thunderstorms and in correlation with lightning,
both the mechanism responsible for producing TGFs and the relation of intra-
cloud discharges to TGFs are still unknown. There are several leading possible
mechanisms that are believed to produce TGFs. Multiple studies conclude that
each mechanism’s optical signature is distinctly different. The intensities at
which the optical emission at different wavelengths is detected would provide
key information about the lightning development sequence. This award will allow
the observation of the relationship between downward-directed TGFs and their
optical emissions using a high-speed video camera and a photometer in
conjunction with Lightning Mapping Array (LMA) stations, electric field-change
detectors, and a high-speed broadband VHF interferometer. Results from these
observations will be directly compared to the optical emissions observed
simultaneously with the ASIM satellite’s upward-directed TGFs. Most importantly,
it will provide answers to critical questions about TGFs and even lightning
initiation processes, and will further the understanding regarding one of the
top ten questions in lightning research: What are the mechanisms responsible for
producing and propagating gamma-ray events in our
atmosphere?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.