* 2112167
* Category II: A Prototype National Research Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Frank Wuerthwein, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 06/30/2027
* USD 12,249,999.00

Advances in data-intensive science and engineering research, supported by
ongoing developments in cyberinfrastructure, enable new insights and
discoveries. Among these are progress in understanding fundamental processes and
mechanisms from human public health to the health of the planet; predicting and
responding to natural disasters; and promoting the increasing interconnectedness
of science and engineering across many fields, including in astronomy, extreme-
scale systems management, cell biology, high energy physics, social science, and
satellite image analyses. Fundamentally new system architectures are required to
accelerate such advances, including capabilities that integrate diverse
computing and data resources, research and education networks, edge computing
devices, and scientific instruments into highly usable and flexible distributed
systems. Such systems provide both technological platforms for conducting
research, and can catalyze distributed and multidisciplinary teams, which are
developing new and transformative approaches to addressing disciplinary and
multidisciplinary research problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent reports,
informed through community visioning, including the NSF supported report
“Transforming Science Through Cyberinfrastructure”, note that a
cyberinfrastructure (CI) ecosystem designed to be open and scalable, and to grow
with time may advance through in kind contributions of compute and data
resources by the national science and education community. This CI ecosystem may
be viewed, “more holistically as a spectrum of computational, data, software,
networking, and security resources, tool and services, and computational and
data skills and expertise that can be seamlessly integrated and used, and
collectively enable new, transformative discoveries across S&amp;E [science and
education]”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aligned with this vision of a national scale
CI ecosystem, the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) at the University of
California, San Diego (UCSD), in association with partners at the University of
Nebraska, Lincoln (UNL) and the Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing
Center (MGHPCC), will deploy the “Prototype National Research Platform” (NRP).
This novel, national scale, distributed testbed architecture includes: a high
performance subsystem to be deployed at SDSC that integrates advanced processors
to be available in association with extremely low latency national Research and
Educational (R&amp;E) networks operating at multiple 100Gbps speeds; additional
highly optimized subsystems each constituting 288 Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs) to be deployed at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln (UNL) and the
Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center (MGHPCC), to be also
interconnected to the R&amp;E networks at 100Gbps speeds at each location; a
minimum of additional 1 PB of high performance disk storage to be deployed at
each of the three sites to establish a Content Delivery Network (CDN) providing
prototype caliber access to data anywhere in the nation within a round trip time
(RTT) of ~10ms to be available through a set of eight optimally positioned 50TB
Non Volatile Memory (NVMe)-based network caches; and an innovative system
software environment enabling both centralized management of the nationally
distributed testbed system. Additionally, the system architecture will remain
open to future growth through additional integration of capabilities to be
achieved through a novel “bring your own resource” program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured as a three-year testbed phase,
followed by a two-year allocations phase. During the testbed phase, SDSC
researchers, working closely with collaborators at UNL and MGHPCC, as well as
with small numbers of research teams, will evaluate the NRP architecture and
performance of constituent components. Semiannual workshops will bring teams
together to share lessons learned, develop the knowledge and best practices to
inform researchers, and explore the innovative architecture to accelerate
S&amp;E discoveries from ideas to publications. During the allocations phase,
NRP will be available to researchers with projects deemed meritorious by an NSF-
approved allocation process. Workshops continue through the allocations
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.