* 2112878
* HCC: Small: Mitigating Online Risks: Designing Social VR to Prevent New Forms of Online Harassment
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Guo Freeman, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,785.00

This project investigates new and potentially disruptive ways that people
experience harassment in online social spaces, in order to design novel and
safer social technologies to protect, promote trust, and mitigate emerging
online risks. It focuses on newly emerging forms of online harassment in that
are occurring in social Virtual Reality (VR), that is, novel and increasingly
popular 3D virtual spaces, where multiple users interact with one another
through VR head-mounted displays, synchronous voice conversation, avatars that
track a person’s body movements, and simulated touching and grabbing features.
As online social spaces evolve towards more natural and immersive interaction,
social VR grows as an important and popular medium for social activities and
connections in and beyond the era of the pandemic. In this way, the project
directly promotes public interest in making VR research and innovation
facilitate human activity. It contributes to the general public's social and
emotional well-being by creating safer online social spaces and promoting
healthier interaction dynamics in these spaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project takes a proactive approach to examining and designing new VR systems for
diverse users’ novel and safe social interactions. It is working toward active
prevention of new and potentially more disruptive harassment in online
environments and experiences through three phases: (1) explore how people
experience and cope with harassment in social VR, using automatic online data
scraping, participatory observations, and interviews; (2) theorize and model new
forms of online harassment using a large-scale online survey; and (3) generate
user-centered design patterns and guidelines to protect users from new forms of
online harassment through prototyping, a participatory design process, and
community deployment. Overall, the project is expected to advance knowledge
about how to explicate risks and mitigate new forms of online harassment, which
emerge in response to new technologies and social
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.