* 2112895
* I-Corps: A reactor (electrolyzer) that converts carbon dioxide to fuels and chemicals using renewable sources of energy
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2021
* Clifford Kubiak, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in the
electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide (CO2) to valuable fuels. This
technology plays a role in the carbon capture and utilization process that has
the potential to significantly reduce CO2 emissions. Production of carbon
neutral fuels and chemicals from CO2 using renewable electricity is a
commercially viable pathway to offset the carbon footprint. The proposed
efficient solution supports profitable production of carbon neutral fuels and
chemicals. When scaled, this technology may impact a wide spectrum of areas that
currently depend on fuels and chemicals produced using traditional methods
ranging from aviation fuels to pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project focuses on carbon utilization and production of clean fuels and
chemicals to help mitigate climate change. The proposed method employs
electrochemical conversion of CO2 using renewable electricity and water,
generation of synthesis gas (syngas), and further conversion of syngas in the
Fischer-Tropsch process to produce a wide variety of chemicals. This technology
represents a new class of catalysts with high energy efficiency and
selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.