* 2112675
* CREST Center for Cellular and Biomolecular Machines
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2027
* Sayantani Ghosh, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,100,000.00

Center for Biological Signatures and Sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers of
Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the
enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving institutions through
the establishment of centers that effectively integrate education and research.
CREST promotes the development of new knowledge, enhancements of the research
productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded presence of students
historically underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics disciplines. With National Science Foundation support, the
University of California – Merced builds on the successes of the Center for
Cellular and Biomolecular Machines (CCBM) Phase I, leading to institutional
transformation and new scientific horizons. In Phase II, the Center will use an
interdisciplinary approach cutting across scientific and engineering
methodologies to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;•pursue a fundamental understanding of
the adaptive and responsive functioning of multi-scale biomolecular and cellular
assemblies that enable control of function in vivo; &lt;br/&gt;•use these
fundamental principles for designing and developing novel bio-inspired
functioning machines ranging from designer nanodevices, cells and tissue to
diagnostic and therapeutic devices; and&lt;br/&gt;•refine, augment, and
institutionalize CCBM’s signature integrated, interdisciplinary graduate
training program that combines scientific and professional skills with
supervision of research and training experiences for undergraduate and high
school students aimed at enhancing and developing career opportunities for
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating
research and education, the Center aims to develop a robust pipeline for
underrepresented minorities in the STEM workforce at all levels and produce
graduates in both physical and biological sciences and can pursue cross-
disciplinary STEM careers in academia, laboratories or
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three thrusts are presented and defined according
to their scale (nano, meso, and multicellular). Thrust 1: Protein Metamorphosis
and Responsive Nanodevices. Phase II research focuses on the emerging theme of
protein metamorphosis as mechanism to enable natural and synthetic controllable
biological nanodevices, organized in two broad areas: the functional roles of
gradually morphing proteins; and engineering of control systems of the assembly-
disassembly of biological macromolecular assemblies. Thrust 2: Adaptive and
Responsive Mesoscale Assemblies. In Phase II, the focus is to understand the
mechanisms that enable assemblies to function collectively in adaptive and
responsive ways as well as exploiting them for applications. Thrust 3: Adaptive
Cellular Communication. Phase II will examine the impact of cell-cell and cell-
matrix mechanical interactions on collective cell motility, patterning and the
emergence of function, combining experimental and modeling
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.