* 2112976
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Determining the functional relationship between simultaneous co-limitating light and nutrient conditions on phytoplankton growth
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Kevin Arrigo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 43,497.00

The growth rate of phytoplankton, single-celled marine algae that take up carbon
dioxide and produce oxygen, is controlled in the ocean by the availability of
both light and nutrients. However, no laboratory study has generated the data
required to quantify how nutrient and light interact to control phytoplankton
growth. Some models assume that light and nutrients act independently to control
phytoplankton growth, while others assume that light and nutrients act in
concert. These two different assumptions about how light and nutrients control
phytoplankton growth can produce vastly different predictions about the speed of
this process and the magnitude of phytoplankton blooms. The researchers will use
a series of laboratory experiments to determine if the effects of nutrients and
light on phytoplankton growth is best modeled assuming that the two limiting
resources act independently or in concert. This experiment will help to improve
marine ecosystem models implemented throughout the worldâ€™s oceans, but will be
particularly relevant in the Arctic, where light and nutrient availability are
both rapidly changing as a result of anthropogenic climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will grow Arctic diatoms across a
range of growth-limiting nitrate (NO3-) and light conditions. Individual
cultures will be maintained under constant temperature, light, and nutrient
conditions in chemostats. There will be 25 unique interacting NO3- and light-
limited treatment combinations conducted using five light and five NO3-
conditions, as well as five additional treatments at light-saturated but NO3-
deplete conditions. Following acclimation of cultures to the treatments, the
researchers will measure phytoplankton biomass and photosynthesis vs. irradiance
(P-E) relationships, and phytoplankton growth rates will be determined from the
dilution rate of the media. Light and nutrient limitation terms will then be
calculated for each treatment. Finally, the best functional relationship that
best describes the relationship between co-limiting light and nutrient
conditions will be determined by comparing the two established (minimum and
multiplicative) relationships to a variety of non-linear relationships between
the limitation terms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.