* 2112011
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving Diagnosis of Epilepsy by Applying Network Analytics to Non-Seizure Scalp EEG Data
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Adam Li, Neurologic Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a novel
electroencephalogram (EEG) analytics tool that will improve the speed and
accuracy of diagnosing epilepsy. The tool is an easy-to-use software package
that utilizes scalp EEG data. It is being developed as a cloud-based application
designed to integrate with existing software packages and to provide easy-to-
read heatmaps available within minutes. Epilepsy centers and other settings
where EEG diagnostics are used will benefit from improved accuracy in diagnosing
epilepsy: Currently the accuracy is estimated at less than 60%, whereas the
proposed tool can improve this figure by over 25%, more accurately
distinguishing between epileptic and non-epileptic pathologies from EEG alone.
Furthermore, the technology will increase the speed of epilepsy diagnosis:
Currently, patients often require multiple EEGs, during which they are at high
risk of further seizures. The proposed tool will provide a definitive diagnostic
on the first visit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves performing a retrospective study to
validate a novel EEG analytics tool on 60 or more patients, developing an
algorithm to automate artifact removal from scalp EEG data most appropriate for
this clinical application, and developing the tool as a cloud-based service.
These milestones will facilitate clinical adoption and easy integration into the
clinical workflow, both of which are necessary for successful commercialization
of the innovation. The tool will predict if a brain network is epileptic while a
patient is monitored at rest when no seizure occurs. The key strengths are the
use of a dynamic network model (DNM) to uncover connections in the brain that
only exist in an epilepsy patient during rest. All other FDA proved tools are
based on individual EEG channel properties rather than network-based properties.
As a result, their utility is limited to identifying abnormal events (e.g., when
an EEG spike occurs), potentially vulnerable to artifacts. In addition, the
proposed tool is transformative because it captures how nodes in a network
dynamically influence each other, while clinical approaches rely on reading EEG
with naked eyes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.