* 2112610
* EAGER: Acquisition of a Tomographic Particle Image Velocimetry System for Fluid-Structure Interaction Investigation of Active Blowing on Deformable Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Konstantinos Kanistras, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 89,720.00

Active blowing methods have shown tremendous improvements in delay separation,
lift enhancement and noise reduction over the years, however a major roadblock
associated with high mass flow requirements has restricted their use on aircraft
platforms. One potential method to resolve this issue is to synthesize and
utilize two seemingly unique active flow control methods, a deformable flap
providing a continuous wing contour and active upper-surface blowing, to develop
a more efficient active flow control system that can enhance aircraft
performance and control. The primary aim of this project is to investigate and
determine the key factors governing the performance of active blowing on
deformable surfaces. The project will also support the integration of research
with graduate and undergraduate education and it will attract, educate and help
retain a diverse pool of scientists/engineers including underrepresented
minorities from partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to conduct an experimental flow-structure interaction investigation
to impact our understanding of the key parameters that effect the formation and
development of coherent structures near deformable wing flap with upper-surface
trailing-edge blowing. Computational studies are scarce due to the high
complexity of the equations that govern the flow. Experimental results focused
on the coherent structures of active blowing on deformable surfaces are also
sparse; therefore, the current project will produce a detailed experimental
database for unsteady flow-structure interaction for this application in a low-
speed wind tunnel using a state-of-the-art tomographic particle image
velocimetry system to obtain velocities. These results can be used to develop a
physical understanding of the problem and to improve computational tools. The
project will i) determine the properties (varying slot geometry on the
deformable flap, slot-height, blowing intensity and Reynolds number) that govern
the performance of active blowing on deformable flaps and ii) identify and
quantify the effects of geometry, frequency of actuation and blowing intensity
on the formation and development on coherent structures. This project is jointly
funded by the Fluid Dynamics and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.