* 2112169
* SBIR Phase I:  Fiber-Assisted Perfusion for Cultured Meat Production
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Christophe Chantre, BOSTON MEATS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the advancement of animal-free meat alternatives. Today, plant-based
meats are consumed mostly by vegans and vegetarians willing to accept higher
costs or different tastes compared with meat from animals. Recently, plant-based
burgers and sausages have become popular, but the situation is very different
for whole-cut meats. Steaks or chicken breasts, for example, have unique
textures and tastes that are not yet matched by animal-free alternatives. The
proposed project will improve the texture of alternative meats and provide a
path to improved nutrition, taste, and aroma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project addresses a limitation of plant-based meats: they lack the distinct
fibrous texture found in natural meats. This project advances ultrafine protein
fibers with similar structure to animal muscle fibers. Project aims include
ultrafine protein fiber production, development of sterile bioreactor systems to
house fiber scaffolds for tissue engineering, and feasibility studies of
culturing a variety of agriculturally relevant animal cells in the fiber
scaffold bioreactors. The first project aim will overcome the technical hurdle
of producing edible protein fibers using scalable food-safe processes. The
deliverable for Aim 1 will be edible fibrous protein scaffolds with textures
approximating meats. Project Aim 2 will evaluate perfusion systems to securely
house scaffolds under sterile conditions conducive to cell culture. The
deliverable for Aim 2 will be reusable custom tissue culture chambers. Project
Aim 3 will compare a selection of animal cells based on their proliferation
rates and viability when cultured in our fibrous tissue engineering scaffolds.
The deliverable for Aim 3 will be animal cell-based muscle and/or fat
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.