* 2112144
* SBIR Phase I: Modular, Paper-based, Secured Diagnostics for Managing Viral Outbreaks (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Adam Carr, FRUGI BIOTECHNOLOGY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
Project is a cost-effective way to manage and track viral outbreaks in animal,
human, and plant populations, including tracking for situations like the
COVID-19 pandemic. It overcomes the challenges of current viral screening
methods, namely PPE required for collecting samples, handling of samples to
centralized analytic sites, cost of tests, and reliance on limited reagents. The
platform proposed in this project could be used on-site at an animal production
facility or at home. The scanner can be placed at many municipal and commercial
locations (e.g., drug stores) or the envelope can be conveniently mailed for
assessment. The dual read modality gives timely feedback to the client, as well
as the capability for anonymous aggregation of readout data - essential for
real-time tracking of viral outbreak and informing resource allocation to
mitigate spread. This diagnostic platform would generate impact, allowing: 1)
animal producers to mitigate virus spread and reduce loss and 2) businesses,
schools, and other organizations to make real-time data-driven decisions on
closures and health policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses
on assessing technical feasibility of three critical elements of a diagnostic
platform: (1) the ability to couple isothermal RNA amplification directly to
cell-free extract using custom formulations, to simplify usability (eliminate
current off-card amplification with commercial kits) and reduce cost; (2)
Production of a scalable and efficient cell-free extract well-suited for
amplification of reporter proteins by RNA circuits to increase the rate of
protein production and reduced RNA degradation. The performance of this extract
will inform the time to result as well as the cost of card, necessary metrics
for translation; and (3) production of new toehold riboregulators (2 to 3)
selective to virus targets relevant to the animal industry (e.g., swine flu,
porcine respiratory). These will also inform the limits of detection. This
project will evaluate the feasibility of such as
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.