* 2112864
* Metal Oxynitrides: Tuning Metal-N and Metal-O Interactions for Improved Electrocatalytic Properties at the Liquid/Solid Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Thomas Cundari, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 498,943.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ammonia production is vital to
agriculture but is currently produced by an energy-intensive process that also
produces significant amounts of CO2. Earth-abundant transition metal oxides and
oxynitrides are the primary materials used as catalysts for synthesis of ammonia
from dinitrogen, which comprises 78% of Earth’s atmosphere. Widespread use of
these materials for such technologically important applications poses a
significant challenge, however, as the atomic-level understanding of oxynitride
surface chemistry at the complex electrolyte/solid interface is not well
understood. With this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry and Ceramics programs in the Division of Materials Research, Profs.
Cundari, D’Souza and Kelber and their research groups at the University of North
Texas (UNT) will investigate fundamental chemical interactions relevant to the
conversion of dinitrogen to ammonia via more energy-efficient routes. The
studies will help in understanding the chemical and material factors that are
most important for optimizing new materials for ammonia production from
dinitrogen, and applications to other important industrial reactions. Involved
student researchers will learn a wide range of experimental and computational
skills and the PIs will collaborate with other UNT faculty and students to
develop brief presentations – in English and Spanish – on important chemistry
topics to heighten interest of high school students in pursing Chemistry and
other STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of NH3 from N2 relies on the high
temperature Haber-Bosch process which consumes much energy and produces
significant CO2 and the design of new materials to provide an
environmentally/energetically friendly alternative to produce N2 can have
significant impact on agriculture, energy saving, and the environment. Earth-
abundant transition metal oxides and oxynitrides are rapidly growing in interest
for energy and environmental applications, but the fundamental roles of N, O and
metal centers in N2 reduction are, however, not well understood. This project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Ceramics programs in
the Division of Materials Research, will investigate fundamental interactions at
the electrolyte/solid interface relevant to the reduction of dinitrogen to
ammonia, and to other electrocatalytic processes, such as the formation of
hydrogen and oxygen. Electrochemical methods, combined with in situ and operando
surface science probes, will probe the fundamental interactions at the
electrolyte/oxynitride interface governing both catalytic efficiency and
selectivity. Experimental studies will be both supported and guided by
theoretical efforts focused on the energetics of reaction pathways at
N-supported vs. O-supported metal centers. Students involved will learn both
experimental and theoretical methods, which will enhance their capabilities in
both academic and industrial research environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.