* 2112175
* STTR Phase I:  A Next-Generation Computationally Efficient Software for Simulating Additive Manufacturing Processes of Metals
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Ajit Achuthan, Additive Manufacturing Innovations LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I
project is to advance simulation software with high computational speed and
efficiency for small-scale manufacturing. The proposed technology will perform
simulations faster (from days to hours) using a fraction of current resources
(from clusters to desktop), while still capturing the underlying physics
accurately. Such a powerful tool will serve as a platform that facilitates more
innovations in the field of additive manufacturing, bringing paradigm changes in
part design and material development. This will bring efficiency improvements of
50-100x to many industrial sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I
project addresses low computational efficiency of existing manufacturing process
simulation models due to the finite element analysis (FEA) framework on which
the models rely. The proposed innovation consists of three novel concepts: a new
FEA framework called additive FEA (AFEA) framework, and two methods called
Topologically Conformal Regenerative Discretization (TCRD) and Hybrid Modeling
(HM). The proposed project will advance these techniques for computational
simulation of AM processes for metals, engineering them for translation at
industrial scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.