* 2112200
* SBIR Phase I:  Design and Fabrication of Novel Microfluidic Devices for STEM Education
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Erin Ontiveros, PETL FLUIDICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be development of a novel platform for the
design and high-volume fabrication of microfluidic devices for educational and
research purposes. Currently used fabrication methods are not conducive to the
large-scale production of robust, high quality, open-channel microfluidic
devices that are cost-effective for widespread use outside of specialty
applications. The proposed platform will contribute to bridging the gap between
the promised and actual impact of lab-on- a-chip technologies in fields like
biology and chemistry. Devices fabricated using the new platform will be the
centerpiece of laboratory kits that utilize microfluidics to apply scientific
and engineering concepts at the high school and college levels. The kits will
contribute to educational efforts that address the nationâ€™s demand for STEM
professionals, projected to grow at twice the rate of all occupations in the
next 10 years, while training students in a field expected to reach a $60
billion market value by 2029.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to eliminate the main technical
hurdles that prevent the large scale production of open-channel microfluidic
devices. Current lithographic, additive and micromilling fabrication
technologies require a combination of expertise, equipment and production time
that make them ill-suited for the purpose of assembling devices that are
inexpensive and robust enough for consumer use, for example, in educational
settings. The proposed platform will leverage new and existing high-volume
fabrication technologies to manufacture film-based devices with channels and
chambers measured in the tens and hundreds of micrometers, featuring strong
bonding between layers to allow for high pressure flow, and at a projected cost
of &lt;0.15 USD per device. Research objectives include the development of
gravity-based and hand powered pump setups appropriate for educational and low
resource settings. The advancements in device fabrication processes achieved in
this project are expected to have a positive impact beyond the field of
education, facilitating the commercialization of microfluidic technologies in
fields like analytical chemistry, biomanufacture and point-of-care
biosensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.