* 2112061
* SBIR Phase I:  A GREEN PROCESS FOR LOW-COST PRODUCTION OF SILICON CARBIDE FROM WASTE SILICON
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Andrew Tong, SUSTEON INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop and commercialize a new technology
for production of a high-purity silicon carbide powder â€“ a critical feedstock
for the semiconductors used in electric vehicles, 5G communication equipment,
automobiles, aerospace, etc. - at significantly lower production cost and 75%
decreased environmental footprint. Currently silicon carbide powder is generally
imported and is not made in an environmentally sustainable fashion. The proposed
project advances a new manufacturing process for the domestic silicon carbide
market, estimated to grow from $150 million in 2016 to $500 million in 2027.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances a process to react silicon powder
with a hydrocarbon gas under highly controlled temperature/residence time
conditions to produce a pure, crystalline silicon carbide powder. This project
develops a sequential two-step process consisting of catalytic pyrolysis of
hydrocarbon gas (silicon powder acting as a catalyst) to produce highly active
carbon, which subsequently reacts with fine Si powder to form high-purity beta
silicon carbide for conversion into alpha silicon carbide with conventional
sintering methods. The objective is to produce 50 g of high purity and fine
particle size silicon carbide in one step for industrial evaluation, exploring
reaction kinetics, gas solid contacting, optimization of yield and product
purity of silicon carbide, as well as process design and technoeconomic analysis
for translation at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.