* 2112527
* Intersections of String Phenomenology, Cosmology, and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Luis Anchordoqui, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 234,026.00

This award funds the research of Professor Luis Anchordoqui at CUNY Lehman
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High energy physics is in a state of flux. Data
from underground particle colliders, from astrophysics, and from cosmology are
together allowing physicists to determine with unprecedented accuracy the values
of the many parameters that describe our universe. The values of these
parameters are turning out to be the keys to unlocking fundamental secrets
concerning the evolution of the universe. One of the most prominent parameters
describing the universe is the so-called Hubble parameter H0, which quantifies
how rapidly the universe is expanding. Unfortunately, recent improved
measurements of this quantity have led to a mystery, with the apparent value of
H0 depending on how it is measured. Physicists using the Planck satellite to
study the light from the "early" universe (only about 380,000 years after the
big bang) obtain one value, while physicists analyzing astronomical observations
from stars and galaxies in the "late" universe obtain a different value. The
discrepancy between these two values of H0 is called the "Hubble tension". The
resolution of this conundrum will likely require a coordinated effort involving
theory, interpretation, data analysis, and observation. In this dynamic
environment, Professor Anchordoqui will study methods that can help address the
H0 tension while at the same time providing solid predictions for data from
underground colliders. Research in this area thus advances the national interest
by promoting the progress of fundamental science. Professor Anchordoqui will
also involve students in his research, thereby helping to train the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Anchordoqui will pursue a number of different approaches to addressing the
Hubble tension. These include theoretical modeling of time dependent stringy
backgrounds with potential cosmological implications for the Hubble tension;
statistical analyses using Monte Carlo Markov Chain methods to constrain
cosmological parameters which arise in string-inspired models as well as in
explicit realizations of the Dynamical Dark Matter framework; theoretical and
empirical modeling of inflation dynamics with potentials exhibiting S-duality;
and interpreting the tension of astrophysical measurements by IceCube and the
Fermi satellite using flavors of cosmological neutrinos with active-sterile
mixing. Professor Anchordoqui is also involved with the Pierre Auger
Collaboration, searching for the origin and nature of the highest-energy cosmic
rays and studying particle interactions at center-of-mass energies well beyond
those attained at the LHC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.