* 2112679
* Designing, Building, and Testing a micro Combined Heat and Power (mCHP) Gasifier using Wood and Solid Waste as Fuel
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Micah Jasper, Jasper, Micah Nathanael
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 11/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Bioenergy Center for Aquatic Chemistry at
the North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical University. The goal of this
research is to design and build a quiet, small-scale trash shredder and chipper
that can process bulk wood and household waste (HW) to feed into a unit that
converts the material to electricity. The gasification process is used in
Europe, Japan, and some companies in the United States. The novelty of the
proposed research is to design and test a small-scale gasification unit that has
the ability to handle household waste. Successful implementation of the proposed
work has the potential to reduce landfill space, assist those in the developing
world and provide a research opportunity for undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research and the sponsoring
NSF CREST Bioenergy Center is to expand the use and availability of bioenergy
from biomass. This research will work towards providing off-grid locations a
method to generate bioelectricity from trash and wood on a small scale. The
proposed work intends to achieve the following quantitative objectives: (1)
Testing of different feedstocks in the gasifier that represent combustible
components of household waste. (2) Investigating the effect of varying the
moisture content of the feedstock by changing the pretreatment drying time and
measure the effect on the electricity produced and overall system efficiency,
(3) Varying the exhaust recycling ratio and measuring any improvement in syngas
composition as well as the effect on production efficiency. (4) Finally, a life
cycle assessment (LCA) will be conducted of the gasification unit to determine
if it is better for the environment to gasify, compost, or recycle each category
of waste. The LCA will consider different environmental measures (e.g.,
greenhouse gas emissions, water quality impact, human health impacts). For each
of the four objectives, chemical process simulations will be compared to the
field results of the gasification unit. It is expected that this research will
result in two or three peer-reviewed journal publications. Undergraduate
students will participate in the scientific research process and will be trained
in lab and field testing, computer modeling, and journal paper
writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.