* 2112859
* Higher Spin Theories, Kaluza-Klein Superspace and Higher Derivatives
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Ergin Sezgin, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 410,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Katrin Becker and Ergin
Sezgin at Texas A&amp;M University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To describe nature at
the fundamental level, physicists use two different theories with very different
set of rules: quantum theory and general relativity. Quantum theory is used to
describe nature at very small distances (the world of atoms and elementary
particles). By contrast, general relativity is used to describe nature at very
large distances (the realm of planets, stars and galaxies). The task of finding
a consistent and unified set of rules that are valid at all distances, and at
the same time describing all fundamental interactions, has long been a great
challenge in physics. The most promising candidate to achieve this goal is
called "string theory" since it is based on the premise that all elementary
particles correspond to different vibrational modes of an incredibly small
fundamental string. In describing phenomena at low energies, string theory
produces a version of Einstein's theory of gravity known as "supergravity".
However, as we probe shorter distances (or equivalently higher energies), string
theory predicts deviations from supergravity. One of the important challenges in
string theory is to compute and understand these deviations. As part of their
research, Professors Becker and Sezgin will pursue a number of research
directions that deal with this problem, many of which have profound consequences
for the description of the early universe. This project is also envisioned to
have broader impact by strengthening the numerous interfaces between string
theory and mathematics, and advances the national interest by promoting progress
in science and seeking new physical laws that describe the uncharted workings of
our universe. The PIs will also provide critical training to postdocs and
students, and plan to give public lectures on their research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professors Becker and Sezgin aim
to construct the full space-time effective action of different superstring- and
M-theory compactifications in a form displaying manifest off-shell supersymmetry
with the goal of finding all orders in the slope parameter. For higher-
dimensional supergravity theories there is no (finite) off-shell formulation. As
a result, writing higher derivative supersymmetric actions turns out to be very
difficult. Professors Becker and Sezgin plan to reformulate higher-dimensional
supergravity theories, in particular 11D supergravity, in 4D, N = 1 superspace
which is one of the simplest superspaces allowing (finite) off-shell
formulations. Choosing manifest supersymmetry in four space-time dimensions is,
of course, motivated by phenomenology, and Professors Becker and Sezgin envision
a host of phenomenological applications of their work. They will also explore
matter couplings, hidden symmetries, anomalies, and exact solutions of higher
spin theories. They will also construct the higher derivative couplings of
matter-coupled supergravity, investigate its vacua, and study its duality
symmetries and its embedding into string theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.