* 2112872
* Collaborative Research: Tackling Functional Protein States at Atomic Detail by Integrating Weighted Ensemble Simulations with Magnetic Resonance Restraints
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Gordon Rule, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 34,334.00

This project is designed to characterize the alternate structures of
proteins—the workhorses of life whose functions in biology are determined by
their structures. A major challenge to characterizing these so-called
“functional structures” is that these structures are often too diverse or
fleeting to be captured by experimental techniques at the level of individual
atoms. An unmet need is therefore a strategy that can determine the structures
of functional protein structures at the atomic level and even more crucially, a
strategy that can provide insights into how the functional structures
interconvert. This project will develop a new software tool that can determine
the functional structures of proteins, how the proteins move to convert from one
structure to another, and the rates at which the structures interconvert. This
tool combines the use of computer simulations with distances within proteins
that are measured by experiments and will be made available through a popular,
freely available WESTPA simulation software package. This interdisciplinary,
collaborative project is providing a valuable training ground for graduate and
undergraduate students participating in the research, and is supporting diverse
educational and outreach activities, including biennial WESTPA software
workshops to provide training to the scientific community in using the new tool
for determining the functional structures of proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new frontier in biophysics has been the
structural characterization of protein functional states. Proteins are the
workhorses of life and their functions are determined by their structures. A
major challenge to characterizing protein structures is that many proteins adopt
not just a single structural state, but alternate states that are relevant to
the biological functions of the proteins. Due to the diversity and often
transient nature of such functional states, the determination of their
structures at the atomic level has been elusive to experimental techniques. An
unmet need is therefore a strategy that can generate atomically detailed
structures of functional states, and even more crucially, a strategy that can
provide detailed insight into the pathways for interconversion between the
states and corresponding kinetics. A key advance of the project is the
development of a general strategy that integrates sparse distance restraints
from magnetic resonance experiments with rigorous simulations to provide atomic
level structures and dynamics of functional protein states. This project will
provide a new simulation tool that will be made available to the scientific
community through the freely available WESTPA software. To further enhance the
accessibility of the software, the WESTPA software will be integrated with the
Orion cloud-computing platform on Amazon Web Services, the world’s largest on-
demand, cloud-computing facility. This project is funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, with
partial co-funding from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the
Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.