* 2112314
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Impacts of Extreme Events on the Peoples of the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Rosanne D'Arrigo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 09/30/2024
* USD 482,571.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs
paleoclimatological and historical datasets to document environmental changes
and their effects on Indigenous populations in northwestern North America. The
investigators will compile and analyze tree-ring data to identify extreme
climatic events for the period known as the Little Ice Age (~1450â€“1850). The
tree-ring evidence will be compared to historical weather observations and
Indigenous ethnohistories documenting human impacts (e.g., famine, migration).
This project will test hypotheses regarding the response and sensitivity of
Arctic communities and ecosystems to extreme environmental change, with emphasis
on the impacts of volcanic forcing. Project goals include documenting climate
history of northwestern North America using tree rings and determining the
degree of convergence between the tree-ring data and historical, proxy and
Indigenous evidence of extreme environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include the development of
a series of multimedia undergraduate lab exercises focused on dendrochronology.
These labs will familiarize students with the scientific use of tree-rings to
reconstruct climate; the associated website will make the exercises available to
educators nation-wide. The PI team will also work with an educational expert to
develop a high-school-level climate change curriculum for use in local
Indigenous communities. Research results will be disseminated via professional
conferences and scientific publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.