* 2112098
* STTR Phase I:  Video Transmission Through Underwater Wireless Links
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Aristedes Costeas, SUBUAS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,979.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the enabling capabilities in applications
that call for both in-air and underwater operations. The aerial-underwater
drones are the first drones that can fly in air, swim in water, and transition
swiftly between air and water. This project aims to equip the drones with video
transmission capabilities through underwater acoustic communication so that the
drone need not be tethered to operate underwater. With the enabling
capabilities, the drone is useful in critical infrastructure mapping, coastal
environment monitoring, emergency response, coastal surveillance, and search and
rescue operations. The underwater video transmission technology can also be
applied to other platforms to extend underwater wireless and mobile internet.
The capability, in turn, has the potential to enable Internet of Underwater
Things. The commercial potential of the project addresses the pain points of the
existing products: the low data rate and large form factor. The enhanced drone
will enable the hybrid vehicle to create a new market that is unserved by either
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) or Unmanned Aerial Systems
(UASs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will design and prototype a small form factor acoustic
communication system for aerial-underwater drones enabling them to achieve high
data-rate video transmission over underwater wireless links. The intellectual
merits of the proposed acoustic communication system include: 1) real-time
hardware implementation of a novel MIMO (multiple-input-multiple-output)
transmitter on an embedded GPU (Graphic Processing Unit) such that the system
can be powered by battery and be fit in a small water-proof container, 2) real-
time hardware implementation of a Turbo equalization receiver on an FPGA (Field
Programmable Gate Array) platform to combat the huge Doppler spread and long
multipath echoes of acoustic channels, 3) video transmission by a high
information data rate of more than 300 kbps over underwater acoustic links, and
4) integration of the small form factor acoustic transmitter with the aerial-
underwater drones without interfering with the operation of the
drones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.