* 2112224
* I-Corps:  Scalable Microfluidic Manufacturing Using Microfluidic Pressure in Paper (uPiP) Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Zachary Gagnon, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an ultra low cost. microfluidic manufacturing technology for use
in a broad range of liquid handling applications, including disease detection,
point-of-care diagnostics, and environmental monitoring. While the global
microfluidics market size is expected to reach $31.6 billion by 2027, very few
prototype microfluidic devices are successfully translated to commercial
products. One reason for low market penetration is the absence of a low-cost,
high throughput, manufacturing technique that can bridge the gap between initial
academic and research and development prototyping efforts and the commercial
requirements of manufacturing at large scales. The proposed technology aims to
provide a low cost technology that significantly lowers the barrier to enter the
microfluidics market. Such a technology may enable widespread adoption of lab-
on-a-chip technologies across a broad range of environmental, energy,
pharmaceutical, and biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a paper-based, actively controlled liquid
handling platform capable of use at commercial scale. The technology is known as
Microfluidic Pressure in Paper (µPiP). In µPiP, a sheet of paper is cut into
small liquid handling channels using a carbon dioxide (CO2) laser cutter, and
subsequently laminated within two thin polymer membranes. Previous results have
demonstrated that, unlike many conventional paper-based fluidic platforms that
rely on passive wetting, the proposed µPiP devices are capable of actively
controlling fluid flow using external pressure. The proposed platform is capable
of handling a wide range of complex liquids, including whole blood and crude
oil, but yet capable of being manufactured at scale without device modification.
The research efforts are focused on developing the next-generation of paper-
based microfluidic devices that are capable of being rapidly manufactured at
low-cost for widespread use. This project will investigate the potential
benefits that this proposed microfluidics manufacturing technology may
offer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.