* 2112201
* Collaborative Research: ERASE-PFAS: Remediation of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Wastewater using Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Diana Aga, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are used in many consumer and
industrial products. PFASs have been found in domestic drinking water systems
and have been identified in ecosystems on a global basis. PFASs are highly
persistent in the environment, and as such have been called ‘forever chemicals.’
Because PFASs are toxic to humans and wildlife, it is important to find
efficient ways to eliminate these chemicals from water supplies. The goal of
this research is to address this need through the development of anaerobic
membrane bioreactors (AnMBRs) that rely on both bacteria and membranes to remove
and destroy PFASs from water. This goal will be achieved through a multiphase
research program to develop microbial cultures that transform PFAS using novel
molecular biological approaches, characterize the PFAS transformation process
before and after treatment, and assess the reactivity of end products using
state-of-the-science approaches. Successful completion of this research will
allow us to better understand how bacteria degrade PFASs and determine how
degradation affects the toxicity of these products. Societal benefits include
potential development of technology to address the urgent national need for low
cost, effective PFAS treatment. Additional benefits include increasing
scientific literacy and STEM diversity through outreach, recruitment, and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The widespread use and extreme stability of PFASs
have resulted in their ubiquitous occurrence in the environment. The
recalcitrance of PFASs to biodegradation resulting from the inertness of carbon-
fluorine bonds is poorly understood. However, reductive defluorination is
thermodynamically favorable under reducing conditions, a puzzling finding that
warrants further exploration using emerging chemical and molecular
biotechnological tools. This project addresses this need through a multi-stage
investigation of the biodegradation of PFASs in AnMBRs. AnMBRs combine anaerobic
treatment with membrane separation, providing low-energy intensive biological
treatment. The overall goal of this project is to develop a set of tools leading
to a better understanding of PFAS biotreatment. The specific objectives designed
to achieve this goal are to: i) demonstrate reductive defluorination of PFASs in
AnMBRs and identify defluorinating microbial populations using emulsion, paired
isolation, and concatenation (epic)PCR to link phylogenetic genes with
dehalogenation genes at a cellular level; ii) characterize biotransformation
products and assess degradation efficiency using high resolution liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry and 19F nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy; and iii) systematically evaluate biological activity of PFAS
mixtures in mammalian cell lines using an integrated transcriptomics and
metabolomics approach. Successful completion of this research holds strong
potential to transform our knowledge of water treatment systems for legacy and
emerging PFASs. Such information can lead to efficient biological treatment
alternatives for PFAS, addressing a critical national need. Broader scientific
and societal impacts include the potential for a paradigm shift in current
practices for establishing PFAS health advisories should evidence of synergistic
interactions in complex PFAS mixtures be established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.