* 2112245
* SBIR Phase I:  Sub-Decadal Weather and Climate Forecast System to Mitigate Risk for Energy and Natural Resource Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Benjamin Toms, INTERSPHERE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is to reduce weather and climate
risk for organizations within the environmental and natural resource sectors
through multi-year forecasts. The proposed forecast system uses a combination of
Earth science and computer science to create a highly interpretable forecast
system that is optimizable for the needs of specific industries. These multi-
year ("sub-decadal") forecasts help renewable energy resource assessment,
hydropower applications, and the mining industries. Better forecasting can lead
to cheaper energy, more reliable long-term water supply management, and the
improved environmental sustainability of mining operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will advance development of a
sub-decadal weather and climate forecast system integrating geoscience and
machine learning. Project activities include: assessing the technical
feasibility; evaluating the computational scalability; determining the relevant
industry-specific inputs and outputs; and validating the output and
interpretability. The algorithm must scale across multiple spatial and temporal
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.