* 2112547
* Collaborative Research: Spatiotemporal observations of the demise of an ice sheet: Paleo perspectives from Baffin Bay, West Greenland.
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Anne Jennings, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 189,787.00

The Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) is shrinking today in response to the warming
atmosphere and ocean. The GIS holds enough freshwater to raise sea level by 7.4
meters (24 feet) if it melted completely. Thus, understanding how it responds to
warming is important. This project will investigate GIS vulnerability by
studying how the GIS responded to climate warming in the past. At the end of the
last ice age, about 20,000 years ago, the western GIS margin extended farther
into Baffin Bay, hundreds of kilometers west of its present position. By 10,000
years ago, the ice margin had largely retreated to within the current coastline.
It is unclear if a warming atmosphere, a warming ocean, or some combination of
the two is responsible for the retreat. Sediments studied along the West
Greenland margin as part of this project will establish regional variations in
the timing, magnitude, and rate of GIS retreat during the deglaciation. The
relative timing of GIS changes and ocean warming, recorded in the same
sediments, will improve our understanding of the behavior of large ice sheets in
the past and future. The project broader impacts include support for a
postdoctoral researcher, three graduate students, and undergraduate researchers.
In addition, the project will support production of an outreach film based on
the proposed research expedition. The project also will facilitate development
of an upper-level undergraduate course focused on the deglaciation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this goal, an oceanographic expedition will
study four West Greenland trough mouth fan systems (where the GIS deposited
large volumes of sediment when it extended offshore) using seafloor and sub-
seafloor imaging techniques and by collecting sediment cores spanning the end of
the last ice age to present. Biological, magnetic, geochemical, and physical
properties from the sediment records will be used to test the primary
hypothesis; that increasing ocean temperature at the base of marine terminating
glaciers is a major driver of ice-sheet instability. The project will establish:
1) the timing and extent of warm Atlantic water incursion along the west
Greenland margin; 2) the phasing of ice margin retreat and ocean change; and 3)
the influence of regional geology, geomorphology, and ice dynamics on ice-margin
retreat. Early career leadership (supported by senior mentors) is at the heart
of this project with three US-based assistant professors and one post-doctoral
researcher directing shipboard operations and spearheading the post-expedition
science. Half of the sea-going science party will be graduate and undergraduate
students. Acquisition of the first US-based sediment cores from Baffin Bay and
archival of the cores and data in US facilities and databases will provide
diverse high-latitude research opportunities to the NSF community, ensuring the
continuing legacy of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.