* 2112027
* STTR Phase I:  Using AI to develop a red blood cell health index for the monitoring of sickle cell disease
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Vikas Ramachandra, KOVADX INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 275,887.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to reach underserved communities and address inequities in health
care for patients with hemolytic anemias by providing fast, affordable, and
accurate diagnosis and monitoring of hemolytic anemias by combining 3D phase
imaging with deep learning. Sickle Cell Disease (“SCD”) is a global health
problem that significantly impacts the life span, quality of life, and health
outcomes of affected individuals. SCD is one of the most common hemolytic
diseases in Sub-Saharan Africa and the U.S, affecting up to 3% of the newborn
population. However, few resources and research are dedicated to improving the
diagnosis and monitoring of SCD. Individuals who lack access to screening and
testing are susceptible to an early-life mortality rate of up to 90%.
Unfortunately, those who are most likely to suffer from hemolytic diseases like
SCD are frequently underserved by advanced health care. This project may
significantly reduce the SCD burden by providing monitoring to prevent crises
that require hospitalizations and emergency care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will advance
Artificial Intelligence (AI) innovations for diagnosing red blood cell disease
with quantitative phase imaging (QPI). While QPI images can be used to diagnose
a handful of hemolytic anemias, no effort has been made to infuse it into health
care at scale. This project develops an AI system to identify RBCs in crowded
QPI images, as well as other blood cellular components, such as platelets and
white blood cells. The project will develop robust machine learning models to
learn from these data; in particular, new deep learning models, based on forms
of convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks, will provide
insight based on temporal and spatial data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.