* 2112271
* STTR Phase I: Development of a tablet to destroy viruses, bacteria, and protozoa in stored household water
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Christopher Conti, SILIVHERE TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2023
* USD 254,278.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research Phase I project will address
the provision of safe water to our global population. In high income nations,
high-quality drinking water is provided through centralized water-
treatment/distribution systems. For 2-3 billion people in lower income
countries, clean drinking water is not a guarantee. They must collect and store
household water, often in open containers without disinfectant. The consequences
of these deficiencies include the consumption of unsafe water that leads to high
rates of morbidity and mortality from water-related diseases. The World Health
Organization (WHO) has indicated that one possible solution to this problem is
to decentralize water treatment so that people treat their water right before
they consume it in their homes (e.g. point-of-use water treatment). However,
designing point-of-use water treatment technologies is a challenging problem
that requires the product to be technologically effective, simple to use,
inexpensive, and socially acceptable. This project will develop a disruptive
technology for point-of-use water treatment and will meet these rigorous design
criteria. The technology has the potential to improve water quality, human
health, and quality of life for millions of people around the world while
employing US citizens for manufacturing and sales of the
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop and test methods to
apply metallic copper and an N-halamine coating to the surface of a porous
ceramic tablet for household water purification in lower income countries. The
resulting tablet will effectively disinfect viruses, bacteria, and protozoa in
10-20 liters of stored household water for one year (over 7000 liters total)
with a cost of less than 0.3 cents per liter. Copper salt solution will be
reduced through high-temperature heating to form microscopic clusters of
metallic copper. When added to water, the copper will oxidize to release copper
ions into solution to cause pathogen disinfection. This component will be
combined with an existing technology that releases silver ions from a porous
ceramic tablet. The synergistic effects of these disinfectants may enable
1-3-star certification from the World Health
Organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.