* 2112606
* AI Institute for Intelligent CyberInfrastructure with Computational Learning in the Environment (ICICLE)
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2026
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Varun Chandola
* 10/31/2026
* USD 12,099,998.00

Although the world is witness to the tremendous successes of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) technologies in some domains, many domains have yet to reap
the benefits of AI due to the lack of easily usable AI infrastructure. The NSF
AI Institute for Intelligent Cyberinfrastructure with Computational Learning in
the Environment (ICICLE) will develop intelligent cyberinfrastructure with
transparent and high-performance execution on diverse and heterogeneous
environments. It will advance plug-and-play AI that is easy to use by scientists
across a wide range of domains, promoting the democratization of AI. ICICLE
brings together a multidisciplinary team of scientists and engineers, led by The
Ohio State University in partnership with Case Western Reserve University, IC-
FOODS, Indiana University, Iowa State University, Ohio Supercomputer Center,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, San Diego Supercomputer Center, Texas Advanced
Computing Center, University of Utah, University of California-Davis, University
of California-San Diego, University of Delaware, and University of Wisconsin-
Madison. Initially, complex societal challenges in three use-inspired scientific
domains will drive ICICLE’s research and workforce development agenda: Smart
Foodsheds, Precision Agriculture, and Animal Ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICICLE’s research and development includes: (i) Empowering
plug-and-play AI by advancing five foundational areas: knowledge graphs, model
commons, adaptive AI, federated learning, and conversational AI. (ii) Providing
a robust cyberinfrastructure capable of propelling AI-driven science (CI4AI),
solving the challenges arising from heterogeneity in applications, software, and
hardware, and disseminating the CI4AI innovations to use-inspired science
domains. (iii) Creating new AI techniques for the adaptation/optimization of
various CI components (AI4CI), enabling a virtuous cycle to advance both AI and
CI. (iv) Developing novel techniques to address cross-cutting issues including
privacy, accountability, and data integrity for CI and AI; and (v) Providing a
geographically distributed and heterogeneous system consisting of software,
data, and applications, orchestrated by a common application programming
interface and execution middleware. ICICLE’s advanced and integrated edge,
cloud, and high-performance computing hardware and software CI components
simplify the use of AI, making it easier to address new areas of inquiry. In
this way, ICICLE focuses on research in AI, innovation through AI, and
accelerates the application of AI. ICICLE is building a diverse STEM workforce
through innovative approaches to education, training, and broadening
participation in computing that ensure sustained measurable outcomes and impact
on a national scale, along the pipeline from middle/high school students to
practitioners. As a nexus of collaboration, ICICLE promotes technology transfer
to industry and other stakeholders, as well as data sharing and coordination
across other National Science Foundation AI Institutes and Federal agencies. As
a national resource for research, development, technology transfer, workforce
development, and education, ICICLE is creating a widely usable, smarter, more
robust and diverse, resilient, and effective CI4AI and AI4CI
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.