* 2112775
* Workshop: ProVis-EER: Developing Professional Vision into Empirical Practices within Engineering Education Research (EER) though Digital Apprenticeship
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Aditya Johri, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 11/30/2023
* USD 99,647.00

The preparation of a future engineering workforce depends critically on our
ability to provide excellence in training and through our efforts to train a
diverse range of stakeholders for the engineering profession. Increasingly
within the United States institutions are creating programs, courses, and
centers to support the preparation of the future engineer. This institutional
and education infrastructure depends on a better and deeper understanding of how
engineering education works best in order to support their efforts and
initiatives. This project will contribute to this mission by increasing and
improving the capacity of engineering educators to undertake research on
engineering education. Through this series of workshops newcomers to the field
will be able to learn first-hand from scholar-experts in the field. The online
nature of the workshops will ensure that a large number of participants are able
to undergo the sessions. Furthermore, the resources created as part of this
project will be available for future training purposes. Overall, this work is
crucial for the growing field of engineering education and the ability of future
engineering educators to learn from a diverse set of scholar-experts will
broaden the kinds of research that are done as well as the outcomes of the
research. This project aligns with NSF’s investment in the Research in Formation
of Engineers (RFE) program by creating better engineering education researchers
that can support the training of future engineers and who can undertake better
research for us to know how to create a more inclusive engineering workforce for
the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building capacity for engineering education
research (EER) is a core goal of NSF and organizations such as the American
Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) and the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM). Over the past decade the community has made
significant gains towards achieving this objective as evidenced by increasing
number of departments and centers directed towards engineering education across
institutions. Propagation of EER practices has largely been through face-to-face
interactions, including doctoral programs, working in research laboratories, and
workshops and tutorials at professional development meetings. These in person
engagements and events are prohibitive for many who would benefit from
developing a better understanding of how research is conducted. They also limit
new researchers in exposure to a broader diversity of views and research
practices. This proposed series of digital workshops are designed as a “swift
apprenticeship” experiences to increase the formation of EER practitioners by
creating exemplars of engineering education research practices that take the
learner through the entire lifecycle of a project and provide an avenue for
learning by example, scaffolded by experts. Experts will focus on one of their
exemplary published research papers and deconstruct/reconstruct how that
research was done and the paper produced including matters of theory, methods,
and review. The reconstruction will take place as a conversation with the PI/s
which will be captured on video and audio and drafts of papers and other
relevant artifacts will be collected and shared. It will also invite questions
from a set of novice participants and commentary from other experts to provide
another viewpoint and additional context on research practices. This project
will benefit engineering education graduate students, engineering graduate
students and faculty in other disciplines interested in engineering education
research, and postdoctoral scholars. This work will contribute to research on
engineering education, especially the use of professional vision and scaffolding
for novices, and on transfer learning for research
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.