* 2112691
* Phase Transformation and Proximity Coupling in Lateral Heterostructures of Metal Dichalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Pengpeng Zhang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 394,948.00

Two-dimensional (2D) materials are atomically thin with atoms strongly bonded
within layers but weakly between layers. This weak interlayer coupling allows
for the vertical stacking of different materials to form heterostructures with
interesting properties and applications. In contrast, a lateral heterostructure
consists of different 2D materials placed side by side with one-dimensional
boundaries with strong bonding. The difference is akin to a stack of different
plates (vertical) vs. being spread out on a table (lateral). This project will
investigate novel phenomena that arise in lateral heterostructures with exposed
boundaries on the surface. This allows for spatially resolved exploration of new
interfacial physics and the rational design of heterostructures with desired
properties. For example, the PIs have previously demonstrated that they can
convert a 2D material from a semiconductor to a topological insulator. The
latter is a state of quantum matter that behaves as an insulator in its interior
but as a conductor on its surface. Coupling a topological insulator with a
superconductor may give rise to topological superconductivity, which can be used
for quantum computers. This project also aims to providing training ground for a
competitive workforce in materials research. The PIs will strive to enhance the
diversity of this workforce by actively recruiting and mentoring female and
minority students. Research-based educational materials are to be integrated
with outreach activities to engage the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid
advances in two-dimensional (2D) materials enable the integration of atomically
thin layers with vastly different properties into heterostructures, where exotic
behaviors that are not accessible in individual layers may emerge. Most studies
of 2D heterostructures have been pursued on vertical geometries to take
advantages of van der Waals interaction for creating a passivated interface with
low density of interfacial electronic states. In contrast, lateral
heterostructures uniquely allow for the heterointerfaces, which are typically
buried in the bulk, to be directly exposed on surface for unravelling boundary-
induced behaviors by scanning probe techniques. The PI aims to explore the
versatility of phase transformation scheme empowered by the core-shell lateral
architecture and apply the proximity studies to transition metal dichalcogenides
(TMDCs) with correlated electronic behaviors. The local perturbations associated
with the lateral boundary could provide the knob to tune the interactions and
thus facilitate the understanding of collective electronic states as well as
their interplay in the monolayer regime. This research also aims to address the
feasibility of applying lateral heterostructures to induce topological
superconductivity on the edge of 2D topological insulators. It sheds light on
the investigation of Majorana physics using lateral templates of 2D materials,
holding potential to implement topological qubits in fault-tolerant quantum
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.