* 2112725
* Gravity, Holography and Spacetime
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Elena Caceres, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 157,361.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Elena Caceres at The
University of Texas at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum mechanics is a
cornerstone of modern physics; it describes how the subatomic world works, and
experiments have verified the accuracy of its predictions for more than a
century. One fascinating phenomenon predicted by quantum mechanics is "quantum
entanglement". Entanglement occurs when initially independent systems interact
and separate. After interacting, the systems cannot be described independently
even if they are very far apart; they have become entangled. In the last decade,
physicists have discovered a surprising connection between quantum entanglement
--- an intrinsically subatomic phenomenon --- and the geometry of space and
time. This discovery points to the possibility that space and time emerge from
quantum mechanics and is one of the most significant theoretical developments of
the last decade. Research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in a fundamental direction: understanding the
microscopic nature of space and time. Many foundational questions in this area
are still unanswered. Professor Caceres’ research aims to contribute to our
understanding of how to reconstruct space and time from quantum mechanics. Her
research will use a two-pronged approach: 1) studying a specific formulation of
entanglement known as “bit threads”; and 2) investigating a class of promising
quantum systems, known as “sparse SYK models.” This project will also have
significant broader impacts. Professor Caceres will involve graduate students
and postdocs in her research, contributing to their scientific training. She
will also develop a mentoring program for minority undergraduate students and
focus her outreach efforts on disadvantaged communities and underrepresented
groups in physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, one of Professor
Caceres’ goals is to create a framework for metric reconstruction using bit
threads. She plans to study bit threads in time-dependent backgrounds,
investigate bit threads in states with entanglement shadows, and work towards
obtaining the full non-linear Einstein’s equations from a bit thread
construction. Another thrust of this project is the study of sparse SYK. More
concretely, Professor Caceres will investigate two coupled sparse SYKs, the
degree of sparseness for which the two coupled sparse SYKs display features
consistent with a traversable wormhole and a teleportation protocol in this
model. The results will establish to what extent sparse SYKs are good quantum
gravity models and can lead to a wealth of computationally efficient quantum
models with black hole dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.