* 2112550
* Phase II CREST Center for Interface Design and Engineered Assembly of Low-dimensional Systems (IDEALS II)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Maria Tamargo, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2026
* USD 5,100,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and
Technology (CREST) program supports the enhancement of research capabilities of
minority-serving institutions through the establishment of centers that
effectively integrate education and research. CREST promotes the development of
new knowledge, enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty,
and an expanded presence of students historically underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines. With National Science
Foundation support, CUNY City College will continue development of its Phase II
Center for Interface Design and Engineered Assembly of Low-dimensional Systems
(IDEALS II). Building upon the salient accomplishments of Phase I IDEALS (IDEALS
I), IDEALS II research intends to address the need to strengthen the nation’s
leadership in materials capabilities in the frontier areas of quantum materials,
bioinspired reconfigurable materials, and photonic materials and technologies
that address critical national needs, elevating CCNY as a premier research
institution in these fields. Phase II Center investigators and students will
pursue frontier research and education transformative goals through extending
collaborations, created a multifaced cutting-edge materials research program,
fully integrate research and education to enhance student experience and train
tomorrow’s leaders, and introduce the City College New York Presidential
Postdoctoral Fellowship Program to enhance faculty diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research thrusts of the NSF Phase II CREST Center for
Interface Design and Engineered Assembly of Low-dimensional Systems (IDEALS II)
at the City College of New York (CCNY), encompass the frontier areas of quantum
materials, bioinspired reconfigurable materials and photonic phenomena to
address energy, health, and environmental needs. The multi-disciplinary,
collaborative research activities are organized into three thematic Subprojects.
Subproject 1, entitled, Emergent Quantum Materials and Functions, will focus on
materials science and engineering of two-dimensional systems, such as, surfaces
and interfaces where band topology and strong electron correlations lead to new
functions and quantum phenomena for the next-generation quantum technologies.
Zero-dimensional systems, such as, quantum dots and rare-earth ions in host
matrices will be utilized as platforms for implementing spin qubits that
circumvent the limitations of current schemes of quantum computation. Subproject
2, Bio-inspired, Re-configurable Materials to Scale, focuses on scalability of
reconfigurable materials (materials that change their properties by adapting to
an external stimulus) developed in Phase I and further explores their specific
applications in light harvesting, medical diagnostics and cancer therapy as well
as sustainability and environmental rehabilitation. Subproject 3, Frontiers of
Photonic Materials, Phenomena and Devices will explore emerging basic ideas,
synthesize new materials (such as, hybrid semiconductor heterostructures,
topological nanostructures) with unprecedented functionalities, investigate
salient properties of the engineered materials, design and test devices (light
sources, detectors and quantum sensors) based on promising materials, and
provide feedback for materials and device design criteria. The seed project
approach will be used as a mechanism for the nucleation of new ideas and
exploration of areas of opportunity and growth. An integrated research and
education thrust, will continue to apply the proven interventions developed and
implemented in IDEALS I, and introduce new ones, to help produce a talented,
inclusive and diverse work force capable of leading the materials research and
development endeavors in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.