* 2112033
* STTR Phase I:  Broad Spectrum Antimicrobial Surface Coating (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Dana Totir, NANOIONIX, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to minimize the number of hospital-associated
infections which contribute to almost 100,000 deaths each year in the US at an
annual cost exceeding $30 B. Reducing the surface-borne transmission of
pathogens can limit the spread of pathogenic diseases, thus minimizing
transmission from contaminated surfaces in both public and healthcare settings
is of utmost importance. Disinfectants can inactivate pathogens but require an
active engagement that places undue burden on personnel and the environment;
furthermore, the success rate varies, and the results do not persist. Most
current antimicrobial materials are expensive, toxic to humans and the
environment, and show minimal viral inactivation. Self-decontaminating surfaces
provide a much-needed solution to these limitations, especially in areas with
high-touch surfaces and large population flow. Customers, from hardware and
elevator manufacturers to hospitals and airlines, will benefit from an
effective, low-cost, environmentally sound solution to decontamination and
customer safety for conditions such as the current COVID-19 pandemic. This
project has potential impact for the $8 B antimicrobial coatings market, while
delivering improved clinical outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I
project proposes to demonstrate the efficacy of a breakthrough, permanent
ceramic coating technology against both viruses and bacteria. A pure ceramic
coating that exceeds the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) requirements
will be synthesized and deposited on relevant substrates. The key to reaching
this goal is gaining an understanding of the mechanism of microbial inactivation
– believed to be the spontaneous generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) on
the surface of the ceramic – and how to maximize them in a practical coating.
Spectroscopic techniques will be used to rapidly assess the number and type of
ROS generated and thus the efficacy of the materials. Optimization will occur
through the addition/substitution of targeted alkali, alkaline earth,
transition, and/or main-group metals to control the lattice of the material and
lock-in specific valence states to optimize the ability of the ceramic to
generate large numbers of the appropriate reactive oxygen species. Tests will be
performed against both viral and bacterial challenges to correlate the results
of the rapid screening assessment with antimicrobial effectiveness. Pure ceramic
thin films will be deposited, and the antimicrobial efficacy of these films
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.