* 2112890
* Pushing the Boundaries of Classical and Quantum Information Processing Toward Enhanced Security and Energy-Efficient Reliability
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dakshita Khurana, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,912.00

This research aims to disrupt two types of boundaries that often emerge within
classical and quantum information science. The first type of boundary refers to
certain conceptual roadblocks that prevent a translation of results and
scientific ideas between the domains of classical and quantum information
theory. In this project, three topics are identified that have promise for a
cross-fertilization and unified analysis across the classical-quantum divide.
Specifically, the PIs bring expertise from both classical and quantum
backgrounds to investigate the problems of multi-party correlation measures,
cryptographic protocols, and energy-efficient error correction. The results
obtained will have direct relevance to the development of technologies in the
information-security and energy sectors. The second type of boundary challenged
by this work refers to barriers frequently encountered by underrepresented
populations entering STEM fields. This project has plans to initiate a summer
internship program between the PIs at the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign and historically black college and universities
(HBCUs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a technical level, this research will develop
new measures of private correlations and quantum with clear operational
meanings. Building on insights from the subject of quantum resource theories, a
resource theory of secret sharing will be constructed for both classical and
quantum states, and the utility of a given state for secret sharing will be
quantified. Additionally, fundamental questions in the study of classical and
quantum cryptography will be addressed. The existence of one-way functions is
known to be the weakest assumption necessary for many cryptographic tasks in the
classical setting, and the proposed research will look for the analogous minimal
quantum assumption. A significant objective will be to understand the conditions
in which one type of secure quantum cryptographic functionality can be used to
simulate another. As a complement to the work on cryptography, this research
will investigate circuit complexity and the energy limits of reliable quantum
information processing. Analysis techniques from circuit complexity, information
theory, thermodynamics, and fault-tolerant computing will be used to understand
how resources like area and energy are constrained in a given computational
process. As one application, an energy perspective on superquantum violations of
the CHSH inequality will be taken for the first time. This work will also
introduce the concept of quantum creativity and bring artificial intelligence
into quantum computing to support human creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.