* 2112968
* Collaborative Research: Creating mechanisms to make integrative structures of large macromolecular assemblies available from the Protein Data Bank
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Carl Kesselman, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 260,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop the necessary infrastructure to make the
integrative structures of biomolecular systems available from the Protein Data
Bank (PDB). PDB is the single global repository for three-dimensional structures
of biological macromolecules and their complexes. It is used by millions of
scientists and educators worldwide. This project will provide open access to
integrative structures through the PDB, which will greatly enhance the
understanding of cellular and molecular biology and speed the progress of
biomedical and biotechnology research. The project is central to the creation of
an interoperating network of structural biology resources that will provide
seamless access to research data and promote efficient data sharing. This work
will significantly advance biological research by making structures of complex
macromolecular assemblies easily accessible to everyone through the
PDB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasingly, structures of many complex biological
assemblies are determined using integrative approaches, in which data from
multiple experimental methods are combined. The PDB archives structures
determined using single methods and needs to be expanded to handle these
integrative structures. In the last three years, a standalone prototype system,
called PDB-Dev, has been developed for archiving integrative structures and
making them publicly available. The current project will integrate the PDB-Dev
system with the PDB data processing pipeline and ensure that the integrative
structures are made available from the PDB according to the FAIR (Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) principles. Integration of PDB-Dev with
the PDB will enable the broad and growing community of PDB users to have access
to an even richer and more diverse set of curated structural models. The project
will create a rigorous standardized process for deposition, curation,
validation, archival, and dissemination of integrative structures through the
PDB. This functionality will facilitate tackling increasingly more challenging
structure determination problems such as elucidation of the three-dimensional
structures of complete genomes and even the creation of a spatiotemporal model
of an entire cell. The results of the project can be accessed from the PDB-Dev
website: https://pdb-dev.wwpdb.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.