* 2112773
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Predictive Coding Network for Human Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Zhongming Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 968,540.00

This project aims to advance scientific knowledge about human vision and use
neuroscience to enhance artificial intelligence for computer vision. Vision is
central to how humans see and explore the world. About a dozen brain regions
work together to process visual information within a fraction of a second. It is
hypothesized that these brain regions actively predict one's visual surroundings
and use errors of prediction to update their internal representations and guide
actions. However, it is not clear how the brain performs computations for
recognition and prediction, and whether it is possible for a machine to mimic
the brain and recognize and predict visual input in complex, noisy, and
uncertain circumstances. This project will address these questions from
computational, psychological, and neuroscientific perspectives and deliver new
models, data, and tools that promote the synergy between artificial intelligence
and neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will design a model based
on predictive coding in the brain, and test its ability to perform computer
vision tasks and explain human behaviors and brain responses to naturalistic
visual stimuli. The investigators will first develop a deep neural network
referred to as the predictive coding network. Unlike existing feedforward neural
networks, the currently predominant vision models, the predictive coding network
has several defining features relevant to neural processing in the brain. It is
bi-directional, processing information both bottom-up and top-down. It is
recurrent, utilizing the same architecture for dynamic computation. It is
parallel, allowing information processing to occur in parallel both within and
across different layers. It is both discriminative and generative, reconciling
image recognition and synthesis in a single framework. The predictive coding
network will be evaluated against benchmark data sets. It is hypothesized to
reach competitive performance with many fewer parameters than the state of the
art. Then, the investigators will test the model's behaviors given naturalistic
images degraded in various ways and/or presented for various durations. It is
hypothesized that the model will be more robust and accurate after running for
increasingly longer times and reach a time-accuracy tradeoff like human
perception under similar conditions. To test this hypothesis, the investigators
will perform human behavioral experiments and compare the model's behaviors
against human behaviors. Further, the investigators will test the model's
ability to explain brain responses to naturalistic images and videos, measured
with functional magnetic resonance imaging and intracranial
electroencephalography. The model is hypothesized to be able to predict the
brain's dynamic activity and representation given naturalistic stimuli. The
successful completion of this project is expected to deliver a brain-inspired
vision model learnable and computable end-to-end. This model will empower
machines with adaptive and robust vision and provide a tool for understanding
the computational basis of biological vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.