* 2112099
* SBIR Phase I:  A Blockchain-Driven, Distributed Memory, Computational Platform for Industrial Analytics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Nagi Gebraeel, BLOCKALYTICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2023
* USD 255,837.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a novel, predictive analytics
technology for industrial enterprises that require low-latency analytics
insights, i.e., companies that cannot afford the kind of delayed insights that
are widely present in almost all Cloud-based analytics solutions. Large
manufacturing and energy enterprises are comprised of multiple plants sites
spread across different geographical locations. These plants contain critical
processes and equipment that are monitored using sensors and Internet of Things
(IoT) devices. Predictive analytics, a key component in digital transformation,
targets the analysis of large volumes of industrial data to generate insights to
improve the efficiency of industrial operations, optimize processes, and reduce
the life cycle costs of critical equipment and machinery. The prevailing
solutions in todayâ€™s market rely on using the Cloud to consolidate data, perform
analytics, and extract valuable insights. This process creates significant
delays for many industrial processes that require immediate insights into their
critical operations. The process is also not suitable for companies that have
heightened security and privacy protocols (such as nuclear plants and defense
manufacturing). The company seeks to enable companies to conduct predictive
analytics on geographically distributed data silos without the need to move data
from its location, thus reducing decision latency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a technology stack that leverages the
blockchain to train advanced analytic algorithms and Machine Learning models
across data silos in different locations without relying on the Cloud or any
corporate server. Specifically, the project targets the innovative integration
of the blockchain Smart Contracts with distributed memory programming frameworks
like the Message Passing Interface (MPI). This integration raises several
interesting research challenges one of which requires designing basic primitives
similar in functionality to a Map-Reduce framework for the blockchain. The
second research component revolves around the development of novel algorithmic
decomposition schemes for popular Machine Learning algorithms and artificial
intelligence (AI) models to facilitate their training in a decentralized manner
using the blockchain. If successful, this technology may provide analytic
insights faster than the Cloud. It may also significantly reduce the cost and
labor associated with implementing and deploying industrial analytics. Data
science teams will be provided with the agility and flexibility to modify and
redeploy algorithms without having to rebuild and redesign data pipeline
infrastructure to a centralized server.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.