* 2112828
* Collaborative Research: Resource-Constrained Optimal Learning Framework for Post-Seismic Regional Building Damage Inference
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ilya Ryzhov, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2024
* USD 161,687.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge related to
resource allocation for post-seismic building damage assessment, promoting the
progress of science and preserving the national welfare. During emergency relief
operations after an earthquake or other disaster, it is critical to accurately
assess the infrastructural damage across the impacted region. Critical resources
must be allocated quickly, before labor-intensive reconnaissance surveys are
able to inspect each building. Thus, certain inspections should be prioritized
in order to deliver an optimal damage assessment survey in time to benefit
first-response relief efforts. This award supports fundamental research to
develop a mathematical modeling framework to guide inspection teams through
post-seismic reconnaissance missions. This new approach will holistically
identify buildings to be prioritized for inspection and design inspection
schedules to efficiently visit these buildings with limited time and inspection
crew members. Results from this research will expedite regional hazard damage
assessment, which will improve disaster management and thereby help save human
lives, ensure ethical resource allocation, and preserve the welfare of our
society. The project will prepare future civil engineers, mathematicians and
statisticians with multi-disciplinary knowledge, and will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in research which positively impact
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research integrates concepts
from statistical and optimal learning with models for routing and scheduling.
These two aspects have been extensively studied separately, but never jointly.
This knowledge gap poses a serious challenge to the guidance of inspection
teams, which collect information in the field subject to resource constraints.
The research team will develop an integrated modeling framework which bridges
optimal learning and combinatorial optimization to identify inspection routes
and schedules that maximize the predictive power of machine learning models for
post-seismic building damage assessment. The new methodology will be validated
on real-world benchmarks, including data from the 2011 Chile and 2015 Nepal
earthquakes, as well as a regional earthquake simulation testbed for the San
Francisco Bay. The results will improve crisis management, while also providing
new insights into other domains (such as health and disease control) that face a
tight tradeoff between data expense and information
gain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.