* 2112345
* STTR Phase I: A DLT Machine Learning Platform for Blockchain Warehousing
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,11/30/2022
* Mohammad Sadoghi, MOKA BLOX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2022
* USD 255,916.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project improves the use of large-scale databases, data
warehouses, and the software that used to commercially data-mine these
resources. In the era of big data, many applications, such as machine learning
and artificial intelligence, critically rely on data functionalities including
efficiency, interoperability, and analysis. However, their data subsystems are
challenged to meet these needs due to multiple technical limitations, such as
centralized storage, homogeneous data formats, and tightly coupled workflows.
This STTR project will develop a new framework to overcome these limitations to
improve big data applications in various scientific fields, such as biological
sciences, astronomy, and computational chemistry. At the end of this Phase I
project, the requisite knowledge and foundational materials for developing a
blockchain-based data warehousing middleware will be
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to advance the
specific knowledge and commercialization of DLTs (Distributed Ledger
Technologies) and blockchains by creating novel and innovative environments for
further development for DLTs and blockchains as a "virtuous cycle", starting
with bottlenecks identified in modern data warehouses. The DLT tool developed
here advances blockchain protocols, specifically for removing quadratic and
speculative costs from orthodox protocol-based approaches to blockchains on
conventional hardware and instituting linearizable and constant costs with other
innovative programming methods (e.g., probabilistic pruning). New statistical,
topological, and computational approaches will be researched and developed for
these purposes, including for development of techniques applicable for machine
learning, artificial intelligence, peta-scale and exa-scale computing, advanced
scientific computing, and pedagogical academic development of future
generations. The expected results include a new set of protocols and a unified
tool for integrating data types and multiple networks into conventional data
warehouses, especially for advancement of data warehouses struggling to keep
pace with new blockchain data, metadata, and real-time
analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.