* 2112088
* SBIR Phase I:  Intelligent Language Learning Environment
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,10/31/2023
* William Jordan-Cooley, PANGEA CHAT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will improve the current US deficiency in
foreign language skills and bring critical innovations to the $13 billion global
online language learning market. Current language learning methods focus on rote
memorization and not nearly enough on using the language. Experiential learning
opportunities in which students have free-flowing conversations driven by
interests are often not introduced until the third or fourth semester of
language study. The result is that American students graduate with little
ability or motivation to actually use a foreign language and maintain any degree
of language fluency. Using novel machine learning technologies and game design,
this project will let students learn a language while texting with their friends
and help teachers facilitate conversation-based learning in their classrooms.
The project will offer opportunities for students in classes located in the US
to interact with students in other countries around the globe, turning textbook
abstractions into real people, culture, and language. Ultimately, these machine
learning solutions enable a platform that the 1.2 billion individuals learning
language worldwide can use to supplement textbook instruction with experiential
learning for greater long-term fluency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a state-of-the-art
machine learning solution to address critical challenges in the implementation
of&lt;br/&gt;conversation-based language learning. Learning languages through
conversation has been shown by previous research to be engaging and effective.
However, beginners are often&lt;br/&gt;uncomfortable in the early days because
they arenâ€™t confident in expressing themselves. Educators can provide the needed
support, but it is difficult for them to give every
student&lt;br/&gt;personalized tutelage. This project will jumpstart these
initial conversations with the help of in-chat translation, dictionaries, and
grammar checking. To cement learning, the project will generate practice
activities directly from chats and deliver the activities in the context of
those authentic text conversations. This project will analyze the text chats and
form hypotheses about student strengths and weaknesses. The system will then
test these hypotheses with assessments automatically generated from the same
text chats. The Phase I technical objectives are to 1) automatically identify
examples of learning objectives in student text 2) align system-generated and
human-authored assessment activities and 3) predict student scores on practice
activities with increasing accuracy. Over time, the system will understand
student needs to maximize learning and engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.