* 2112262
* SBIR Phase I:  Blockchain for Supply Chain
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Srinivasan Sriram, SKUCHAIN, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2023
* USD 255,780.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to facilitate faster and safer transactions
for manufactured goods. Current Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) solutions are
based on relatively old technology. The proposed project develops a new platform
for the supply chain to operate efficiently using blockchain technology for a
scalable, secure, and interoperable solution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SBIR
Phase I project addresses three principal technical challenges of a blockchain
commercial solution, namely scalability, security and interoperability. For
scalability, the core technical requirement is to provision, maintain and
periodically rotate hierarchical and deterministic public/ private key-pairs
used to sign transactions and usable by non-technical users. Security research
will focus on providing each organization/ participant the ability to provide
granular access to field-level data to others in the ecosystem. The project will
use an Elliptic-Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) protocol to encrypt each field with
its own key-pair. The system will use a blockchain smart contract to provide
trustable decryption based on access control policies set by the submitter. The
project’s interoperability will focus on the ability to share data between
different blockchain networks as well as between traditional ERP systems and a
blockchain network by developing an interoperability protocol that securely
transfers the record and ensures that double-spend type attacks are not
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.