* 2112056
* Collaborative Research: PlantSynBio: Identification and Design of Transcriptional Activation Domains Across Plant Species
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Lucia Strader, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 713,476.00

Every plant begins life as a seed with one cell and one genome. In order for a
plant to grow, the cells must divide and turn into different kinds of cells by
turning on different genes. Leaf cells turn on leaf genes; root cells turn on
root genes. This process of turning genes on and off requires specialized
proteins called transcription factors. Transcription factors also allow plants
to turn genes on or off to respond to stresses like drought or pests and
pathogens. Transcription factors turn genes on using specialized regions called
“activation domains.” The first part of this project will use technologies we
developed to identify activation domains on all the transcription factors of one
widely studied plant species, Arabidopsis. The data we collect will power our
computational models for predicting activation domains in other plants. The
final portion of this project will build synthetic transcription factors that
can be used to engineer gene regulation in other plants. This research will
create useful and powerful tools for plant biologists and plant breeders. This
collaboration between three research teams creates a unique interdisciplinary
training environment for undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
research fellows. Our team is committed to building a supportive environment
that fosters Equity, Diversity and Inclusion. The three PIs come from
backgrounds that have been traditionally excluded from science. Two of the PIs
are building on the success of their NSF CAREER awards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
plants, transcription factors control gene regulatory programs for development,
growth and stress responses. Transcription factors have two functions: 1) to
bind DNA sequences in the genome directly with a DNA binding domain (DBD) or
through a partner DBD-containing protein and 2) to recruit transcriptional
machinery. DBDs have been well characterized and can be predicted directly from
amino acid sequence. In contrast, the regions of transcription factors that bind
coactivator complexes, activation domains, remain poorly characterized and
cannot be predicted from amino acid sequence. For example, in Arabidopsis, there
are 1,717 transcription factors, but only 8 known activation domains. As a
consequence, when a new genome is sequenced, models for predicting DBDs can
identify putative transcription factors, but there are no analogous models for
predicting if these transcription factors are activators or repressors. This
project will use high throughput screening methods to identify activation
domains on all Arabidopsis transcription factors. These data will train deep
learning neural networks to predict activation domains from amino acid sequence
and predict activation domains in other diverse plant species. The final portion
of this project will create and validate synthetic transcription factors for
engineering gene regulation in plants. These tools will expand the synthetic
biology toolbox for targeted hypothesis testing of metabolic processes,
engineering regulatory networks, advancing agriculture and contributing to
solutions that could address environmental problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award was co-funded by the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.