* 2112885
* I-Corps:  A Low-Cost Structured Light Monitoring System for Additive Manufacturing Processes
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Michael Todd, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a structured light optical monitoring system for metal additive
manufacturing (MAM). Metal additive manufacturing (MAM) is a rapidly expanding
industry, impacting aerospace, energy, and medical industries, among others.
However, the lack of in-process monitoring for part quality is recognized as a
hindrance to rapid, wide-scale industry adoption. The monitoring system under
development is designed to be implemented within the MAM process to measure the
quality of parts and detect defects in an in-process fashion. The proposed
technology may allow for part qualification and increased part output while
reducing the cost of the fabrication process and increasing US manufacturing
competitiveness. In addition, the proposed technology may reduce material waste
when compared to traditional subtractive techniques. The goal of this technology
is to reduce the per-part cost of MAM by allowing immediate cancellation of
builds that include defective parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a structured light monitoring system (SLMS) for
metal additive manufacturing (MAM). SLMS uses a projector and a camera to
quickly measure the three-dimensional height of multiple features of a part
during its fabrication in MAM settings. Dimensional results from the SLMS are
compared against values predefined by technicians to determine if the part is
within defect tolerance. A patented measurement model is included to gauge the
uncertainty of each measurement point to further bolster the statistical part
health monitoring method. Initial results show that the SLMS is capable of
resolving porosity defects as small as 25 microns, and powder deposition defects
as small as 80 microns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.