* 2112642
* Large wood in low-gradient floodplain rivers: Spatial distribution, physical controls, and geomorphic effects
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Sarah Praskievicz, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 05/31/2024
* USD 353,216.00

This project will advance understanding of the dynamics of large wood (LW) in
Coastal Plain rivers of the Southeastern US. LW (logs within rivers) provides
many benefits, affecting the transport of sediment, the form of river channels,
and the functioning of aquatic ecosystems. Most previous research on LW has been
conducted in small streams, often in mountainous regions, or in gravel-bedded
rivers. This project will examine the distribution, mobility, and effects of LW
in relatively large, gently sloped, and fine-bedded rivers of the Coastal Plain.
The results will have implications for forest and river management in this
region, where LW was once abundant but has been reduced because of human
activities. The project will also provide benefits in terms of student training
and in educating the public about the benefits of LW through a new citizen-
science initiative that will be implemented in collaboration with Riverkeeper
organizations across North Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
seeks to characterize the spatial distribution of large wood (LW) in low-
gradient floodplain rivers, the physical controls on LW recruitment and
transport, and the effects of LW on channel process and form. LW (generally
defined as pieces of wood at least 1 m in length and 10 cm in diameter, located
in the active channel) has long been recognized as a significant driver of
physical and ecological processes in river systems. Nevertheless, most knowledge
of LW in rivers is based on studies of small to medium-sized rivers in steep
headwater catchments, such as in the mountains of the western United States.
There is therefore a need for a systematic analysis of LW dynamics and their
influence on geomorphic processes in low-gradient floodplain rivers. The
research will investigate the spatial distribution of LW at reach and regional
scales through field measurements and remote sensing, the physical controls on
LW recruitment through statistical modeling, LW transport through episodic and
continuous tracking, and the effects of LW on channel process and form and the
physical drivers of those effects through physically based modeling. The results
will contribute to the understanding of coupled physical and ecological dynamics
in river systems. Broader impacts include training of students at a Minority
Serving Institution, dissemination of research results to state land- and water-
management agencies, and a new citizen-science initiative to collect data on LW
in rivers and to educate the public about the benefits of
LW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.