* 2112460
* Topics in Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Marc Sher, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 630,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Christopher Carone and
Marc Sher at the College of William &amp; Mary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
goal of elementary particle physics is to understand the spectrum of elementary
particles as well as their fundamental interactions. This is the central focus
of the work of Professors Carone and Sher, who construct and study theories that
address some of the most profound unsolved mysteries in particle physics. These
theories often lead to testable predictions in experiments like the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC), which was built in order to search for undiscovered particles
and to study their properties. The LHC is best known for the discovery of the
Higgs particle whose existence is related to the origin of the masses of the
other known elementary particles. The LHC operates at the frontier of
experimentally accessible energies. The theoretical work of Professors Carone
and Sher is also relevant at lower-energy experiments, such as neutrino
experiments and precise measurements of the properties of muons (elementary
particles which act as heavier versions of the electron). Research in these
areas advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one
of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new
particles and new physical laws. In their research, Professors Carone and Sher
will explore several new theories that are experimentally testable. These
include theories in which the observed Higgs boson is accompanied by additional
Higgs bosons, leading to effects that may be discerned in LHC experiments and in
precision tests of the muon properties. These also include theories that explain
the observed structure of the masses of the elementary particles through
symmetries, as well as theories which provide a new description of the nature of
gravity. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts.
Professors Carone and Sher will provide critical training for both undergraduate
and graduate students beginning research in a technical field, giving them
skills that translate to the broader technical workforce. They will also
continue presenting public lectures on their research results, giving interviews
about new results to interested media, and promoting high-energy physics in the
southeastern United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professors
Carone and Sher will study the consequences of asymptotic safety in flavor
models based on the Froggatt-Nielsen mechanism and they will explore whether the
requirement that couplings evolve to nontrivial ultraviolet fixed points leads
to interesting constraints on the structure and parameter space of these
theories. They will consider the problem of axion quality in flavorful axion
models, exploring whether axion compositeness can address this problem and
whether interesting composite flavorful axion models can be found using the
AdS/CFT correspondence and SUSY dualities. They will study two-Higgs models in
which vector-like leptons can solve the discrepancy with the muon magnetic
dipole moment. In addition, they will study models in which electromagnetism is
broken at high energies and study the electroweak phase transition. Finally,
Professor Carone will study nonlocal gravity models in hopes of improving their
high-energy behavior while Professor Sher will examine the possibility that
matter oscillations of solar neutrinos in the Moon can be detected either during
eclipses or by an orbiting neutrino detector. This neutrino tomography could
also lead to the first experimental studies of the interior of
Jupiter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.