* 2112554
* CREST Center for Advancement toward Sustainable Urban Systems
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Arturo Pacheco-Vega, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2027
* USD 4,100,000.00

Center for Advancement toward Sustainable Urban Systems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and
Technology (CREST) program supports the enhancement of research capabilities of
minority-serving institutions through the establishment of centers that
effectively integrate education and research. CREST promotes the development of
new knowledge, enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty,
and an expanded presence of students historically underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines. With National Science
Foundation support, California State University Los Angeles (Cal State LA)
establishes the Center for Advancement toward Sustainable Urban Systems
(CATSUS). Its goals are to: (1) advance novel and transformative research
focused on issues related to the generation, supply, consumption, protection and
revitalization of energy and water systems within the framework of urban
environments, (2) increase the research capacity of Cal State LA, and (3)
develop highly-effective undergraduate and graduate level research education
curriculum, training and opportunities in STEM fields for underrepresented
minority groups at Cal State LA. Research interests in sustainable urban systems
stem from the fact that energy consumption in urban areas is responsible for 70%
of greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, although urban areas cover only 3-4%
of the planet’s surface area, they affect 41% of watersheds globally. CATSUS
will integrate research findings into undergraduate and Master’s level
engineering education, K-12 and community college outreach, and policy-informing
components, while creating pathways towards doctorate and postdoctoral research
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research thrusts aim to advance knowledge
in the areas of physics, chemistry, engineering, materials science, experimental
techniques, and modeling methodologies. Research outcomes from the thrust areas
will be transformative, addressing both fundamental and applied questions
relating to sustainability of urban energy and water resources. The thrust area
of Energy Systems and Management in Buildings will (1) develop new thermal
management strategies in buildings and photovoltaic devices, and (2) advance
knowledge regarding urban bio-derived fuels and grid-scale energy storage
systems. The second thrust area, Advanced Materials for Energy and Water
Applications, will develop/design new materials for (1) highly efficient
photovoltaics, and (2) water treatment including wastewater remediation and
seawater desalination. The third thrust area, Resilience of Urban Water Bodies,
will develop (1) novel and effective water resource and sediment management
strategies, and (2) novel experimental approaches to ascertain the long-term
impacts of wildfires and microplastics on urban watershed water storage and
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.