* 2112533
* AI Institute for Advances in Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Dorit Hochbaum, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2026
* USD 11,536,570.00

This NSF Artificial Intelligence (AI) Research Institute for Advances in
Optimization aims at delivering a paradigm shift in automated decision-making at
massive scales by fusing AI and Mathematical Optimization (MO) to achieve
breakthroughs that neither field can achieve independently. The Institute is
driven by societal challenges in energy, logistics and supply chains, resilience
and sustainability, and circuit design and control. In particular, the Institute
will help deliver the next generation of control and optimization algorithms for
operating electric grids with distributed generation and demand response, and
for planning and scheduling large-scale, green, and resilient supply chains. The
Institute will also pioneer novel AI&amp;MO methods for designing new mixed-
signal integrated circuits, dramatically reducing development time, and for
operating sustainable urban environments. To address the widening gap in job
opportunities, the Institute will deliver an innovative longitudinal education
and workforce development program with an initial focus on historically black
high schools and colleges in Georgia, as well as Hispanic-serving high-schools
and colleges in California. The program is organized along “pathways for AI in
engineering” and seeks long-term partnerships with high schools and community
colleges to transform AI education and research for underserved students. These
pathways will bring a step change to existing programs and teach AI&amp;MO in
the context of engineering disciplines and societal challenges. The Institute
will develop internship programs with national laboratories and industrial
partners, and build a strong, welcoming, and inclusive community where social
mobility opportunities and the societal impact of AI technologies will be
highlighted. The Institute assembles a multi-disciplinary team in artificial
intelligence and optimization and domain experts in the end-use cases, bringing
together the Georgia Institute of Technology, the University of California at
Berkeley, the University of Southern California, Clark Atlanta University,
Spelman College, and the University of Texas at
Arlington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To transform decision-making at massive scales,
the Institute moves from optimization solutions to intelligent agents that
predict and quantify uncertainty, reason and optimize, learn continuously, and
coordinate and collaborate. It unifies the data-driven and model-driven
approaches at the core of AI and Operations Research (OR). Its methodology
thrusts include a new generation of hybrid optimization solvers that learn to
optimize, end-to-end learning and optimization to tightly integrate forecasting
and decision making, and novel machine-learning methods based on combinatorial
optimization. To learn and optimize at massive scales, the Institute will
contribute innovations in compact representations, data compression, and
probabilistic modeling. To enable safe and scalable decision-making in uncertain
and multi-agent environments that often arise in engineering disciplines, the
Institute will design new methods in reinforcement learning, decentralized
optimization, and data-driven optimization at massive scales. Importantly, to
ensure that these scientific advances serve the interests of society, a
transversal thrust will integrate ethics and values in complex systems design
from inception through design and operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.