* 2112562
* AI Institute for Edge Computing Leveraging Next Generation Networks (Athena)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Suman Banerjee, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 10,300,000.00

The National AI Institute, named Athena, seeks to kindle and fuel a
transformation in modern edge computing by leveraging next generation networks.
Led by Duke University, Athena taps the ongoing revolution in Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and brings together a multidisciplinary team from seven
universities: Duke University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, North
Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Princeton University,
University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and Yale
University. Athena organizes its research activities under four interrelated
thrusts - AI, Computer Systems, Networking, and Services - which constitute an
ambitious and comprehensive research agenda. It will develop AI-driven, next
generation technologies for edge computing and new algorithmic and practical
foundations of AI. Athena will evaluate the research outcomes through a
combination of analytical, experimental, and empirical instruments, especially
with target use-inspired research. Athena is committed to a robust and
comprehensive suite of educational and workforce development endeavors alongside
its collaboration and knowledge transfer efforts with external stakeholders that
include both industry and community partnerships.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Athena
aims at scientific contributions in both edge computing and AI. These include
(i) edge networking mechanisms across the stack by leveraging a data-driven, AI-
based approach; (ii) systems support for efficient and reliable AI across the
edge-enhanced mobile networks; (iii) novel practical and algorithmic foundations
of AI to ensure the new functionalities, efficiency, scalability, security,
privacy, and fairness of the AI solutions adopted in these next-generation
networks; and (iv) novel services and applications, focused on diverse cyber-
physical systems that leverage the innovations of the other thrusts. Athena’s
research outcomes will benefit the network and computer industries at large.
This national institute will work closely with external collaborators to
translate research outcomes to industrial practice and policymaking. The
educational and outreach activities of Athena will empower students and postdocs
to develop their interests, build skills, and acquire knowledge about AI and
computer and network systems through research experiences, industry internships,
and community engagements. The Inclusive AI Initiative – one of Athena’s
innovations in education and workforce development - will strengthen the ethical
AI competencies of all Athena members to better promote and be aware of equity
and fairness in their research and the communities impacted by the institute’s
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.