* 2112956
* GOALI: Structure-Property-Processing Relationships of Concentrated Surfactant Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kendra Erk, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 312,283.00

The goal of this project is to determine how concentrated surfactant-based
solutions are affected by common chemical additives and manufacturing processes.
Concentrated surfactant solutions are used to formulate detergent-based products
for cleaning, laundry, and other personal care. A better understanding of the
solution’s structure-property-processing relationships will enable industry to
more efficiently manufacture concentrated solutions to achieve desired
properties and performance while also meeting sustainability goals such as
reducing water from formulated liquids. Thus, the new knowledge resulting from
this project will ultimately lead to reduced economic and environmental costs
associated with detergent-based products as well as corresponding gains in
important public health measures related to global hygiene. This project is a
collaboration between faculty and students at Purdue University and technical
staff at The Procter and Gamble Company (P&amp;G), providing the Purdue graduate
and undergraduate students with valuable industrial experiences and professional
development opportunities. In addition to the research activities, lab modules
and lecture demos will be created in collaboration with P&amp;G to teach the
fundamentals of phase diagrams to engineering students through an engaging,
hands-on approach coupling physical models of surfactant solutions with online
computational tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Model lamellar-structured surfactant
solutions containing different additives will be investigated through a series
of rheophysical, scattering, and birefringence experiments coupled with fluid
dynamic modeling and pilot-scale processing studies. The results will hep
evaluate the impact of common formulation additives and processing routes on the
multiscale structures and properties of surfactant solutions, including
surfactant bilayer spacing, thickness, and bending moduli. In addition to
studying conventional dodecyl sulfate surfactants, the research team will also
investigate a class of microbial biosurfactants, which are more sustainable and
environmentally friendly. Project deliverables include: (1) experimentally
validated constitutive models that connect macroscale dynamics of concentrated
lamellar-structured surfactant solutions with nano- and micro-scale
characteristics of surfactant bilayers; and (2) predictive processing maps to
ultimately create concentrated surfactant solutions at scale with a desired
microstructure and end-use performance. Project outcomes are expected to be
relevant to a variety of areas beyond cleaning and personal care, including
environmental remediation, surfactant manufacturing, and lipid-based vaccine
development. This project will build upon fundamental experimental studies that
were performed in the early 1990s on the flow behavior of liquid crystalline
surfactant fluids and the impact of shear on the fluid’s microstructure as well
as recent work that used in situ rheophysical measurements to connect power-law
shear thinning rheology with the surprising occurrence of macroscale wall slip
and plug flow in concentrated surfactant solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.