* 2112152
* STTR Phase II:  Multi-Electron Intercalation Reactions for High Capacity Lithium Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2024
* M. Stanley Whittingham, Dimien Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,189,402.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is to advance the performance and decrease the
cost of batteries for applications in electrified vehicles. Reinventing cathode
materials of rechargeable batteries is an important because the cathode is the
most expensive material in a battery and often performance limiting. Cathodes
cost more than all the other battery materials combined. This new class of high
performance, low-cost vanadium cathodes will be used in lithium ion batteries.
Vanadium also benefits from high availability, domestic sourcing, and existing
capacity for the recycling of spent vanadium to establish a circular battery
ecosystem. The proposed batteries may benefit electrified vehicles by increasing
range, enabling fast charging, improving safety, and reducing cost. More
broadly, a wide range of applications in consumer electronics, medical
electronics, military and defense systems, and energy storage are
envisioned.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase II project proposes to develop a high performance, multi-electron battery
cathode. This lithium ion battery's cathode is a new tunnel structured vanadium
based material. Commercially available battery chemistries are often limited to
just one electron reaction per intercalation site and this limits performance.
Lithium batteries that reversibly enable multi-electron intercalation of lithium
ions are needed to improve gravimetric and volumetric energy density.
Specifically, the proposed project will scale up the synthetic method to produce
multi-electron vanadium based cathodes, evaluate multi-electron cathodes paired
with lithium metal and/or silicon for electrochemical performance, and explore
various battery components and surface modifications to mitigate oxidation of
electrolyte and transition metal dissolution. The project will also optimize
battery performance based on a design of experiments approach. Addressing these
technical gaps and challenges will lead to more advanced multi-electron pouch
cell batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.