* 2112900
* Temporal Multimode Transformations for Quantum Information Science
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brian Smith, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Quantum information science and technology (QIST) is a rapidly evolving field of
interdisciplinary research that aims to harness the behavior of quantum systems
to enable new capabilities for a range of applications including computation,
communications, and sensing. A variety of physical systems are being explored
for their potential to encode and manipulate quantum bits (qubits), each of
which presents different advantages and challenges. Within QIST, light plays an
important role in the transport and extraction of quantum information. To date
most approaches to encoding quantum information in light fields has focused on
polarization and spatial profile of light beams, which are not compatible with
optical fiber networks that will form the backbone of a future quantum Internet.
In this project the group will develop an experimental platform to encode
quantum information in temporal modes of quantum light, where the temporal shape
and color of a photon, a light ‘particle,’ carries information. Quantum
applications enabled by temporal mode encoding include linear optics quantum
computing, quantum communications, sensing, and simulations. Beyond the
scientific and technological impacts, this project will contribute to a quantum-
ready workforce through training of graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop methods to control and measure
pulses of light at the single-photon level and its application to perform
targeted operations for quantum information applications. Common approaches to
shape optical laser pulses, which employ filtering or amplification, are not
compatible with quantum light. To address the temporal modes of light thus
requires unitary (phase only) transformations that modify the spectral and
temporal phase of the light pulses. For quantum applications most efforts have
focused on nonlinear optical means for pulse control. Here the group will use
linear-optical methods with electro-optic temporal phase modulation and
dispersive spectral phase. The overarching research goal is the implementation
of unitary transformations on temporal modes. The proposed approach is to
realize such temporal mode transformations by the sequential application of
temporal phase modulation and spectral dispersion using off-the-shelf
components. To overcome challenges in timing instability that arise in the
application of temporal phase using electro-optic modulators, the radio-
frequency driving field will be directly generated from the optical pulses that
generate the single photons to be manipulated. To verify that the targeted
temporal mode transformations are experimentally implemented, an approach to
characterize the transformations – a technique known as quantum process
tomography – based upon spectral interferometry will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.