* 2112424
* SBIR Phase I:  A transformative low-cost approach for Direct Air Capture of CO2 via repeated cycles of ambient weathering of metal oxides
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Shashank Samala, Heirloom Carbon Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2021
* USD 255,737.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the development of a highly-scalable
solution to environmental change. While natural solutions like afforestation and
soil sequestration are important, there is an urgent need for scalable, low land
use, permanent alternatives. The proposed technology will use a process called
Direct Air Capture to reduce atmospheric CO2 concentrations, thereby limiting
sea level rise, natural disasters, climate related forced migration, and
economic distress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will minimize
energy requirements from forced air convection relative to traditional Direct
Air Capture systems, repeatedly re-using mineral feedstocks in an enhanced
weathering process to capture CO2 from the air, and developing innovative
approaches to the integration of engineered components at ultra-low cost. No
scaled accelerated mineralization operation has been demonstrated to date,
largely because of the technical difficulties facing its implementation. The
integration of various technical pieces into a cohesive, economical system is a
principal challenge facing the industry. The goal of the project is to de-risk
the integrated system by achieving consistent carbonation rates within tight
economic constraints in a low-control environment at industrial scale. The
process will include developing test fixtures and a development platform to run
constant testing, as well as developing new hardware components to further
enhance carbonation rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.