* 2112884
* Investigating the Nature of Dark Matter throughout Cosmic History
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kimberly Boddy, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

One of the most prominent and exciting challenges in fundamental physics is
understanding the nature of dark matter, which accounts for 85% of all matter
throughout the known Universe. Dark matter plays a crucial role in forming
galaxies, galaxy clusters, and larger structures of matter through its
gravitational effects on ordinary particles. A key question is whether or not
dark matter experiences any forces beyond gravity. Dedicated experimental
efforts to search for new dark matter physics have thus far produced null
results, prompting the development of new theoretical ideas and detection
techniques. The PI's research program will tackle the dark matter problem at the
intersection of cosmology and particle physics, using cosmological and
astrophysical observations to study the microscopic properties of dark matter.
Such observations have emerged as a powerful probe of dark matter, due to their
increase in precision and sensitivity over recent years. The PI's research will
provide foundational work for future dark matter analyses, in preparation for
potential new discoveries as next-generation instruments and surveys begin
operations in the upcoming decade. In conjunction with research, this program
incorporates the mentoring and training of students and postdocs, who are poised
become the future scientific leaders of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will study the impact of dark matter interactions with ordinary
particles throughout cosmic time. These interactions affect the formation of,
for example, the cosmic microwave background and small-scale structure, enabling
the opportunity to search for new dark matter physics using cosmological and
astrophysical observations. This research will pursue new avenues to bridge
theoretical models and observational techniques to study dark matter. It will
involve the development of sophisticated tools to perform joint analyses using
multiple datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.