* 2112839
* Research in High Energy Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Kleban, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Matthew B. Kleban at New
York University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is strong observational evidence in
cosmology that the expansion of our universe is accelerating at a slow rate, and
that the very early universe underwent a period of extremely rapid accelerated
expansion. At the same time, several theoretical constraints on cosmic
acceleration have recently been proposed that are in sharp tension with these
observations. How can these mysterious features in the expansion history of the
universe be explained? A breakthrough in understanding the meaning of these
profound discoveries would promote the progress of science and advance the
national interest by potentially revealing new laws of nature and helping to
explain the origin and fate of our universe. This award will fund the research
of Professor Matthew Kleban into theories of hypothetical particles called
axions that could address these questions. In addition, it will support his
investigations of the physics of statistical models that can describe both the
far future of a universe undergoing accelerated expansion and the surfaces of
materials undergoing phase transitions. Lastly, it will enable him to continue
his work on the quantum-mechanical physics of black holes and their formation
and evaporation. Professor Kleban's work will also have a broad impact in the
form of public lectures and interviews, and in inspiring and training
undergraduate and graduate physics students at NYU, as well as post-doctoral
researchers and early-career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically,
Professor Kleban will study the theory of multi-axion landscapes and their
applications to cosmology, making use of the novel techniques he developed to
push forward our understanding of such theories and of inflation in general. He
will continue his work on the Brownian Loop Soup, building on a recent
breakthrough in a connection to the O(n) model and the set of exact correlation
functions and spectral information that were obtained as a result of that
advance. Finally, Professor Kleban will return to the topic of quantum black
holes in anti-de Sitter spacetime, investigating the extent to which recently
developed tools can be applied to higher-dimensional theories of
gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.