* 2112055
* SBIR Phase I:  Biometric Wearable Device for Real-Time Mental Health Intervention of Anxiety
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Farzad Ehsani, INNSIGHTFUL INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to utilize artificial intelligence for mental
health interventions, with an initial application of college students. Over 60%
of U.S. college students suffer stress and anxiety that can manifest in physical
symptoms such as palpitations, chest pressure, stomach aches, muscular tension,
diarrhea/constipation, and fatigue. The significant negative impact of stress
and anxiety affects learning, development, and social engagement, and ultimately
can contribute to destructive behaviors such as drug and alcohol use. This
project proposes an intelligent, personalized digital health technology that
integrates biometrics for automated, early detection of increasingly stressed
states as a cost-effective way to inform interventions and improve college
retention. This application can be expanded to other populations for improved
mental health outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project improves mental health through integration of
wearable biometric sensors, artificial intelligence (AI), and a user interface
to guide both automated and interactive psychotherapy interventions. A wearable
wrist band device will passively capture biosignals to detect signals of anxiety
to inform an automated analysis. The app can then provide varying levels of
alerts and intervention as appropriate for the magnitude of the event. This can
be used for mental health monitoring broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.