* 2112166
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel COVID-19 Dual-function Therapeutic/Vaccine Product
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Sang Van, PARAMITA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2022
* USD 255,990.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a new class of dual-function
therapeutic/vaccine products that can prevent viruses from entering cells
(therapeutic effect) while also stimulating immunity to viruses (vaccine
effect). The proposal has immediate impact in that it seeks to synthesize a
compound that can be used to treat patients with COVID-19, caused by SARS CoV-2.
Specifically, the novel solution both prevents SARS-CoV-2 from entering human
lung cells and stimulates immune cells, such as dendritic cells, resulting in
immunization. The proposed solution is the only one that could be given to
infected individuals as both a therapy and a vaccine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop a new
class of dual-function therapeutic/vaccine solutions. The proposed work is to
synthesize a compound with multiple copies of a peptide from SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein that could block the virus from entering host cells. It will also
contain multiple copies of a peptide that could direct excess product to immune
cells to serve as a vaccine to induce T cell responses and neutralizing
antibodies. The multiple copies of the peptides are synthesized on a multivalent
backbone using patented chemistry. This unique synthetic scheme allows for the
rapid production of such multivalent conjugates, but proof-of-principle
supporting the biologic activities of the proposed products is missing. The
proposed studies will accomplish the synthesis and characterization of the dual-
function compounds, resulting in selection of a lead candidate for subsequent
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.