* 2112643
* AF: Small: Theoretical Aspects of Repetition-Aware Text Compression and Indexing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Sharma Thankachan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2023
* USD 465,763.00

Being able to store, search, and analyze massive data sets efficiently is one of
today's pressing challenges. To that end, this project will study a collection
of problems under text compression and indexing with tremendous current
relevance, owing to a specific characteristic prevalent in many modern text data
sets, called high repetitiveness. This characteristic makes the data highly
compressible using some specialized schemes. However, the theoretical
understanding of those schemes is still in a nascent stage. This project will
address some of the fundamental open problems on the effectiveness of several
schemes that are popular in practice. This project will also introduce new ideas
for indexing such data in a highly space-efficient manner and quickly support
various (application-specific) queries. The techniques developed in this project
will apply to a broad class of algorithmic problems and applications; therefore,
they will have a lasting impact on related fields. The main results stem from
this research will be disseminated through major conferences, journals, and
workshop tutorials. The participation of undergraduates and minorities,
including women, will be ensured.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Suffix trees and suffix
arrays are two fundamental data structures for text indexing with many
applications in bioinformatics. However, they are notorious for their space
complexity. The FM-index index encodes suffix arrays in space close to the
entropy-based lower bound using the Burrows-Wheeler Transformation (BWT). But,
the entropy model of compression is less effective in capturing repetitiveness.
Therefore, modern applications urge even more space frugal encodings that
exploit repetitiveness. Although the community has made some recent progress in
exact pattern matching, solutions to many other (more complex) matching problems
are still open. To that end, this project will attempt to design repetition-
aware indexes for pattern matching under mismatches, edits, and wildcards, along
with efficient construction algorithms. This project also aims to develop a
unified framework to compress several advanced suffix-tree variants (quasi-
suffix trees) that support even more complex matching paradigms such as
parameterized and order-isomorphic matching. Novel techniques and concepts that
go beyond the existing BWT-based methods will be sought. Additionally, the
project will attempt a deeper study on various aspects of BWT-runs and the
relative Lempel-Ziv compression scheme from the hardness
side.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.