* 2112276
* STTR Phase I: Exploring Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Enabled Skills Data For Education-to-Employment Transitions and Career Support
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Nicholas Hathaway, BRIO DATA GROUP, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to empower individuals to thrive in a world
of innovative disruption through the development of an enduring, data-driven,
ready-access digital service that will assist learners to identify opportunity
pathways throughout a lifetime of learning and employment. Completion of this
project and the addition of the proposed analytical capabilities applied to
learner narratives may create a powerful and unique set of tools for
individuals, secondary and higher educational institutions, employers, and a
range of informal education providers. The research completed in this project
and tools produced by it seek to inform a new approach to matching the
interests, skills and educational backgrounds of learners to jobs and
educational opportunities. This approach engages learners of diverse backgrounds
early in their education and assists them in succeeding in many fields that
currently suffer from lack of diversity, especially in the STEM disciplines.
Better matching of skills and interests to learning trajectories and career
options may enhance human development broadly, increase job satisfaction, and
lead to a more productive workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop methods for bringing
a wide range of learner interests and achievements into a common framework that
will be used to match a learnerâ€™s current state to specific opportunities and
general development pathways. The project also seeks to assess the value of
opportunities and chance of success for the student. This research centers on
machine analysis of written reflections. Findings digitally mined from written
reflections and potentially from other kinds of narrative artifacts are combined
with data from grades, test scores, and other skills assessments and
certifications to guide learners toward attractive educational and employment
opportunities. In addition, findings from interactive visualization tools
support human exploratory analyses of machine categorizations in order to
improve the delivery of educational programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.