* 2112191
* SBIR Phase I:  Simultaneous In situ Pharmacological Profiling of Gene Regulatory Proteins (GRPs) for Cancer Therapy
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Alexander Federation, TALUS BIOSCIENCE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2022
* USD 255,831.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that for the first time, drug developers will
have access to a platform to measure global changes to the set of proteins that
bind and regulate the human genome. With this tool in hand, pharmaceutical
researchers will be able to target molecular pathways previously inaccessible
for drug development against Gene Regulatory Protein (GRP)-regulated cancer,
neurological, and other conditions. The beneficial effects of drug-based
therapies to treat cancers such as multiple myeloma (MM), small cell lung
carcinoma, and neurological cancers will improve health outcomes: In the USA
alone, about 1.8 million new cancer cases are diagnosed every year. Millions of
people will benefit if any drug targeting the function of GRPs is identified
using this technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project converts technology from a manual bench
application into a high-throughput platform. This project will implement a
quantitative proteomics-based drug discovery platform that quantifies the
effects of small-molecules on the GRP proteome in a diversity of cell and tissue
types. Despite their relevance in health and disease, GRPs have been largely
considered undruggable for several reasons, including the lack of knowledge of
small-molecule pockets and high degrees of intrinsic protein disorder, which
both make biochemical study challenging and full structural characterization
almost impossible. This project will tackle this problem by removing the need
for GRP biochemical isolation via implementing a methodology where the GRP
proteome is studied in situ. This method employs nuclear fractionation followed
by GRP isolation and characterization, resulting in a platform that can inform
the effects of drug compounds on the chromatin-bound proteome. This project will
build the first database that links in a statistically-robust manner compounds
to their effects on the genome-bound proteome, with links to laboratory
measurements (i.e., high-resolution mass spectrometry). The curated data will
include both presence of drug/proteome interactions and false and/or positive
discovery rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.