* 2112537
* CREST-Postdoctoral Research Fellowship:Design of Ag Nanoparticles-Coated ZnO Nanoshells Substrate for the Detection of Contaminants in Water Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Adrian Camacho-Berrios, Camacho-Berrios, Adrian
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 159,122.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Nanotechnology Center for
Biomedical, Environmental and Sustainability Applications â€“ Phase II at the
University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez. The goal of this research is to develop an
inexpensive material which will be useful in detecting water contaminants. The
new material will be composed of metal nanoparticles that will enhance signals
from these contaminants. The proposed work has the potential to position a new
researcher to start an independent research career and become a competitive
faculty member. The work also has the potential to create outreach activities
for students in Western Puerto Rico public schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
aim of the proposal is to develop a surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS)
substrate made of Ag nanoparticle coated ZnO nanoshells through a less expensive
methodology capable of being scaled upwards. The SERS substrate will serve to
detect emerging contaminants in water, an environmental problem of increasing
concern in the U.S. The proposed SERS substrate will be produced in a three-step
process that includes the electrospinning of cellulose fibers and the sputtering
deposition of ZnO nanoshells and of Ag nanoparticles. These are well known, less
expensive techniques that can be used at large scales. The SERS performance will
be evaluated as a function of the Ag nanoparticles' size as a function of
sputtering time and temperature during post-deposition heat treatment. The
detection of emerging pollutants in water at trace levels will assist scientists
in implementing quick remediation actions before dangerous consequences to human
health and the environment occur. Thus, the proposed nanostructure as SERS
substrate will expand the field of detecting trace levels of emerging pollutants
in water resources. Through the host scientist's mentoring, the proposer will
have an opportunity to be trained as a competitive faculty member and engage in
an independent research career. The proposed outreach activities for students in
public schools in Western Puerto Rico will focus on the significance of
nanotechnology and how it addresses environmental issues such as water
contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.