* 2112789
* New Approaches to Modeling and Searching for Physics Beyond the Standard Model: Boosted Dark Matter, Macroscopic Dark Matter, Dark Sectors, and Exotic Phases
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Joshua Berger, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports the research activities of Professor Joshua Berger at
Colorado State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bulk of matter we have
observed in the Universe is dark and has so far only been seen by its
gravitational pull on visible particles. Detecting and determining the nature of
dark matter are among the highest priority goals of particle physics in the
coming years. While dedicated experiments have been built to look for some dark
matter candidates, recent efforts have demonstrated that even experiments not
expressly built to look for dark matter can make important contributions to the
hunt for these elusive particles. The bulk of Professor Berger’s research aims
to develop models and predictions of dark matter that can be seen at experiments
designed to study other phenomena such as neutrinos and atoms, creating valuable
synergy with other areas of physics. Research into the nature of dark matter
thus contributes to the national interest by promoting progress in answering
fundamental scientific questions as to the nature of the universe and its basic
building blocks. This project will also have significant broader impacts.
Professor Berger plans to train students and post-doctoral scientists in
advanced physics research methods, as well as in state-of-the-art computing
techniques. He will also present the results of his research in both public and
scientific presentations, and incorporate aspects of his research in the
curricula for courses he teaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In technical terms, this
research encompasses searches for dark sector particles at current and future
neutrino and atomic, molecular, and optical (AMO) physics experiments. This
research also involves studying alternate cosmological histories to develop new
mechanisms for baryogenesis. Ongoing and upcoming neutrino experiments such as
the accelerator-based Short Baseline Neutrino (SBN) experiments and Deep
Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) will be able to detect dark matter and
long-lived dark states produced in collisions of their very intense proton beams
with a target. Large volume experiments such as the DUNE far detector can also
be sensitive to astrophysical dark matter interacting in the detector. Professor
Berger will explore hidden sector models such as Higgs Portal models leading to
dark sector particles produced in the beams at these experiments. He will
further explore dark matter models such as boosted dark matter and macroscopic
dark matter which lead to dark matter from astrophysical sources interacting in
neutrino detectors. He will develop new simulation tools needed to investigate
these models and propose new search strategies to ensure that interesting
signals are not missed. His work will also encompass a collaboration with an AMO
experimentalist, Professor Samuel Brewer at Colorado State University, to
develop searches for dark matter in high-precision atomic measurements performed
in Professor Brewer’s lab. Finally, he will study the properties of a possible
phase of the early universe in which the weak force becomes strongly coupled,
leading to the possibility of a new mechanism for
baryogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.