* 2112769
* WoU-MMA: Demonstrating Ultrahigh-Energy-Neutrino Observations with Compact Air-Shower-Imaging Telescopes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nepomuk Otte, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 823,130.00

The discovery of a new window with which to observe the Universe, whether X-ray,
gamma-ray, or gravitational waves, has provided transformative impact on the
fields of astrophysics and particle astrophysics. The most recent new messengers
observed are high-energy astrophysical neutrinos, now detected to approximately
10 peta-electron-Volts in energy. While the sources of these neutrinos are yet
unknown, they are fully expected to be linked to the most extreme cosmic ray
accelerators, implying that ultra-high-energy (UHE) neutrinos that far exceed
the current observed energies must exist. The detection of UHE neutrinos remains
an outstanding challenge for the field but hold the potential to answer some
longstanding questions, including the sources of the most energetic particle in
the Universe, how these cosmic accelerators behave, and large-scale evolution of
the Universe. The Trinity project aims to open the window to UHE neutrinos by
utilizing advancements of air Chereknov telescope techniques, and this award
facilitates the development and deployment of the first demonstrator instrument.
The project provides several opportunities to train the next generation of
scientists and engineers; in particular undergraduate students will
significantly contribute to the design and construction of the proposed
instrument, gaining hands-on and real-world experience. The awarded program also
furthers the development of novel light sensors based on silicon photomultiplier
(SiPM) technology that have a broad range of applications from medical imaging
to LIDARs for automotive driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UHE neutrinos must exist
but detecting them is an extraordinary challenge. Neutrinos in general are
elusive particles that require monitoring large volumes of water, ice, or
atmosphere. The primary task in their detection is to achieve a scalable
instrument with the highest possible sensitivity for the lowest possible cost.
The Trinity design is a system of air-shower imaging Cherenkov telescope that
aims to realize these goals. As a first step in demonstrating this approach, a
one-square meter (5 degree x 5 degree) air-shower imaging telescope with a SiPM
camera will be developed, installed and operated at Frisco Peak in Utah. The
telescope will image upward-going particle showers and search for those that
result when a UHE tau neutrino enters the Earth under a shallow angle,
interacts, and produces a tau lepton that emerges from the ground and decays in
the atmosphere, a technique known as Earth-skimming. The project's objectives
are to realize the crucial steps to advance this technique towards the first
detection of UHE neutrinos and introduce a new messenger to the extreme
Universe. They include: demonstrate the long-term stability and reliability of
the detection technique, the light-sensor and camera technology and remote
operation of the telescope; and the study of background events and the
advancement of analysis techniques. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.