* 2112765
* University of Delaware/RV SHARP Swallow SSSE
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Jon Swallow, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 07/31/2022
* USD 105,485.00

A request is made to fund Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) for the
R/V Hugh R Sharp, a 146-foot Regional research vessel operated by the University
of Delaware as part of the US Academic Research Fleet (ARF). Sharp is a state-
of-the-art, coastal research vessel that is owned and operated by the University
of Delaware. The vessel can carry fourteen to twenty scientists on cruises up to
eighteen days in duration and supports projects from all disciplines of
oceanography. The vessel is a regional asset, serving researchers from many
institutions throughout the mid-Atlantic. The vessel typically operates in the
coastal waters from Long Island, New York, to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, as
well as the Delaware and Chesapeake Bays. In 2020, in a pandemic-shortened
season, Sharp completed only 35 days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 8
days or 25% of the sailing schedule. In 2021, Sharp is scheduled for 143 days
with NSF days accounting for 7% (10 days) of the total sailing schedule. SSSE
requested in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furuno Navigation
RADARs (Set of 2) $88,600 &lt;br/&gt;GMDSS Emergency Communications Equipment
$16,885 &lt;br/&gt; $105,485 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.