* 2112022
* SBIR Phase II:  Hardware Acceleration for Zero Knowledge Proofs for Distributed Ledger Technology
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Simon Peffers, Supranational LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,976.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the enablement of verifiable and confidential
computing through research and development that improves the performance and
cost of the underlying cryptographic computations. Digital services play a
foundational role in varied sectors including communication, education, banking,
and others. Without cryptography these services would be impossible to conduct
online in a secure and private manner. However, many new and more powerful
cryptographic techniques remain out of reach due to their computationally
expensive nature. Reducing the cost of these operations enables not just secure
communication, but also verifiable and confidential computation, of rapidly
growing interest to both the enterprise and government segments for use cases
such as privacy-preserving machine learning. The market for verifiable and
confidential computing solutions is expected to grow to over one billion dollars
in the next five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes
to design and develop a high performance cloud-based system for verifiable and
confidential computing. Currently many verifiable and confidential computing
techniques can not be brought into production due to their computationally
expensive nature. This project performs algorithmic research, hardware design,
and software development, that will improve the performance and cost of these
operations. In particular, this project optimizes cryptographic algorithms to
make them more amenable to GPU-based processing, optimize the software
implementation of those algorithms to target GPU architectures, devise methods
for reducing the amount of data that needs to be transmitted, and develop a
scale-out architecture that dynamically scales capacity as the complexity of
uses and number of users grow. With the appropriate design, the project expects
to develop a system with over an order of magnitude or more performance than
existing designs. Furthermore, by creating a ‘cloud-based’ infrastructure, these
resources can be made available to developers around the world, with low latency
and low cost. The expected improvements in performance, cost, and access will
enable new use cases that have previously been
impractical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.