* 2112377
* SBIR Phase II: High-power, lightweight, and flexible tandem perovskite solar panels
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Kevin Bush, Swift Solar Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is
an opportunity to develop new applications that depend on mobile power and
ultimately lower the cost of residential, commercial, and utility-scale solar
power. The project seeks to develop extremely lightweight, flexible, and
efficient photovoltaic (PV) modules using perovskite absorbers. These efficient,
lightweight, and flexible modules may enable long-endurance unmanned aerial
vehicles, supplemental charging for electric cars, and efficient solar power for
commercial buildings with roofs too weak for typical solar panels. The
anticipated advances may also lower installation, module, and total system
costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project seeks to bring flexible
and efficient perovskite technologies to the commercial production of solar
power. The project seeks to develop a minimum viable product (MVP) that is
targeted at solar-powered aerospace platforms and has the highest power density
by weight (W/kg) of any commercial solar technology. Double-junction or tandem
solar cells can reach far higher power conversion efficiencies than traditional
single-junction cells (45% vs. 32%) by using two layers that absorb
complementary parts of the solar spectrum. Such tandem cells have previously
been too expensive for mainstream applications. This project uses perovskite
materials to make tandem solar cells on flexible substrates at a lower cost than
conventional cells by using high-throughput manufacturing and low cost
materials. Through this project, the company will validate its first product
line. It is expected that the efficient and lightweight technology may be able
to be extended beyond airborne vehicles to other electric vehicles such as cars
and trucks. Realizing these goals may pave the way for highly efficient and
flexible solar cells at substantially lower costs than today’s leading solar
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.