* 2112265
* Investigating the Molecular, Neurophysiological and Behavioral Effects of Hypoxia in Marine Mollusks
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Javier Rodriguez-Casariego, Rodriguez-Casariego, Javier A
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Environmental Neuroscience at
the University of Puerto Rico. The goal of this research is for the post
doctoral fellow to receive training in animal neurophysiology and developmental
biology. The proposed research will build on the fellow's background in
epigenetics, molecular biology, and ecotoxicology. The postdoctoral fellow
intends to engage with the public to promote conservation efforts focused on
coastal urban ecosystems, broaden the participation of groups underrepresented
in biology through active mentoring and teaching, and promote scientific
collaboration between Puerto Rican universities and minority serving
institutions in South Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accumulating evidence
suggests that epigenetic mechanisms, which are influenced by developmental and
environmental signals, play a crucial role in regulating gene expression and
potentially modulate behavior and memory. However, it is unclear how
environmental-exposure-driven epigenetic modifications could affect short and
long-term behavioral responses. The intent of the proposed work is to
disentangle epigenetic effects in the establishment and plasticity of behavioral
responses to stress. The proposed work will investigate linkages between
molecular, cellular, and behavioral responses to hypoxia; evaluate the
inheritance of molecular and narrow plasticity to stressors and the resulting
behavior outcomes; and studying these plastic responses in coastal urban
environments with a recent history of hypoxic events. Neurohistology methods,
including immunohistochemistry and dye injection are expected to enable the
postdoctoral fellow to work on individual identified neurons. Coupled with his
prior training, the post-doctoral fellow has the potential to be uniquely
positioned to embark on an independent career studying epigenetic impacts of
environmental perturbations on neurological function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.