* 2112419
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Resolution Image Segmentation for Natural Resource Management
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Ross Davison, COMON SOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to produce currently unavailable high-
resolution vegetation maps and analyses that enable stakeholders (i.e.,
government agencies, academic researchers, land managers, non-governmental
organizations, and private companies) to rapidly assess the health of ecosystems
that are threatened by human development and environmental change. Producing
this information will result in better management of natural lands and their
associated services and goods, globally valued at $125 trillion, such as
buffering current and future infrastructure from natural disasters (i.e.,
managing wetlands that dampen storm surge) and improving human health and well
being outcomes (i.e., disease prevention and livelihood security, respectively).
Compared to traditional ground surveying methods, this project will
revolutionize the ecosystem health evaluation and management process by reducing
work hours by approximately 50-90% and project costs by approximately 40%-70%.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility
to expand the accessibility and scalability of machine learning image
segmentation to the fields of natural resource management, environmental
conservation, and ecological research. The technical innovation of this project
is a replicable machine learning model for vegetation analysis and ecosystem
assessment that will expedite the ability to process and classify aerial imagery
into individual species layers that can be used to assess vegetation composition
and dynamic changes in species populations most influenced by human activity and
climate change on a global scale. While there are examples of employing machine
learning image segmentation in these fields, they are specific to regions or
species and are incapable of scaling across diverse ecosystems and image
resolution levels. The goal of the project is to create a machine learning model
that can quickly and accurately delineate vegetation types from aerial imagery
across diverse sets of data. This goal will be achieved following a development
strategy of model exploration, data collection/annotation, model refinement,
testing and evaluation, and model deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.