* 2112867
* NSF-BSF: The Phase-Modulated Quantum Optical Frequency Comb: A Simple Platform for One-Way Quantum Computing
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Olivier Pfister, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 506,000.00

This joint project, ''NSF-BSF: The phase-modulated quantum optical frequency
comb: a platform for one-way quantum computing,'' is a collaboration between the
research groups of Olivier Pfister at the University of Virginia and Avi Pe'er
at Bar-Ilan University, supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and
the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) Collaborative Research
Opportunities program. Quantum computing is now in a "Moon race," supported by
the National Quantum Initiative, to harness the extraordinary computational
power of quantum physical systems for specific intractable problems such as
integer factoring (relevant to cryptography and national security), discovering
carbon sequestration processes, or discovering efficient nitrogen fixation
processes for fertilizer production. One of the challenges to building a quantum
computer is scalability. The Pfister-Pe’er collaboration leverages the
outstanding scalability of frequency-multiplexed photonic quantum computing,
invented by Pfister, by associating it with the ultrabroadband quantum detector
technology invented by Pe’er. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to demonstrate a large-scale photonic quantum computer by use of quantum
frequency multiplexing or "quantum bandwidth," the quantum analogue of the
technology subtending FM radio and broadband wireless. The core system is the
optical frequency comb (OFC) defined by the resonant modes of an optical cavity.
The OFC has seen spectacular development since its Nobel-recognized inception by
T.W. Hänsch and J.L. Hall, with applications such as ultimate precision
metrology and fundamental measurements. Pfister's group was the first to
experimentally demonstrate that the quantum OFC emitted by a single optical
parametric oscillator (OPO) is a quantum computing substrate, by generating
scalable cluster-state entanglement between the ''teeth'' of the QOFC. In
parallel, Pe'er's group demonstrated a novel quantum detection method,
parametric homodyne detection (PHD), that is broadband and resilient to losses.
The project will bring both technologies together to demonstrate bona fide
quantum processing in the quantum OFC and scale quantum computing beyond the
noisy, intermediate-size quantum (NISQ) regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.