* 2112978
* CIF: An Ice Nucleation Cold-Stage for Research and Teaching
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Markus Petters, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 12/31/2023
* USD 132,755.00

This Community Instruments and Facilities (CIF) award makes the North Carolina
State ice nucleation Cold Stage (NC State CS) freezing assay available as a
community instrument facility. The instrument consists of a machine vision
optical system to observe a thermally controlled surface. The main purpose of
the instrument is to observe the freezing nucleation process of supercooled
water droplets. The instrument is suitable for studying ambient ice nucleating
particle concentrations and laboratory-based process-level studies of the
nucleation process. The facility will be advertised at conferences, including
conferences that exclusively target professional societies focused on fostering
enhanced diversity in science. Interactive educational content will be created
and disseminated using a multi-user web-interface that can be used by
instructors to supplement instruction in a wide range of undergraduate and
graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes instrumentation
and educational resources to tackle the problem of characterizing the abundance
of ice nucleating particles in the atmosphere. By becoming a community
instrument facility, the cold-stage technique will become more widely available
to groups that do not specialize in instrument design. Funds for the award will
also yield a public design of a low-cost version of the instrument that can be
self-manufactured. This award will enhance the ability of the broader scientific
community to use the NC State ice nucleation cold stage freezing assay through
the Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences facility and instrument request
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.