* 2112034
* Collaborative Research: How are Flood Basalts Fed? A Textural Investigation of the Chief Joseph Dike Swarm
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Paulo Hidalgo, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 11/30/2024
* USD 188,207.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flood basalts are the Earth’s most
extensive expressions of volcanism. The eruption and emplacement of these
voluminous magmas have been linked to global climate shifts and many extinction
events. The Columbia River Flood Basalts in Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and
Nevada are the most recent and best-preserved example of this voluminous
volcanic activity. It is believed that degassing during their eruption 17-14
million years ago influenced global temperatures. A key aspect to understanding
magmatic systems is deciphering how the magma is transported from depth to
surface. At the Chief Joseph Dike Swarm in Oregon, a portion of the magmatic
plumbing system of the Columbia River Flood Basalts is preserved and exposed.
While the transport mechanism for these magmas is well understood (i.e., sheet
magmatism), the style and timing of magmatism is poorly constrained. Namely,
were the Chief Joseph Dikes produced through single-pulse events or grown
through time as a series of magmatic pulses where each of them contributed with
tectonic deformation and degassing? Detailing the mechanism of transport and
emplacement could constrain the rates of surface deformation and volatile
release during magmatism. This study will utilize relatively fast, simple, and
resource-light methodologies that will inform us of the dike emplacement and
growth mechanisms by studying in great detail the crystal textures recorded in
the dikes themselves. This team’s research project was designed from the ground
up as an unparalleled research experience for underrepresented minority (URM)
undergraduate students who will be recruited to participate in the research and
dissemination process. This research is built intentionally to contribute to
making the geosciences a diverse, equitable, and inclusive discipline by
promoting the development of future leaders and mentors for subsequent students
in STEM research and education. The program will benefit the URM student cohorts
with the knowledge, motivation, and inspiration to pursue focused science
careers to solve US-national and global challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate the tectonomagmatic evolution of the Columbia River
Flood Basalts (CRFB), as recorded within the Chief Joseph Dike Swarm (CJDS). The
team will develop and disseminate a technique that uses Electron Backscatter
Diffraction (EBSD) to identify dike emplacement style using textural analyses.
Analyses of dike centers will be performed on a statistically significant number
of dikes to meaningfully constrain the actual proportion of single-event and
pulsed emplacement styles. Dike-center textural analyses will be calibrated
using field observations and a subset of detailed textural profiles collected
across dikes to identify the overall cooling history. The information generated
by the proposed work will address long-standing questions surrounding the
generation of space to accommodate hundreds to thousands of dikes with
considerable average thicknesses. This will impact future research by generating
a detailed database of dike textures and morphologies that will allow future
comparisons with other CRFB dike swarm systems and cross-comparison with other
dike swarms worldwide. Results will provide insights into magma transport
efficiency through the crust and the relationship between tectonics and
magmatism. Characterizing the textures of pulsed assembly of dikes or dikes that
experienced sustained high Reynolds Number flow will add to our overall
understanding of magmatic plumbing systems and their connection to
mineralization zones and hydrothermal fields. Furthermore, the project will
create linkages with education organizations in the state of Georgia.
Researchers will train and professionally develop six Underrepresented Minority
(URM) student research scientists over three years. The project will broaden the
participation of URMs in geosciences as we will fully leverage the existing
student populations from Historically Black Colleges and Universities and
Minority-Serving Institutions in Georgia. The program will benefit the URM
student cohorts with the knowledge, motivation, and inspiration to pursue
focused science careers to solve US-national and global challenges. More
importantly, this research is built intentionally to make geosciences a diverse,
equitable, and inclusive discipline. Their mentoring experience is built around
creating a welcoming environment with comprehensive guidance by relatable
mentors and academic socialization, which have proven to be integrative tools
for URMs. They want to foment the extraordinary untapped talent that URM
students bring to geosciences. To do this, researchers need to work towards
transformative change in the way they plan their research. This team believes
that their program design strives to bring justice, diversity, and inclusion to
the field of geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.