* 2112781
* RUI: Solitons and Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Royston, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 135,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Andy Royston at Penn State
Fayette, The Eberly Campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of a "field" is
central to physics and everyday life. Fields (such as electric fields and
magnetic fields) exist throughout space and enable the transmission of forces
like gravity, electricity, and magnetism. Light and radio waves, for example,
are ripples in an electromagnetic field. "Quantum field theory" is the
mathematical framework theoretical physicists use to describe fundamental
particles as discrete ripples in a field. In his research, Professor Royston
aims to apply novel approaches centered on the use of objects called "solitons"
to address two difficult and long-standing questions in quantum field theory. A
soliton is a special type of particle that can exist when fields self-interact;
one can imagine a soliton as a knot of tangled-up field. By studying the
mathematical description of solitons interacting with each other and with
ordinary particles, Professor Royston aims to understand mechanisms for certain
particle creation and decay processes beyond the reach of traditional
computational methods. Research on the mathematical structure of quantum field
theory thus advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science
at its most foundational level. This project will also have significant broader
impacts. Professor Royston will involve undergraduates in his research, exposing
them to basic science and teaching them practical skills such as computer coding
and numerical analysis that will benefit them in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the first question Professor
Royston will address is that of determining the leading contribution of virtual
soliton-antisoliton pairs to processes involving perturbative particles. Through
crossing symmetry in quantum field theory, such contributions are related to a
soliton that emits or absorbs a high energy particle resulting in a large
momentum transfer of order the mass of the soliton. Professor Royston will
combine semiclassical techniques with a new tool --- the forced soliton equation
--- to analyze this process. The forced soliton equation, discovered by
Professor Royston and collaborators in 2020, is a wavelike equation that
describes a soliton being driven along an arbitrarily specifiable trajectory.
The second question Professor Royston will address concerns "wall-crossing"
phenomena for soliton bound-state spectra in certain supersymmetric gauge
theories, and focuses on the manner in which wall-crossing can be understood
from the semiclassical perspective of soliton field configurations and moduli
spaces. In recent work, Professor Royston has noted a close connection between
wall-crossing phenomena for magnetic monopoles and a construction in mathematics
that aims to provide a compactification of monopole moduli space as a manifold
with corners. Professor Royston, working in collaboration with a leading
mathematician, aims to give a complete description of wall-crossing by analyzing
the jumping behavior of zero-energy bound states in a certain quantum mechanics
on monopole moduli space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.