* 2112893
* Non-Equilibrium Steady States and Dynamics in a Tapped-Ion Quantum Simulator with Engineered Dissipation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Zhexuan Gong, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 350,098.00

Quantum simulation has become a promising technology for exploring and solving
hard scientific, engineering, and computational problems. So far, most quantum
simulation experiments are focused on simulating quantum systems that do not
interact with their environment. A major challenge in developing future quantum
technologies is to address the inevitable coupling between the quantum system
and its environment that often leads to unwanted decoherence of the system. A
promising way to overcome this challenge is to fight natural dissipation with
engineered dissipation. The main goal of this project is to find combinations of
dissipation and interaction that can lead to new physical discoveries, or
facilitate quantum information processing tasks, such as the generation of
useful entangled states. The group will focus this project on a particular
experimental platform that uses trapped ions, which is a leading platform for
both quantum simulation and quantum computing. This project will also facilitate
the education of a new generation of students with expertise in quantum
technologies via a combined effort in undergraduate student research, the
development of a new quantum engineering program, public quantum lectures to
local high-school and community-college students, and an online project for
providing STEM-oriented users a visually attractive and interactive platform for
demonstrating quantum simulation with trapped
ions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this project aims to both advance the
theoretical understanding of non-equilibrium steady states and dynamics in open
quantum systems with long-range interactions and guide near-future trapped-ion
experiments in engineering dissipation for achieving novel dynamics, phase
transitions, and state preparation. The proposed research will also be relevant
to other experimental platforms, including polar molecules, circuit QED, and
atoms coupled to multi-mode cavities. Thus it serves as a critical bridge
between the experimental and theoretical communities working on open quantum
many-body systems. The group will study four closely related topics: (1)
Locality and its breakdown for systems with long-range interactions and local or
nonlocal dissipation; (2) Steady-state phases and phase transitions for long-
range interacting spins; (3) Preparation of many-body entangled states and
thermal states via engineered dissipation; (4) Fighting against natural
dissipation on trapped-ion qubits with engineered dissipation. Importantly, the
group will also propose practical experimental setups for trapped-ion
experimentalists, including two groups who are close collaborators, to
investigate novel physics discovered under each topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.