* 2112298
* SBIR Phase II:  Bilingual Literacy Assessment and Skill Tracker
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Rocio Rana, LangInnov
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 898,537.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is related to the underserved, emergent
bilingual population in US school systems. In spite of their growing size
(approximately 20 percent of the total US population), emergent bilinguals still
do not have adequate support to succeed in academic settings and are often
victims of a subtractive bilingualism process that favors the acquisition of
English at the expense of the home language. The lack of adequate bilingual
resources has led to a disproportionate misplacement of emergent bilinguals in
special education as well as an increased drop-out rates in bilingual
populations, in general, and Latino communities in particular. To address these
problems, a recommendation system powered by machine-learning algorithms that
will generate a personalized bundle of fun, bilingual literacy activities linked
to a fully-automated bilingual assessment is proposed. The unique characteristic
of this solution is that the personalized activities are generated automatically
based on assessment results and activity performance. The goal of the activities
is to develop the skills identified by the assessment as needing improvement,
both in English and in the home language of the child.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project addresses the educational
needs of the growing, school-age, emergent bilingual population (i.e. children
in the school system whose home language is not English or only English), as
well as the loss of cultural diversity and linguistic acumen for society as a
whole. The main research objectives involve: a) designing game-like bilingual
activities that can get the young child’s attention, b) developing age-
appropriate and culturally-sensitive content for the bilingual activities, c)
refining the speech recognizer to work well with children's speech in both
Spanish and English, and d) implementing the latest trends in data-analysis and
machine-learning technologies to develop a recommendation system that proposes
personalized activities tailored to each child’s needs based on assessment
results and activity performance. The research and development plan aims at
developing an innovative product that stands out from existing solutions. The
key differentiator features are: 1) its focus on bilingual children and its
adaptability in accepting bilingual answers for the activities, 2) its capacity
to help children develop speaking skills due to the integration of automatic
measures of speech performance, and 3) its recommendation engine that suggests
personalized bilingual activities for each student tailored to their specific
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.