* 2112092
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Lung Health Diagnostic Test for COPD and Prognosis-Based Early Intervention
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Neeraj Vij, PRECISION THERANOSTICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable early diagnosis of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and age-related lung conditions. Reliable
detection of these diseases at an early stage has the potential for
significantly improving disease outcomes, by reducing the health impact of lung
diseases and the costs associated with the treatment. Briefly, 14 million
Americans are currently estimated to have Pulmonary Function Test
(PFT)-diagnosed COPD, while &gt;16 million subjects are expected to have PFT-
undiagnosed COPD leading to the first or initial diagnosis at the severe stages.
Currently no accurate and early lung health assessments exist, representing a
vital healthcare gap - especially for young children, elderly and subjects with
chronic conditions, as lung diagnostics such as PFT require patient compliance
and CT, PET etc., have significant risk for these subjects. With &gt;16 million
cases of PFT-undiagnosed COPD in the United States alone, a new lung health
screening diagnostic test will address the “invisible” epidemic of COPD and help
monitor impact of exposure to first- and secondhand- smoke, e-cig vapors and air
pollutants. Early more frequent lung health screening will allow timely
intervention and limit significant health care costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will accelerate
development and commercialization of a lung health multiplex point of care test
(xPOCT) for early diagnosis and intervention of COPD. The POCT is supported by
proof-of-concept pre-clinical data and human subject validation of a prognostic
biomarker for delivering on first-in-class RAPID home-based and POC Lung Health
Diagnostics (LHDx) for predicting initiation and progression of COPD-emphysema.
The goal is to develop an effective, non-invasive and rapid LHDx for early more
frequent screening and diagnosis of COPD-emphysema, commonly missed by current
standard-of-care diagnostics. This project has the following objectives: (1)
prototype engineering and standardization of the specificity and sensitivity of
the home-based and POC LHDx platform technology; (2) validation of the
diagnostic assay specificity and sensitivity for evaluating disease prognosis;
and (3) development of a lab validation assay with custom software for disease
severity analysis and initiate regulatory approval for commercialization of the
home-based RAPID and POC LHDx. The Phase I project will address the unmet need
for identification of individuals that are at-risk and highly susceptible to
developing COPD for prognosis-based early intervention. The outcome would be
development of a novel, non-invasive LHDx for quantifying COPD-emphysema
initiation and progression for tailored intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.