* 2112356
* Category II: ACES - Accelerating Computing for Emerging Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Shaowen Wang, Texas A&M University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2026
* USD 12,249,999.00

The ever-growing complexity of Science and Engineering (S&amp;E) workflows and
expectations of Open Science have encouraged researchers to adopt new
technologies, such as containerization, virtualization and composability, that
enable them to respond to an increasingly complex cyberinfrastructure (CI)
landscape while producing shareable, and reproducible results. ACES
(Accelerating Computing for Emerging Sciences), an innovative advanced
computational prototype to be developed by Texas A&amp;M University, tries to
answer a fundamental question: how does one effectively offer a holistic
computing platform that can simultaneously meet the needs of a continuum of
users in diverse research communities with varying levels of computing adoption?
The project will allow researchers to creatively develop new programming models
and workflows that utilize these architectures while simultaneously advancing
HPC (High Performance Computing) and data science
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACES platform removes significant bottlenecks
in advanced computing by introducing the flexibility to aggregate various
components (i.e., processors, accelerators and memory) on an as-needed basis to
solve problems that were previously not addressable. By letting researchers
switch and run on accelerators best suited for their workflows, ACES will
benefit many research and development projects in the fields of artificial
intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML), cybersecurity, health population
informatics, genomics and bioinformatics, human and agricultural life sciences,
oil &amp; gas simulations, de novo materials design, climate modeling, molecular
dynamics, quantum computing architectures, imaging, smart and connected
societies, geosciences, and quantum chemistry. Toward facilitating researcher
use, ACES will offer avenues for interactive computing, portals, and cloud
connectivity. ACES will support the national research community through
coordination systems supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF).
Finally, ACES will also leverage existing efforts that promote science and
broaden participation in computing at the K-12, collegiate, and professional
levels to have a transformative impact nationally by focusing on training,
education and outreach. ACES activities are designed to expand the participation
of traditionally underrepresented groups in computing and STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics), particularly at minority-serving
institutions. ACES will offer fellowships to students, continue efforts to
support teacher programs, and offer a number of formal and informal courses,
whose materials will be offered to the national community for use free-of-
charge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funds the development of a dynamically
composable high-performance data analysis and computing platform, named ACES. AI
and ML are integrated with traditional simulation and modeling approaches in the
pursuit of innovation. Edge-computing and instrumental probes have pushed the
need to verify, process, store, analyze, and query vast amounts of unstructured
data in real time. The coupling of analytics with closely-situated data on
highly-usable web-based technologies connected to a compute backend have led to
a paradigm shift in expectations from research computing environments. The ACES
innovative composable hardware platform helps accelerate transformative changes
in research areas that can leverage novel High Bandwidth Memory (HBM) processors
and accelerators for analytics and computing. ACES leverages Liqid’s composable
framework via PCIe (Peripheral Component Interconnect express) Gen5 on Intel’s
HBM Sapphire Rapid processors to offer a rich accelerator testbed consisting of
Intel Ponte Vecchio GPUs (Graphics Processing Units), Intel FPGAs (Field
Programmable Gate Arrays), NEC Vector Engines, NextSilicon co-processors,
Graphcore IPUs (Intelligence Processing Units). The accelerators are coupled
with Intel Optane memory and DDN Lustre storage interconnected with Mellanox NDR
400Gbps (gigabit-per-second) InfiniBand to support workflows that benefit from
optimized devices. ACES will enable applications and workflows to dynamically
integrate the different accelerators, memory, and in-network computing protocols
to glean new insights by rapidly processing large volumes of data, and provide
researchers with a unique platform to produce complex hybrid programming models
that effectively supports calculations that were not feasible
before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.