* 2112694
* CAREER: Theory and Algorithms for Efficient Control of Wireless Networks with Jointly  Optimized Performance: High Throughput, Low Delay, and Low Complexity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Bo Ji, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 04/30/2023
* USD 301,495.00

With the advent of smart devices and the Internet of things, wireless technology
has spawned a plethora of services that span business, science and engineering,
entertainment, safety and security, health monitoring, and cover a large portion
of our social interactions. Due to the prevalence of these new services, today's
wireless networks are witnessing not only an unprecedented growth in the volume
of traffic, but also a significant change in the types of traffic (e.g., a much
higher percentage of voice/video traffic with more stringent delay
requirements). These new trends require next-generation wireless networks to
provide not only high data rates (tens of gigabits per second), but also ultra-
low latencies (sub-millisecond). Moreover, as wireless networks grow and support
an increasingly large number of users, network control algorithms must also
incur low complexity in order to be implemented in practice. However, the
question of how to simultaneously achieve high throughput, low delay and low
complexity remains largely open. Addressing this major research challenge is a
main goal of this project. Not only is this research expected to substantially
advance our understanding of designing efficient control algorithms for wireless
networks with jointly optimized performance, but it would also expand/create the
much-needed theoretical foundations for developing simple and practical
protocols to optimize the key performance metrics needed in the design of next-
generation wireless networks. This research will also be closely integrated with
a comprehensive educational plan, which is focused on providing research
experiences to undergraduate and K-12 students, recruiting and training
underrepresented students, and engaging in curriculum development activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create new theoretical
foundations for designing provably efficient network control algorithms that
perform well in all three dimensions of throughput, delay, and complexity.
Specifically, this research will be carried out around three main thrusts: (i)
it focuses on intra-cell control for a multi-channel cellular network, and aims
to build a theoretical framework for designing low-complexity scheduling
algorithms with provably guaranteed optimal throughput and optimal (or near-
optimal) large-deviations delay rate-function; (ii) it considers a more
challenging setting of network-wide control for larger systems (e.g., a dense
multi-cell system or an ad hoc wireless network), and aims to develop a new
node-based approach for designing efficient scheduling algorithms with provable
throughput and evacuation time performance; and (iii) it considers distributed
network-side control and aims to design low-complexity algorithms that achieve
high throughput and low delay.