* 2112381
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing the Microballoon: Precisely-Placeable Stratospheric Balloon
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Jared Leidich, URBAN SKY THEORY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2022
* USD 254,685.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to address many of the limitations
associated with traditional stratospheric balloons that have, to date, prevented
the widespread usefulness of this technology for targeted remote sensing
applications. Traditional stratospheric balloons are massive and difficult to
operate. They are often hundreds of feet tall, weigh thousands of pounds, costs
tens of thousands of dollars, must be launched from fixed locations in near-
perfect weather, and are always one-time use. These technical, operational, and
financial limitations have led to a largely underutilized stratospheric
environment. The first proposed research objective for this effort is the design
completion of a small, mobile-launch, durable, and fully reusable altitude
stable stratospheric balloon. The second research objective is the design and
development of advanced balloon flight trajectory software needed to identify
acceptable balloon launch sites that yield successful, targeted remote sensing
missions. The third objective is the development of a rapid, mobile-launch
platform. The project will culminate with a stratospheric flight test campaign
that may demonstrate the combined system innovations, measured by the system’s
overall ability to image pre-determined target areas of interest at specified
times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project is to advance stratospheric remote sensing technologies while enabling
safe, routine, and commercially-viable Earth observation from a stratospheric
balloon platform. The stratosphere is relatively void of commercial remote
sensing activity, largely due to the limitations associated with traditional
stratospheric balloons. Today, stratospheric balloons are commercially unviable
for remote sensing applications due to their inability to image specific areas
of Earth at desired times, largely due to constraints associated with the need
for fixed launch infrastructure, a lack of system directional control, and
narrow operational launch windows requiring restrictive launch weather
conditions. The novel stratospheric remote sensing balloon that is the subject
of this effort may reduce or eliminate many of these constraints, resulting in a
zero-emission, mobile-launch, precisely-placeable stratospheric remote sensing
balloon that will enable high-resolution, targeted, low-cost Earth observation.
This effort may enhance scientific and technological understanding of small
stratospheric balloon systems for remote sensing applications and, most
importantly, may enable widespread commercial usefulness of the stratosphere for
remote sensing applications including remote, real-time wildfire monitoring and
rapid, broad-area disaster response awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.