* 2112540
* Searches for New Physics with Colliders and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Antonio Delgado, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 765,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Antonio Delgado, Adam
Martin, and Yuhsin Tsai at the University of Notre
Dame.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of theoretical particle physics is to
understand the fundamental building blocks of the universe around us. There are
two avenues towards this achieving this goal. The first is to analyze collisions
of protons slammed together at the highest energies available, with the goal of
investigating the elementary particles and their interactions at very short
length scales. The second is to study the history of the universe through the
cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation --- i.e., radiation from a very
early epoch in the evolution of the universe --- as well as through other
cosmological signals. Pursuing both of these directions, Professors Delgado,
Martin, and Tsai will conduct research that casts a wide net for signals of new
physics using a variety of techniques. As such, this research advances the
national interest by promoting the progress of science towards illuminating the
principal laws of nature. This work also has a broad impact in that it will
guide future experimental searches and involves close collaboration with
experimenters, both at Notre Dame and at CERN (the European Laboratory for
Particle Physics). Professors Delgado, Martin, and Tsai will also teach physics
at the undergraduate and graduate levels, lecture at graduate physics summer
schools, organize workshops and conferences around the world, and teach particle
physics to high school teachers and students through the QuarkNet program, both
nationally and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Martin will work on improving effective field theory-based searches for new
phenomena, with particular emphasis on the uncertainties from higher order
terms. Professor Delgado will study novel signals from R-parity violating
supersymmetry. He will also study Dark Matter model building in supersymmetry
and more general two-Higgs-doublet models. Professor Tsai will adapt existing
cosmology computer codes to study how dark photons and Mirror Twin Higgs models
can be bounded by current and future cosmological observations. Finally,
Professors Martin and Tsai will together study ‘hotspot' signals in the CMB from
pairs of super-heavy particles created in the early
universe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.