* 2112003
* A Dual-Mode Millimeter-Wave Sensor Network for Structural Monitoring in Wind Farms
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Changzhi Li, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2025
* USD 549,999.00

This project will enhance the resiliency and sustainability of the Nationâ€™s wind
energy infrastructures by investigating effective and autonomous turbine
inspection. The major forms of structural monitoring of wind structures have
traditionally been accomplished using contact-based sensors such as
accelerometers and strain gauges. However, application of these contact-based
sensors is limited by challenges in onsite integration, maintenance, and
reconfiguration. Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) systems are non-contact and
have high precision, but they are susceptible to weather conditions and are
often installed at fixed locations. Cameras can be mounted on unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) to scan the surface of turbines. However, this approach requires
stopping the rotation of turbine blades and can only inspect the surface. To
address these challenges, this project will develop a dual-mode millimeter-wave
sensor network driven by a unified decision-making framework that optimizes
structural inspection in wind farms. Since radio frequency signals are robust
against ambient light and weather conditions, a stationary platform located near
turbines will offer robust continuous monitoring during normal operation. On the
other hand, a formation of swarm-UAV-based sensor network can synthesize a large
observation aperture for high-resolution imaging when an initial problem is
identified by continuous-monitoring sensors, or during scheduled maintenance.
This project has an interdisciplinary nature involving millimeter-wave sensing,
adaptive UAV formation, swarm flight control, and unified decision-making
framework for system-level inspection schedule optimization. It will generate
new knowledge and methodologies for structural health monitoring of critical
infrastructures such as power transmission networks, oil/gas pipelines, and
transportation networks. The project provides a valuable opportunity for
students to develop their interest in the fields of system reliability
optimization, autonomous robotics, and microwave/millimeter-wave technologies.
The PIs will develop integrated research and education programs to attract
students from underrepresented groups and K-12 students into engineering and
involve undergraduate students into research. It will also encourage student
entrepreneurship based on successful technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is innovative in that it
integrates unique miniature millimeter-wave remote sensing capability with
advanced UAV control methods for networked coherent detection. Furthermore, it
unifies the long-term inspection planning at the system level and the dynamic
prognosis based on the short-term information at the turbine level. This project
will investigate: 1) stationary sensors mounted near wind turbines to provide
uninterrupted monitoring while turbines are in operation, where analytic and
machine learning methods will be integrated to analyze blade distortion from the
micro-Doppler signatures generated by rotating turbine blades; 2) UAV-based
sensor arrays to scan details of turbine blades with high-resolution synthetic
aperture imaging; 3) novel intrinsic flight control strategies to enable swarms
of UAVs to realize the desired formation with sufficient precision, energy
efficiency, and minimal jitter for synthetic aperture imaging; 4) a unified
decision-making framework to optimize the inspection schedule of wind turbines
from a systems and dynamic perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.