* 2112723
* Novel Astrophysical Probes of Exotic Particle Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Zentner, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 122,918.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Andrew Zentner at the
University of Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An overwhelming preponderance of
evidence indicates that 85% of the matter content of the Universe is in the form
of dark matter. Dark matter is an as-yet-unidentified form of matter. Evidence
for dark matter currently comes only from its gravitational pull and this
evidence has been accumulating, on many fronts, for a century. The identity and
properties of the dark matter nevertheless remain unknown. The nature of the
dark matter and the physical laws governing the interactions of dark matter can
be investigated in both earth-bound laboratories and indirectly through
astronomical observations. As part of his research, Professor Zentner aims to
further the quest to identify the dark matter through a combination of both
theoretical investigations and astrophysical observations. Dark matter lies
beyond our current understanding of matter and forces in nature. Consequently,
dark matter research advances the national interest by furthering efforts to
discover new forms of matter and new forces with which matter may be
manipulated. This project has two components. In the first, Professor Zentner
will attempt to identify subtle signatures of the properties of the dark matter
particle in stars, while in the second he will build more complete theoretical
models for the production and evolution of the dark matter that can be tested
using large astronomical surveys of galaxies. Both components will reveal clues
regarding the nature of dark matter and its interactions. Professor Zentner's
research will also have significant broader impacts. In particular, Professor
Zentner will conduct his research in collaboration with a graduate student who
will thereby receive training in cuttting-edge dark matter research. Professor
Zentner also plans to build a program to pair local K-12 teachers with
practicing physicists and astronomers in order to enable the teachers to bring
physics and astronomy into the classroom. Each scientist/teacher pair will
receive professional training in science education, develop an inquiry-based
curriculum, and co-teach the curriculum during several classroom visits
throughout the academic year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In further technical detail,
the two components of Professor Zentner's project are as follows. In the first
component, Professor Zentner will simulate the effects of exotic dark matter
candidates --- particularly asymmetric dark matter, self-interacting dark
matter, and strongly-interacting dark matter --- on stellar structure and
stellar evolution. These simulations will be tailored toward modeling stellar
populations in specific astrophysical environments, such as Local Group dwarf
galaxies. The predictions of these simulations can then be compared with
detailed astronomical observations of stellar populations in these astrophysical
environments to determine whether or not specific properties of the dark matter
can be identified in the data. In the second component of this proposal,
Professor Zentner will build more complete theoretical models of so-called light
and ultra-light dark matter particle candidates. In particular, he will study
light and ultra-light dark matter models using the semi-classical techniques of
quantum fields in curved spacetimes. In so doing, he will develop a better
understanding of the possibilities for ultra-light dark matter and the
implications of ultra-light dark matter for the evolution of structure in the
universe. This will, in turn, provide for more incisive comparisons of
theoretical predictions with observational data that will yield more decisive
conclusions on whether or not the dark matter may be an as-yet-undiscovered,
ultra-light particle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.