* 2112824
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Algorithmic Game Theory: Equilibria and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Aviad Rubinstein, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,962.00

U.S. firms and government agencies run high-stakes auctions in exceedingly
complex environments with sophisticated, algorithmic bidders. The strategic
aspect of the agent behavior requires game-theoretic reasoning about their
different incentives, and their large numbers and complex environment demand
efficient algorithms. This research is advancing fundamental questions at the
intersection of Economics and Computer Science, solidifying the theoretical
foundations underlying these auctions. The new insights are intended to inform
the design of auctions, leading to improved and more robust auctions, with
better efficiency and greater revenue. The education plan incorporates course
development and research training for both undergraduate and graduate students,
as well as professional workshops that promote early-career researchers
(students and postdocs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research directions
are centered around two natural questions regarding the design and analysis of
auctions, and more generally systems used by strategic agents: (i) Will the
agents converge to an equilibrium? This project takes a computational approach
with respect to this problem and asks in what scenarios equilibria can be
computed efficiently. A particular emphasis will be given to tractable, beyond-
worst-case instances. (ii) If agents do not converge to an equilibrium, how
should one model their behavior? What guarantees can be given on the quality of
outcomes under alternative behavioral models? For example, when modeling
algorithmic strategic agents, it is natural to replace classical (fully
rational) game-theoretic assumptions with common machine-learning algorithms
(such as no-regret algorithms) that have become increasingly popular. Beyond the
immediate applications to mechanism design, the research is also developing
fundamental connections to computational complexity and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.