* 2113880
* IUCRC Phase 1 Florida International University: Center for Infrastructure Trustworthiness in Energy Systems (CITES)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Osama Mohammed, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 210,000.00

The Center for Infrastructure Trustworthiness in Energy Systems (CITES), a new
Phase I IUCRC, focuses on research issues in the critical area of cyber
resilience and the trustworthiness of energy systems (e.g., electric grid
generation, transmission, and distribution), which have an extensive dependence
on cyber technology. Composed of three University sites (University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, University of Arkansas, and Florida International University),
CITES seeks to advance research and technologies that addresses unmet and
underserved industry needs to better secure energy systems. In close partnership
with its members (Offices of Emergency Medical Services, energy providers,
national labs, and industry associations), CITES will help secure the national
defense by developing research that leads to practical means of protecting
energy systems against failure within and attacks upon their cyber
infrastructures. The fundamental issues addressed by CITES concern cyber
resilience in the context of the specialized requirements for these “operational
technology” (OT) systems, issues which include the heterogeneity of OT
equipment, and integration with much more widely used informational technology
(IT) equipment. The Center will focus on detecting and quickly responding to
attacks on the cyber infrastructure, rapidly recovering from the impacts of
successful attacks, decreasing the costs and risks of patching operational
systems, and ensuring that communication between devices happens fast enough and
with enough volume to support operations. CITES will also serve an important
role in augmenting the nation’s workforce in OT-knowledgeable cyber-security
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methodologies include system
analysis, formal methods and other mathematics, and empirical evaluation of
prototypes. CITES technical contributions include knowledge creation, knowledge
transfer, and practical proofs of concept that utilize Florida International
University (FIU)'s specialized testbeds. Energy providers benefit by observing
the potential for increased resilience; Equipment manufacturers benefit from
proven ideas, and other stakeholders benefit from increased knowledge. CITES
research at FIU is organized in three thrusts. The first thrust is increasing
security which addresses issues related to increased energy industry use of
power electronics with embedded sensors, converters, actuation, and control
mechanisms through wired and wireless connections. Electric grids, electrified
transportation, data centers, and Internet of Things (IoT) devices rely on
trustworthy power electronics. The Center seeks to identify the best key
management approaches, make the existing solutions deployable to the power grid,
and adapt novel solutions that will be lightweight, have significant bandwidth,
and be storage efficient. The second thrust - enhancing communications
supporting energy cyber-physical systems - provides critical capabilities for
securing commercial wireless networks and their interactions with energy systems
equipment that operate on them. The Center utilizes a comprehensive frequency
range across the 5G and satellite communications and navigation bands to enable
security measures and characterization techniques that serve the growing
industry and related energy systems innovations, internet of things (IoT), and
navigation in support of current and future energy cyber-physical systems. The
third thrust, security of electric vehicle infrastructure - solves diverse
problems related to safety and security that are forced by the widespread use of
electric vehicles. A broad space of research problems related to power
electronics, placement, and management of charging stations supports aggregate
battery power to support renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.