* 2113526
* The Moving Mountains Summit: Collaboratively Redefining the Future of Mountain Environments and Society
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Timberley Roane, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,829.00

Mountain environments provide critical resources – such as clean water, forests,
food, and medicines – to over half of the world’s population. Mountain systems
are also facing some of the most extreme effects of climate change. This project
will support the Moving Mountains Summit, an event that will advance scientific
and practical knowledge regarding the future trajectories of mountain
environments and human communities. The Summit’s participants will take part in
workshops to address key issues including food security, livelihoods, tourism,
and energy and the connections among them. Participants will explore how people,
policy, and science can team up to build resilience in the face of climate
change, and catalyze changes toward a sustainable, equitable and secure future
for mountain environments and societies. Indigenous peoples and knowledge will
play a prominent role in the Summit and in identifying pathways toward the
future. The Summit will thus make a substantive intellectual contribution to
synergies among Indigenous knowledge, Western science, and other knowledge
systems. It will also expand the process for how we do science and increase
public participation in the scientific process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Moving
Mountains Summit will leverage the synergistic power of science, local and
Indigenous knowledge, business, policy and advocacy to build and strengthen
enduring links between key players in mountains and address mountain
environmental and community sustainability in the post-COVID world while facing
accelerating effects of climate change. &lt;br/&gt;The Summit will be a hybrid
meeting with the in-person portion taking place at the Rocky Mountain
Institute’s Innovation Center in Basalt, Colorado, USA. For those who cannot
attend the Colorado meeting, participants in different locations around the
world can convene in-person at ‘regional meet-up mountain-hubs’ such as
Kathmandu, Nepal and Huaraz, Peru. A fully supported online-only option will be
available for those who are not able or choose not to travel. Summit outcomes
will include: a clearly articulated and shared vision with metrics to assess
progress; a theory of change and related “road map”; new partnerships across
diverse actors and sectors; media products; peer-reviewed publications; a Summit
Declaration of Values; and commitments to an Action Plan towards sustainable
mountain futures. The Summit will help build collaborations among mountain
researchers, practitioners, entrepreneurs, and stakeholders by establishing the
Mountain Sentinels network as a boundary spanning organization for meaningful
and broad engagement among mountain Indigenous and western scientists and
stakeholders, globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.