* 2113315
* Collaborative Research: High resolution passive seismic imaging beneath Valles Caldera
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Brandon Schmandt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 106,431.00

The Valles caldera is one of three supervolcanoes in North America and has a
long history of volcanism with documented magma flows as recent as ~70,000
years. Seismic imaging allows visualization of volcanic subterranean structures
by using seismic waves in a similar way ultrasound sonography in medical
imaging. Seismic imaging of the Valles Caldera was lacking until recently, which
in turn has hindered estimate of melt volumes, melt extent, and understanding of
the plumbing system. A joint University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP)/University of
New Mexico (UNM) deployment in 2019 resulted in a 97-seismometer line crossing
the entire caldera for 1 month. A primary objective of this initiative is to
resolve the spatial extent and concentration of melt under the caldera, with
other standing questions including the depth of any magma body underlying the
dome, the thickness of intra-caldera fill and fractured basement blocks, and the
nature of the crust/mantle boundary. Using cutting edge techniques, researchers
probe and unveil the subterranean magmatic system of the volcano and foster a
collaboration between UTEP and UNM, two minority serving institutions. The
outcomes of this project improve earthquake and volcanic hazard assessment in
the region, and support the training of graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented minorities in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Valles
caldera, a Quaternary-active supervolcanoes, is the textbook example of a
resurgent caldera. It has largely escaped seismic scrutiny in the past two
decades. Here the researchers probe the magmatic system beneath Valles caldera.
They quantify the spatial extent of melt structures, the depth and emplacement
of scattering boundaries, and assess the assumed aseismic nature of the caldera
system. Ambient noise seismic interferometry is leveraged to estimate dispersion
curves for long period Rayleigh and Love waves; these will be jointly inverted
in a transdimensional Bayesian scheme with receiver functions, H/V ratios, and
noise autocorrelations. The goal is to accurately estimate velocity structures
under the Valles caldera. Targets include bounding the spatial extent and
concentration of melt through shear-wave velocity and Vp/Vs estimates, depth to
magmatic structures and caldera fill under the resurgent dome through scattered
wave analysis, and detection and location of any local seismicity that may
reveal magma and fluid movements. This project complements sparser long-term
seismic monitoring efforts by Los Alamos National laboratory. It serves as an
educational primer and complement to frequent geophysics field camps using the
caldera as a natural laboratory. Its outcomes improve the assessment of the
volcano life-cycle stage and allow better comparison with other Quaternary
supervolcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.