* 2113843
* IUCRC Planning Grant Louisiana State University: Center for Coastal Deltaic Innovation, Research, &amp; Technology (CDIRT)
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Marcio de Queiroz, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 11/30/2023
* USD 19,999.00

The US coastal economy contributes almost $8 trillion to the US gross domestic
product (GDP). If considered an individual country, the US coastal GDP would
rank number three in the world behind only the economies of the U.S. and China.
In a warming world, fraught with sea level rise; subsidence; and human
engineering interventions designed to protect communities and installed
infrastructure along the shoreline, coastal erosion is taking a serious toll,
especially on the mud-dominated Mississippi River deltaic system. Mississippi
River natural processes, driven by both climate change and flood/river control
practices, are hampering the ability of our nation’s southern coastal
communities and shoreline environments to remain resilient, sustainable,
productive, and healthy. This funding provides resources for Louisiana State
University to explore the formation of an industry-university cooperative
research center (the Center for Deltaic Innovation, Research, and Technology
(CDIRT)), a Center focused on combining the strengths, intellectual capacity,
and resources of universities, industry, and the public sector in tackling some
of the largest problems in mud-dominated, engineered, deltaic systems. Through a
Center planning meeting, Louisiana State University faculty and administrators
will engage a broad spectrum of public and private entities to identify and
discuss collective needs with the goal of creating a viable research roadmap and
associated research thrusts in which partners are willing to participate and
fund. Topics related to low cost, fine-grained, sediment transport to improve
longshore sediment distribution and the building up of barrier islands and
coastal wetlands will be proposed. In addition, topics involving possible
solutions to wetland erosion and regeneration will be discussed as will the use
of autonomous robotic vehicles that can help in restoration of wetland
vegetation and shoreline stabilization. Broader impacts of the work include:
workforce training where students participate in industry-relevant, basic, pre-
competitive research projects proposed by university faculty; the engagement of
underrepresented groups via partnership with Jackson State University a
historically black university; and coastal community and infrastructure
sustainability and resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industry-university
cooperative research Centers, like the one proposed to be focused on coastal
erosion and its mitigation by Louisiana State University, are powerful
partnerships between universities; the private sector; government; non-profits;
and local communities. These Centers operate as consortium focused on university
faculty and students carrying out fundamental research that addresses collective
industry and community needs and where projects are funded by membership fees
and other financial contributions from Center members. In this construct, the
intellectual power; infrastructure; and student talent of universities is
focused on real world problems of critical interest of a segment of the economy
in need of innovation to overcome conceptual and technological hurdles
individual entities are unable to do for themselves. The planning meeting
proposed will bring together interested parties to hear proto-Center leadership
describe the Center’s value proposition and potential return-on-investment of
those entities wishing to become members of the Center. Those at the planning
meeting will also help the Center create a research road map and research
thrusts that best address the most pressing needs of the collective membership
in the Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.