* 2113948
* Material Processing and Mechanical Behavior of High-Performance Cellulose Nanopaper Made From Cellulose Nanofibrils
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hareesh Tippur, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 489,155.00

This grant will enable research on developing cellulose ‘nanopaper’ made by
self-assembly of cellulose nanofibrils for structural applications. Strong,
stiff and tough materials with lightweight characteristics are critical for many
engineering applications ranging from automotive to aviation industries to
reduce energy consumption and increase structural agility, among others. This
research aims to create green alternatives to traditional fossil fuel derived
polymers and polymer composites by employing cellulose nanofibrils derived from
lignocellulosic biomass as an alternative to petroleum-based resources.
Educating and training students from diverse and underrepresented groups in
areas of processing of green materials and mechanical characterization and
modeling of novel nanostructured materials via non-contact, vision-based
approaches is part of the overall research goal. Incorporating the research
outcomes into the graduate curriculum, disseminating the findings to peers and
the community at-large through demonstrations, presentations, publications and
other outreach activities is integral to the research project as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high aspect ratio and semi-crystalline nanostructure
that cellulose nanofibrils possess make them ideal to form three-dimensionally
entangled microscopic networks suitable for processing high-performance
structural materials via self-assembly. The resulting material is often referred
to as cellulose nanopaper and has promising mechanical characteristics. This
basic research, at the interface of material processing and mechanical behavior
of cellulose nanopaper in ‘as-is’ and functionalized states, is to decipher
process-microstructure-property relations for this non-traditional and
potentially transformative material for high performance mechanical
applications. On the material processing front, the focus will be on (a)
studying the reaction conditions associated with the environmentally-friendly
formic acid hydrolysis and mechanical fibrillation parameters on the cellulose
nanofibril characteristics, (b) investigating different processing approaches to
control the resulting nanopaper quality, microstructure and functionality. On
the mechanical characterization front, the focus will be on (a) developing
mechanics-based understanding of the tensile and fracture responses of fibrous
cellulose nanopaper of different microstructures and functionalities at
different length scales and loading rates, (b) developing and demonstrating
monolithic and laminated high-performance cellulose nanopaper
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.