* 2113395
* Developing and Validating STEM Social Capital Scales
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Guan Saw, Claremont Graduate University
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 10/31/2023
* USD 255,054.00

This project will allow a mid-career principal investigator to acquire the
education research expertise needed to successfully conceive and execute
fundamental research with the potential to meaningfully advance knowledge on
developing scales to assess social capital as it relates to STEM learning. The
investigator's individual development plan includes a mentor and advisory board
members with expertise specific to this topic who will provide guidance and
feedback throughout the award period. Specifically, the principal investigator
will seek to increase capacity in four major areas: (1) deep knowledge of social
capital theories and measures; (2) knowledge and skills of designing and
conducting interviews/focus/groups; (3) knowledge and skills of designing
surveys and developing instruments; and (4) knowledge and skills of conducting
validity studies and multilevel structural equation modeling. Activities in the
individual professional development plan include attending academic conferences;
engaging in one-on-one mentoring activities; participating in specialized
training on scale development; engaging in networking opportunities; taking
short courses and attending seminars; and taking part in online activities with
STEM education experts, colleagues, and researchers. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, the principal investigator will develop and
validate two STEM social capital scales to advance knowledge about social
capital's role in promoting positive students' outcomes in STEM. This is an
important pilot study since few instruments exist to assess both student and
parent perspectives about how best to support and promote participation in STEM.
The project will be conducted in collaboration with a seven-week STEM summer
program for students in grades six through eleven. Therefore, this project will
seek to increase the principal investigator's understanding about student
achievement, motivation, and participation in STEM fields and careers through a
seven-step scale development procedure. Outcomes from this project will advance
the principal investigator's methodological knowledge about the development of
scales for measuring the influence of STEM social capital on student's interest,
motivation, and participation in STEM fields and careers. The project is
supported through the EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research competition that is designed to build individuals' capacity to carry
out high quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.