* 2113345
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Using Machine Learning to Build More Resilient and Transparent Computer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Michael Reiter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 244,069.00

Machine learning algorithms are increasingly part of everyday life: they help
power the ads that we see while browsing the web, self-driving aids in modern
cars, and even weather prediction and critical infrastructure. We rely on these
algorithms in part because they perform better than alternatives and they can be
easy to customize to new applications. Many machine learning algorithms also
have a big weakness: it is difficult to understand how and why they compute the
answers they provide. This opaqueness means that the answers we get from a
machine learning algorithm could be subtly biased or even completely wrong, and
yet we might not realize it. This project's goal is to make machine learning
algorithms easier to understand, as well as to leverage some of the techniques
used by attackers to trick machine learning algorithms into making mistakes to
build computer systems that are more resistant to attack. In addition to making
fundamental contributions to how machine learning algorithms are designed and
used, the project includes outreach efforts that will entice students to gain
hands-on experience with machine learning tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on deep neural networks (DNNs). A groundswell of research within
the past five years has demonstrated the propensity of these models to being
evaded by inputs created to fool them -- so called "adversarial examples." These
types of attacks leverage DNNs' opacity: while DNNs can perform remarkably well
on some classification tasks, they often defy simple explanations of how they do
so, and indeed can leverage features for doing so that humans might find
surprising. This project leverages DNNs and the attacks against them to gain
insights into how to build more resilient computer systems. Specifically, the
project will use DNNs to model adversaries trying to attack computer systems and
then "attack" these DNNs to learn how to improve these systems' resilience to
attack. This modeling will be done using Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs), in
which "generator" and "discriminator" models compete. Central to this vision are
the abilities to evade DNNs under constraints and to extract explanations from
them about how they perform classification. Consequently, this project will make
fundamental advances both in developing better methods to deceive DNNs and in
improving this important machine-learning tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.