* 2113752
* SBIR Phase I:  Epidermal Sensor for Human Performance Assessment and Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Evan Davies, PREDICOR LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a wearable sensor and
analytical platform capable of non-invasively monitoring human health and
athletic performance. This SBIR Phase 1 project will result in a miniaturized,
durable wearable sensor that can be comfortably worn in any environment athletic
or otherwise. The device will contain a novel suite of sensors capable of
measuring health and performance related parameters. The analytical platform
will continuously predict core body temperature, athletic performance, and
optimal athletic training goals. The core body temperature prediction algorithm
will provide an early warning when the core temperature approaches a dangerous
level, which will mitigate the serious and growing risk of heat-related illness.
The performance and optimal training prediction algorithms will provide training
suggestions to achieve maximum performance growth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the unmet
technological and clinical need to integrate biomechanical, physiological, and
thermoregulatory parameters into a single unobtrusive device and provide users
with meaningful and actionable insight toward health and performance. The
critical research objectives of this Phase 1 project are the development of: a
comprehensive suite of sensors packaged into a durable and comfortable wearable
device, a reliable and accurate core temperature prediction algorithm,
performance and optimal workload prediction algorithms, and an integrated system
providing clear and useful feedback to users regardless of medical or scientific
knowledge. The hardware will be incorporated into a 0.75x0.75 inch form factor,
continuously measure all parameters with medical grade accuracy, and achieve a
minimum battery life of 90 hours. Algorithm development will leverage high-
fidelity datasets, advanced signal processing, and custom deep learning
architectures involving multivariate Long Short-Term Memory and feed forward
neural networks to understand the non-linear, time dependent relationships
between parameters and overall human performance and safety. These complex
relationships will be distilled into an easily understandable and visually
appealing user interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.