* 2113817
* IUCRC Planning Grant Wayne State University: Center for Electric, Connected and Autonomous Technologies for Mobility (eCAT)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Jerry Ku, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 11/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

While autonomous vehicle companies focus on manufacturing driverless cars,
electrification and connectivity technologies can upgrade the industry by
allowing vehicles to communicate with the driving circumstance to achieve better
safety with less emission. A key obstacle to the development of the electric,
connected and autonomous vehicle system is the shortage of synergy research from
needed domains. The proposed Center for Electric, Connected and Autonomous
Technologies for Mobility (eCAT) will concentrate on interdisciplinary research,
aiming to initiate and accelerate the transformation of mobility methods from
conventional vehicles to electric, connected and autonomous vehicles by creating
innovative electric, connected and autonomous technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In light of a partnership between Wayne State University
(WSU), the University of North Texas (UNT), and Clarkson University (Clarkson),
the center not only serves as an apparatus of academic researchers collaborating
with industry on problems of high national and international importance but also
provides industry partners the opportunities to access the most advanced
synergic research produced from a diverse group of researchers. Especially, the
Wayne State University (WSU) Site will collaborate with other academic sites by
building on prior and ongoing transdisciplinary work in technology to support
electrification, real-time computing system and safety of the connected
autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will not only advance the
science and technologies of electric, connected and autonomous vehicles, but
also accelerate both knowledge and intellectual property transfer between
academia and industry through collaborative partnerships. This will allow for
the rapid transformation of the state-of-the-art mobility technologies from
research labs to industry. Educational efforts will be devoted to (1) curriculum
design for the BS/MS programs, (2) summer camp development for K-12 students,
(3) broadening participation in computing and engineering, at WSU, UNT, and
Clarkson. Research results will be disseminated through our annual conference -
MetroCAD, publications, and the development of publicly-available open-source
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data obtained from this project will include
experimental, computational, text-based, and/or curricular data. All data
products will be retained for a minimum of three years after conclusion of the
award or three years after public release (publication), whichever is later.
WSU, UNT, and Clarkson will have password-protected shared network drives to
facilitate data sharing within the teams, with collaborators, and indeed anyone
in the community with an interest in the NSF-funded data. A landing page for
navigation to archived data will be created at
http://ecat.center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.