* 2113458
* Theory and Methods for Tree-Informed High-Dimensional Compositional Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Shulei Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,999.00

Compositional data, that is, quantitative measurements of the parts of some
whole, is subject to constraints that necessitate its analysis be distinct from
that of standard unconstrained multivariate statistical analysis. High-
dimensional compositional data naturally arises in a wide range of modern
scientific applications, including human microbiome studies, nutritional
science, genomics studies, and geochemistry. In these scientific applications, a
hierarchical relationship represented by a tree structure is often available for
the compositional data’s different components. Because of compositional nature
and tree structure, these data pose a unique challenge to gaining reliable and
scientifically meaningful insights in a data-driven way. Current efforts on
analyzing such tree-informed compositional data are primarily designed for
individual applications; there is need for new methodology and theory in a
unified framework. Motivated by this need, this project aims to develop novel
statistical theories, methodologies, and computational tools for more robust and
efficient analysis. The project will provide interdisciplinary research
opportunities for students who aim to work on the intersection between
statistics and other scientific areas. The project will also develop user-
friendly open-source software implementing the new statistical methods to
benefit a broad scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
study how statistical analysis should take data's compositional nature and tree
structure into account reliably and efficiently. Through a unified framework,
the project will develop novel and principled methodologies and provide a deep
understanding of the tree structure's role in tree-informed compositional data
analysis. Specifically, this research will study three fundamental topics in
tree-informed compositional data analysis: 1) independence and conditional
independence test for tree-informed compositional data, 2) testing for
differential components in tree-informed compositional data, and 3) metric
learning for tree-informed compositional data. The resulting methods and
theories from the project will lead to more robust and powerful practical tools
for tree-informed compositional data analysis in different scientific fields,
ultimately helping advance knowledge in science and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.