* 2113941
* SHF: Small: High-speed DNA polymerase CRNs for signal amplification, oscillation, consensus, and linear control
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,951.00

The regulation of cellular and molecular processes typically involves complex
biochemical processes, which are termed chemical reaction networks (CRNs).
Synthetic CRNs using reactions on DNA molecules can be systematically designed
to approximate sophisticated biochemical processes. However, most of the prior
experimental protocols for CRNs relied on either DNA strand-displacement
hybridization or enzymatic reactions, and the resulting synthetic systems
usually suffer from either slow rates or leaky reactions. In contrast, much
higher reaction rates can be obtained by the DNA enzyme strand-displacement
polymerase (PSD). This project is investigating a wide variety of fast and
robust CRNs using only DNA hybridization and PSD reactions. The project includes
design, simulation, and experimental implementations. Further, the project is
highly interdisciplinary and impacts interdisciplinary education at
undergraduate and graduate levels. The project engages students (with emphasis
on women and under-represented minorities) from different academic levels across
multiple disciplines in mentoring and teaching. Hands-on demonstrations of DNA
computing and CRNs are being designed for outreach programs at Duke and local
high schools. Workshops and lectures are disseminating knowledge of advanced
PSD-based nanoscience concepts to undergraduate and graduate student
audiences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The regulation of cellular and molecular
processes typically involves complex biochemical processes, which are termed
chemical reaction networks (CRNs). Synthetic CRNs using reactions on DNA
molecules can be systematically designed to approximate sophisticated
biochemical processes. However, most of the prior experimental protocols for
CRNs relied on either DNA strand-displacement hybridization or enzymatic
reactions, and the resulting synthetic systems usually suffer from either slow
rates or leaky reactions. In contrast, much higher reactions rates can be
obtained by the DNA enzyme strand-displacement polymerase (PSD). This project is
investigating a wide variety of fast and robust CRNs using only DNA
hybridization and PSD reactions. The project includes design, simulation, and
experimental implementations. The key CRNs investigated in this project include
(i) an autocatalytic amplifier, (ii) a dynamic oscillatory system, (iii) a
molecular-scale consensus protocol, and (iv) a linear control system. All of
these CRNs have important practical applications. The project has already
completed the design, simulation and preliminary experiments of some simple CRNs
using PSD, including in silico demonstration of dynamic CRNs using PSD, which
provided estimates of reaction rate, leak, and false positives for these simple
CRNs. Further, the project has already completed the design, simulation &amp;
experimental demonstration of dynamic oscillatory CRN systems using PSD to
identify the number of cycles, precision of cycles, sensitivity to initial
concentrations and approximation to unit rates, etc. The project is now refining
its initial designs for the key CRNs listed above. These are being simulated and
optimized. Experimental demonstrations are being made of each CRN. The project
has potentially a transformative impact on research in DNA CRNs due to the
speed-ups. The speed-ups also significantly impact many applications of PSD-
based CRNs: (a) the amplification CRNs allow speedy nucleic acid detection for
diagnostic use in medicine and detection use for forensics, (b) the consensus
CRNs allow multiple molecular-device voting, (c) the oscillation CRNs allow for
synchronization of multiple repeated molecular-scale operations, and (d) the
linear control CRNs allow for regulation of molecular concentrations, for
control of a large variety of synthetic and natural biochemical systems. The
project is investigating these applications (a-d) and plans to experimentally
demonstrate at least one of them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.