* 2113412
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR--A Whole-Atmospheric Perspective on Connections between Intra-Seasonal Variations in the Troposphere and Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Astrid Maute, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 19,998.00

This collaborative award is aimed at studying the relationship between the
variability of thermospheric winds to the variability caused by wave structures
generated in the tropical troposphere. This coupling is driven by wave
excitation by deep convection in the tropical troposphere that can propagate
vertically into the thermosphere. Tropospheric convection associated with the
Madden‐Julian Oscillation (MJO), the dominant mode of intra-seasonal variability
in tropical convection and circulation, is known to modulate the intensity of
upward‐propagating gravity and Kelvin waves. Previous work demonstrated that a
90-day oscillation in tropospheric convection during 2009-2010 was imprinted on
both thermospheric mean winds and the eastward propagating wavenumber 3 diurnal
(DE3) tidal amplitudes. This modulation was observed by the GOCE and CHAMP
satellites and modeled with the TIME-GCM. The research effort would broaden
participation by involving and training two undergraduate student interns
through the University of Colorado BOLD internship program that focuses on
promoting the recruitment, retention, and development of traditionally
underrepresented engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new research
will follow up on the results obtained in recent studies that demonstrated that
strong coupling between the troposphere and the thermosphere occurs on intra-
seasonal timescales. The award will address the following questions:
&lt;br/&gt;Q1: How frequent, prevalent, and persistent are correlations between
30 to 100-day variations in the three regions of troposphere, mesosphere, and
thermosphere, during the past two decades? &lt;br/&gt;Q2: What plausible roles
do large-scale upward propagating waves play in dynamically coupling tropical
tropospheric intra-seasonal variability into the thermosphere? &lt;br/&gt;Q3: Is
there any observational evidence suggesting a connection between this
troposphere-thermosphere intra-seasonal coupling and MJO, Quasi-Biennial
Oscillation (QBO) and El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)? &lt;br/&gt;The
combination of available upper atmosphere satellite data with ground-, and
model-based datasets would be studied to provide insight into whether the intra-
seasonal variations in the waves are caused by variability in the tropospheric
sources or by wave-mean flow interactions. In the case of the latter, the study
would determine at which heights these interactions are occurring. This study
will determine the contribution of global-scale wave coupling between the
troposphere and the thermosphere, thus addressing outstanding issues of
fundamental importance to the CEDAR community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.