* 2113994
* Imaging charge recombination dynamics in organic semiconductor films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* John Marohn, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2024
* USD 592,636.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our economy requires energy to run.
Sunlight is a free and essentially limitless source of energy. To exploit this
energy source, economical solar cells that can convert sunlight into electrical
current and voltage are needed. Existing silicon solar cells are too expensive
to create, pattern, and install on a massive scale. Solar cells made from
plastics and small molecules, on the other hand, can potentially be as
inexpensive as paint to create and as easy as newsprint to pattern at high
speed. Plastic/molecular solar cells are being intensely studied worldwide, but
how these complex materials convert light to electricity remains a puzzle. With
this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research, Professor John Marohn and his research group
at Cornell University will develop methods for watching how electrical charges
in a film activated by sunlight move and relax. The research team will utlizie a
specialized microscope which enables the observation of charges moving distances
of nanometers (one billionth of a meter) on the timescale of nanoseconds (one
billionth of a second). By allowing the observation of charge motion at the
molecular level, it is expected that these measurements will significantly
advance our understanding of how plastic/molecular solar cell materials convert
light into electricity. This research will open new ways to study semiconductor
chips and batteries, two growth technologies central to our economy. Researchers
funded by this project will develop virtual high-school science experiments on
the physics of waves suitable for both in-person and remote
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
best organic photovoltaic materials, the photocarrier recombination time is
anomalously long. If this anomalous behavior could be understood then it could
be exploited to improve the open-circuit voltage and current of organic solar
cells. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, will study charge generation and
recombination in organic donor/acceptor (D/A) blends at nanoscale spatial
resolution and nanosecond temporal resolution. Proposed experiments include
scanning Kelvin probe force microscopy, measuring local electrostatic potential
and electric field; broadband local dielectric spectroscopy, measuring local
steady-state conductivity and energetic disorder; and "phase-kick" electric
force microscopy (pk-EFM), measuring transient conductivity. Charge mobility
will be studied in single-component films by simultaneously measuring device
current and local electric field. Charge recombination transients in D/A blends
prepared on both insulating and metallic substrates will be recorded using pk-
EFM and compared to bulk time-resolved microwave conductivity measurements. The
drift and diffusion of photogenerated charges in inhomogeneous D/A blends will
be observed stroboscopically via pk-EFM. Films comprised of polymer donors with
both fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors will be examined. It is expected that
the microscopic material parameters gleaned from these measurements will enable
the rigorous testing of charge-recombination
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.