* 2113641
* Collaborative Research: Climate-induced sea-level rise, warming and herbivory effects on vegetation and greenhouse gas emission in coastal western Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Karen Beard, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 01/31/2026
* USD 642,524.00

Arctic coastal wetlands are experiencing the effects of climate change,
including warming temperatures, flooding from sea level rise, and changes to the
number of geese that migrate in the summer and graze on local plants. The Yukon-
Kuskokwim (Y-K) Delta of Alaska is one of the largest river deltas in the world
and an important ecosystem for millions of migratory geese. This research looks
at how warming, increased flooding, and changes in the impacts of geese will
affect different plant communities and the uptake and release of greenhouse
gases, which influence the rate of climate change. The investigators will
conduct field experiments in different plant communities that will experience
different levels of flooding, warming, and goose impacts, and measure plant and
greenhouse gas responses to these changes. The investigators will also conduct
laboratory experiments where the investigators can tightly control temperature,
flooding, and effects of geese to better understand the mechanisms behind our
measured field responses. This project expands our understanding because it will
be conducted across both coastal and inland landscapes in the Y-K Delta, unlike
previous research. The experiments will look at complex interactions between
flooding, warming, and goose grazing to tease apart these three effects. The
deep understanding provided from these experiments can also be applied to other
ecosystems because many coastal regions in the Arctic are experiencing similar
climate changes. The investigators will work with a school teacher to build
learning modules based on this research that will be used in middle schools
across native villages in the Y-K Delta. The researchers will work with local
high school students at the research site to train them in field techniques as
well as help them develop a story about the research for the local radio
station. Finally, the investigators will train and mentor a post-doctoral
researcher, two graduate students, and undergraduates at three universities, who
will disseminate their findings through scientific conferences and
publications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Arctic coastal wetlands are experiencing
significant consequences of climate change, including increasing temperature,
rising sea level, and changing waterfowl abundances. The Yukon-Kuskokwim (Y-K)
Delta in Alaska, one of the largest river deltas in the world, is an important
refuge for millions of migratory birds and one of the most vulnerable regions in
North America to these changes. The overall goal of this proposal is to
investigate how increasing temperature and flooding, in light of changing
waterfowl abundances, interact to affect plant communities and greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, specifically carbon dioxide and methane, across the Y-K Delta
landscape. To address this goal, the investigators will conduct a large-scale
field experiment, where they will manipulate temperature, flooding regimes, and
goose impacts to quantify how these variables interact to influence plant
communities and GHG fluxes. The investigators will use laboratory experiments to
expand inference and understanding of the mechanisms behind the measured
responses. The combination of these approaches will result in a greater
understanding of what drives vegetation community dynamics and GHG emissions
from this system. The proposed research addresses three gaps in knowledge: 1)
This research expands our knowledge about GHG fluxes in the Y-K Delta by
measuring the controls on GHGs in both coastal and inland plant communities; 2)
The results will inform prediction of how climate-induced changes will interact
to influence communities and GHG fluxes in the future; and 3) By improving
understanding of the mechanisms that drive GHG fluxes across a gradient of
conditions, the work will improve understanding of how GHG fluxes will be
affected by climate change in other high-latitude coastal wetland systems. For
broader impacts, the investigators will work with a local school teacher to
build learning modules from our research to be used in middle schools across
native villages in the Y-K Delta. The investigators will work with local high
school students at the research site to train them in field techniques as well
as help them develop a story about the research for the local radio station. The
investigators will train and mentor a post-doctoral researcher, two graduate
students, and undergraduates at three universities, who will disseminate their
findings through scientific conferences and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.