* 2113789
* IUCRC Planning Grant Tufts University: Center for Cellular Agriculture and Cultured Meat (CACM)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2022
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2022
* USD 19,999.00

The Center for Cellular Agriculture and Cultured Meat (CACM) aims to address the
world’s growing need for high quality proteins that are nutritious, delicious,
affordable, safe, sustainable, and ethical. Rising meat demand, juxtaposed with
increasing concern over climate change and environmental degradation, highlights
the need for alternative methods of producing conventional animal products. Cell
culture, fermentation, and food science offer powerful tools for developing
these alternatives. Specifically, by producing animal products such as meat and
dairy through cell culture—rather than from whole animals, it is possible to
decouple the animal products that consumers demand from the negative
externalities of intensive animal agriculture. Such a production paradigm
(termed “Cellular Agriculture”) could improve our food system’s resilience,
sustainability, health, safety and accessibility. The CACM is focused on
combining the strengths, capacity, and resources of academia and industry to
tackle some of the biggest problems facing the sustainable and scalable
production of cellular agriculture products. The Center will explore topics
ranging from raw material inputs for production, process designs to maximize
efficiency, product quality metrics including nutrition and sensory experience,
food safety, environmental impacts, production economics, and consumer
desirability. Specific research thrusts will be determined with input from a
range of industry stakeholders and will address the most pressing research areas
for advancing the field. Additionally, the Center will pursue activities to draw
in talent to this rapidly growing and highly interdisciplinary industry,
building a workforce which encompasses workers from STEM (e.g., biology,
chemical engineering, and food science), agriculture (e.g., chefs, farmers, and
economists), and policy (e.g., food policy, food safety, and consumer interest).
Through these activities, the CACM will foster this growing field towards a food
system that is sustainable, healthy, and attractive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CACM will focus on three main research thrusts: 1) advancing technologies for
cellular agriculture production, 3) advancing the quality of cellular
agriculture products, and 3) advancing our understanding of cellular agriculture
products. The first of these will focus on developing enabling technologies that
can be used to lower the cost and improve the scale of production. The
approaches will include bioengineering (e.g., developing tissue scaffolds for
meat products), chemical engineering (e.g., developing bioreactors for producing
meat, milk, and other products through cell culture), food science (e.g.,
processing plant-based inputs for culture systems or cellular agriculture
products), and cell biology (e.g., developing cell lines or media for large
scale culture). The second research thrust will focus on enhancing the quality
of cellular agriculture products. Approaches here will include cell engineering,
nutrition and sensory evaluation and food processing/science. Finally, the third
thrust will focus on understanding the environmental, health, and societal
impacts of cellular agriculture products. Approaches will include life-cycle and
techno-economic assessment, nutrition evaluation, food-safety evaluation, and
consumer acceptance studies. Together, these thrusts will converge to accelerate
the development of cellular agriculture as an accessible, sustainable,
equitable, and desirable food production system. The CACM is centered at Tufts
University, which is home to the largest academic cultured meat research lab in
the US, as well as the Friedman School of Nutrition. The resources of the school
of Arts Science and Engineering (biomedical and chemical engineering facilities,
expertise, and workforce) combined with those of the Friedman School (nutrition
evaluation facilities, expertise, workforce, and the USDA’s Human Nutrition
Research Center on Aging), as well as the position of Boston, MA as a hub for
life-science research, combine to equip the CACM as a leader in collaborative
research for advancing cellular agriculture and cultured meat
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.