* 2113665
* Collaborative Research: Genetics and biomechanics of non-Newtonian prey capture adhesives across Panarthropoda
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Mercedes Burns, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 12/31/2025
* USD 330,483.00

Several groups of invertebrate species produce prey capture glues that are
deposited on silks, secreted onto limbs, or squirted directly onto prey. These
glues are materially unique in their drying times and reaction to humidity, but
they are functionally similar in that they vary in viscosity based on applied
forces and their rapid adhesion. The researchers will investigate the molecular
and physical attributes of prey capture glues from 10 species in three distantly
related groups - arachnids (spiders and opilionids), flies (predatory glow
worms), and onychophorans (velvet worms). By understanding the differences in
glue properties with respect to their molecular bases, a catalog of necessary
components can be established for the design of new synthetic adhesives. This
research will furthermore enhance participation of underrepresented minorities
in field coursework, which research continues to demonstrate to be critically
important to individuals choosing careers in ecology, evolution, and
environmental sciences. The Highlands Biological Station (HBS) in Highlands,
North Carolina, is an important resource for research in the Appalachian region
and has hosted the two-week field class, “The Biology of Spiders,” for several
decades. This class focuses on field identification, specimen collection, and
preservation. With the twin goals of furthering positive public perception and
interest in arachnids within the Appalachian region, and improving access to
fieldwork opportunities for diverse student populations, the researchers will
enhance the existing course by supporting student attendance via diversity-
focused scholarships, new course material, and contributions to the HBS arachnid
collection through student participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike materials
with homologous origin that diversify under selective pressure, investigating
convergently evolved prey capture glues from distantly related organisms offers
a unique opportunity to explore the necessary and novel components for
constructing these adhesives. This project will examine prey capture glues with
the broad goals of understanding the contribution of their molecular components
to function, and discovering the commonalities associated with functional,
ecological, or morphological similarity. First, targeted transcriptomics, DNA
sequencing, and glycosylation analyses will be employed to reconstruct the
biomolecular organization of the glue from each species. This will be the first
study to investigate the importance of glue gene length and repetitiveness for
glue function, and the first comparison of posttranslational O-glycosylation
modifications in a diversity of bioadhesives. Second, force transduction
measurements during adhesive manipulation will allow documentation and analysis
of the biomechanical properties of each glue. Combined with full-length
sequences, direct inference will be made about the mechanical potential of glue
sequence, including the role of repeat number and unit complexity in
contributing to adhesive toughness and extensibility. Finally, we will
reconstruct gene trees in order to evaluate support for parallel or convergent
evolution of prey capture adhesives. Similar sequence identity will support the
convergent strength of functional selection in the evolution of prey capture
glue genes. Alternatively, poor sequence identity between glue transcripts
indicates that a variety of biochemical mechanisms exist for prey adhesion,
providing exciting novel pathways for biomimetic
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.