* 2113906
* IUCRC Phase I Stevens: Center for Research toward Advancing Financial Technologies (CRAFT)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Steve Yang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2026
* USD 517,500.00

This project establishes the Center for Research toward Advancing Financial
Technologies (CRAFT) devoted to research on fintech, the conjunction of finance
and technology. The fintech industry is growing as a result of advances in
computer science coupled with practical advances in computing hardware, and it
affects almost all other industries in the broader economy. The vision of CRAFT
is to bring together industry partners, academic researchers, federal agencies,
and students to conduct and advance interdisciplinary fintech research,
innovation, and workforce training in support of new products, services and
ventures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRAFT at Stevens Institute of Technology will
focus on financial technology through combining its existing fundamental
technological research with finance and management knowledge. The technological
research will draw from artificial intelligence, information systems, quantum
computing, distributed ledgers and associated smart contract technologies. With
respect to each of these technologies, cross-disciplinary teams will work with
industry to define challenges and search for solutions. The site research will
strive to discover technologies and processes that can be used to help industry
participants build new services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRAFT will have a broad
impact on the economy by helping to better understand the benefits and risks of
potentially disruptive technologies. The research projects will allow policy
makers and industry participants to better understand and manage risks, thus
reducing the possibility of unintended consequences and disruptions. Since new
technologies are often associated with innovation and growth, CRAFT may
contribute to a more vibrant economy. With respect to education, the projects
will lead to technologies and processes that can be used in education and
training. The proposed workshops for high school students will broaden
participation in all disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center repository
will be hosted at Stevens library. The data, code, and the results of projects
will be well organized and maintained on the CRAFT server according to the
Center data management policy for at least ten years or longer. After the
training modules and software packages are documented and tested, they will be
released and made available through popular public code hosting services such as
GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.