* 2113528
* Neuronal Control Mechanisms Underlying Animal Locomotion that Cope with Physical Changes in the Body and Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Tetsuya Iwasaki, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 10/31/2024
* USD 339,878.00

This project will lay a foundation for understanding of biological intelligence,
and for the development of engineered systems that can process information, make
decisions, and act to achieve desired outcomes. There would be significant
societal benefits if the speed and precision of modern machines were matched by
flexibility and resilience in responding to unstructured situations -- including
those arising from interactions with humans -- rather than relying on
preprogrammed instructions. The human brain stands as a model of such
flexibility and resilience, and translating the brain's functionality to
machines is a flagship challenge for engineering researchers. Due to the
complexity of neuronal circuits, however, precise mathematical description of
brain functions remains an elusive ambition. This project focuses on a smaller
network of neurons within the spinal/nerve cord, called a central pattern
generator, with the goal of uncovering the mechanisms underlying a more
primitive form of intelligence that underlies animal locomotion. The research
outcome will contribute to advancing scientific knowledge of biological
information processing and to establishing a technological basis for enabling
intelligent machines for various applications including autonomous robots for
exploration of unknown environments and therapeutic medical devices for treating
neurological dysfunctions. The multi-disciplinary research will be integrated
with training and education of diverse student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to pose hypotheses
on the design architecture of neuronal control circuits that achieve robust and
adaptive behaviors during locomotion, and provide supporting evidence through
model-based analyses. An initial working hypothesis is that the neuronal network
embeds an internal model of the body-environment dynamics and can be decomposed
into a diffusively coupled rhythm generator and a feedforward compensator. The
method is based on mathematical modeling of leech swimming, and computational
and theoretical analyses using dynamical systems theory. The leech provides one
of the best research platforms, because its neuronal circuits are relatively
simple and well-studied, yet provide sufficiently rich control functions of
engineering relevance. General control principles will be revealed to explain
how the neuronal controller maintains or modifies the body oscillation pattern
through sensory feedback when environmental changes or neuromechanical failures
occur. The outcome of the research is expected to contribute to the foundation
of a new control paradigm that integrates trajectory planning and regulation
into a distributed network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.