* 2113767
* Collaborative Research: Role of Polymer Sequence on Penetrant Transport in Charged Brushes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amanda Marciel, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 286,339.00

Molecular-scale brushes, created by grafting polymers to surfaces, can be used
to control the properties of the surface, including its charge, wettability,
permeability, and response to environmental conditions such as salt
concentration. In principle, polymer brush-coated surfaces are potentially
transformative technologies for important applications in drug delivery,
chemical separation processes, and water purification. Selectively controlling
the transport of small molecules and particles into and out of the brush is
necessary for these applications, but the ability to do so remains a persistent
challenge because it is difficult to tune the structure of the brush. This
research project will develop a route to control brush conformation and its
response to environmental conditions by engineering the sequence of monomers
that compose the polymer brush. The team will relate the structure of the
engineered brushes to how small molecules and particles move through them under
static and flow conditions. This research will address a critical knowledge gap
by providing understanding of how the sequence of charged monomers affect the
transport of penetrants, leading to improved membrane coatings for water and
biologic drug purification. The project team will disseminate these results to
scientists and engineers in Houston’s petrochemical, biomedical, and materials
industries through local meetings, including the Texas Soft Matter Meeting. In
parallel, they will develop educational outreach videos on water purification in
multiple languages spoken in the Houston metro area, and present hands-on
demonstrations for the general public at the Houston Energy
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a
fundamental understanding of the influence of polymer sequence on transport
within charged polymer brushes. Team members from two nearby universities in
Houston will integrate complementary expertise in sequence-controlled polymer
synthesis (Marciel – Rice University), neutron scattering applied to brushes
(Conrad – University of Houston), and state-of-the-art microscopy techniques
(Marciel and Conrad) to address three specific aims: (1) determine the role of
polymer sequence on brush properties, (2) identify mechanisms that dictate
coupling between penetrant and charged polymer brush dynamics, and (3)
understand the effects of flow on out-of-equilibrium penetrant transport in
charged polymer brushes. Protein engineering methodologies will be used to
synthesize sequence-controlled charged polymers with isotopic labelling for
grazing-incidence small angle neutron scattering (GI-SANS) and neutron
reflectivity (NR) experiments to measure brush conformation and height in
equilibrium and out-of-equilibrium conditions. Penetrant transport coefficients
will be measured using confocal and total internal reflection fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy (TIR-FCS), exploiting vertical sensitivity to
distinguish transport inside and outside brushes and tested against theories for
diffusion and dispersion within polymer matrices and in porous media. Together,
these studies will provide new insight into the role of charge fraction and
spacing on the diffusive and flow-driven transport of penetrants in charged
brushes, which will pave the way for the design of advanced responsive
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.