* 2113319
* Probing heterochromatin growth and memory dynamics in live single cells
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2025
* Ilya Finkelstein, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,242,532.00

Each cell of an organism contains the same genetic information, yet development
of unique cell types requires that only part of this information be accessible
in any given cell. This selective access is governed by structures inside the
cell nucleus that assemble along large stretches of a chromosome, grow to
variable extents depending on the cell type and then repress the underlying
information. If this process is repeated every cell division, this repression is
heritable. It remains unclear how these structures, known as heterochromatin,
(i) grow along the chromosome, and (ii) “remember” their sites of assembly and
growth over cell divisions. This research project aims to resolve these
questions, and thereby help lay the foundation to build or manipulate genetic
information-controlling heterochromatin structures to drive cells to adopt new
fates and perform new functions. The project will also educate diverse
undergraduate and graduate students in different scientific fields, including
genetics, biophysics, cell biology, and biotechnology, through research training
and teaching opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the genetic requirements
for gene silencing by heterochromatin have been long studied, the rules
governing heterochromatin growth (spreading) along the chromosome in cells
remain opaque. Neither it is understood why certain heterochromatin elements
epigenetically maintain themselves across cell divisions while others do not. In
this project, the single-celled fission yeast model system is employed to
investigate the mechanisms of spreading and maintenance of heterochromatin. The
research will combine the ability to visualize and quantify spreading in real-
time in single fission yeast cells with Langevin dynamics modeling to
distinguish different models of how heterochromatin spreads along the chromosome
within the cell cycle. To understand how heterochromatin formed by spreading is
remembered across cell divisions, hysteresis measurements with fission yeast
cells containing heterochromatin spreading reporters will be used to assess the
degree of memory within a given heterochromatin domain. The power of yeast
genetics, single cell imaging and modeling combined is expected to yield new
insights into the molecular origins of epigenetic
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded by the Genetic Mechanisms
program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate
of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.