* 2113626
* IUCRC Planning Grant: Oregon State University: Center for Concrete Advanced Network - CAN
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Jason Ideker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 12/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The Concrete Advancement Network (CAN) is a consortium of academic and
industrial researchers engaged in bringing cutting-edge technologies to the
cement and concrete materials industries, improving the built environment.
Cement and concrete represent ubiquitous human-made materials and continue to be
widely utilized in construction. Despite a universal utilization, most modern
cement and concrete applications are based on relatively dated technology,
requiring massive inputs of raw materials. This IUCRC will allow researchers to
collaborate on the latest advancements in nanotechnology, bottom-up engineering,
recyclability, improved structural design with machine learning, and emergent
technologies relating to the improvement of concrete in its use throughout the
nation’s buildings and infrastructure. This award supports the planning phase of
the CAN IUCRC to enable the team and participating leaders from industry to
explore unmet needs, identify promising research trends, and formally establish
the 5-year research plan for the proposed Center. The Planning Workshop will
allow members and industry partners to establish the research agenda, select the
first pool of research projects for the four member sites, and foster
collaborative activities. CAN will be led by the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee, with Arizona State University, Oregon State University, and the
University of Texas at Arlington as partners. CAN’s members will facilitate the
translation of novel concepts and ideas into scalable and implementable
solutions with impact. Industry partners will steer CAN’s research direction and
priorities to realization by providing testbeds and promoting CAN’s value
proposition and research results to cement and concrete
businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAN’s mission is to enhance the resilience and
sustainability of concrete materials and structures through innovations in
materials and processing by leveraging use-inspired research and collaborations
between academia and related industrial partners. CAN will plan to develop new
techniques and methods that will usher the next generation of concrete that is
energy-efficient, rapidly deployable, labor efficient, economical, and less
dependent on natural resources than existing concrete. The collaborative teams
research capabilities will couple scientific advances in concrete materials and
design with multi-scale modeling, machine learning, artificial intelligence,
and, ultimately digital manufacturing, towards cutting-edge concepts in this
critical and massive-scale industrial sector. At the planning workshop and
during the 12-month planning grant period, CAN industry and academic leaders
will discuss current limitations, barriers, and obstacles to identify immediate
solutions for industry/academic research and dissemination, engineering student
education and job-preparedness, and broadening the participation of students
underrepresented in STEM. CAN seeks to provide long-term solutions for the
nation’s deteriorating infrastructure and meet the demand for future
transportation, infrastructure, buildings, and
housing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.