* 2113256
* Connections to water: How water governance has affected the connections between the Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation Peoples and the Yakima River
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Victoria Walsey, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,505.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions increases the opportunities for their students to pursue
challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in
areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and
generational appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project,
titled “Connections to water: How water governance has affected the connections
between the Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation Peoples and the
Yakima River” directly aligns with that goal. Conducted by a faculty member at
Northwest Indian College (NWIC), the project aims to understand the Yakima
River’s role within the Yakama Nation’s culture, history, and sense of place.
Using archived information and the ancestral and present perspectives of the
Yakama people, this study aims to generate important information about the past
and current relationship and interactions between the Yakama people and the
river and how governance and use of the river has influenced these activities
over time. The project provides a platform for including the Yakama perspective
in the history of the river. By engaging the faculty member in cutting-edge
research, the project enhances the college’s research capacity and prepares her
for future research work that engages NWIC
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing grounded theory and a mixed methods
approach, the research study begins with an examination of archived city, state,
and Tribal records related to the river, including audiovisual and digital
material such as newspaper articles, art, legislation, and videotapes.
Interviews with Tribal and state officials about the history of the river will
be combined with archived data to develop a preliminary framework for examining
how the river and its relationship to the Yakama people has progressed over
time. Employing a qualitative reflective design, the study will then use chain
referral strategies to engage Yakama Tribal members in interviews and the use of
PhotoVoice to represent their relationship to the river with the intention of
establishing how the evolution of that relationship correlates with the
historical use and governance of the river.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.