* 2113401
* Overcoming Epistemic Uncertainty to Plan with Learned Dynamics Models for Robotic Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Dmitry Berenson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,998.00

Manipulation of objects like cables, cloth, and scattered rigid objects is
essential in a broad range of settings, including factories, homes, and
hospitals. While modern robots are physically capable of manipulating these
objects, they lack the algorithms necessary to understand how these objects move
when being manipulated. To give robots the ability to perform a wide range of
manipulation tasks necessary for maintenance, manufacturing, and cleaning tasks,
this project will develop new methods that allow robots to learn how these
objects move from data. Yet there will always be some uncertainty in what the
robot learns, and if the robot is over-confident in its understanding, it may
make many errors, or even be unable to complete the task-at-hand. Thus a robot
requires methods to reason about what it has and has not learned so that it can
accomplish useful tasks reliably. Finally, as the robot performs the
manipulation task-at-hand it will acquire experience of manipulating that
particular object. The robot will need to use that experience to enhance its
understanding of how the object moves, leading to more reliable performance.
Endowing robots with the ability to learn from data while being aware of the
uncertainty in what they learn and improving their understanding from experience
will enable a wide range of robotics applications across many sectors of
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide robots with these fundamental
capabilities, this project will build a much-needed bridge between the fields of
dynamics learning and motion planning, enabling roboticists to take advantage of
the latest dynamics learning methods to plan for manipulation tasks that are
currently considered too difficult to model analytically. Recent advances in
machine learning have allowed dynamics models to be learned from high-
dimensional data, such as images. However, these learned models are currently
insufficient for planning because they do not account for epistemic uncertainty,
i.e. uncertainty due to a lack of data. Not considering epistemic uncertainty
leads to unreliable estimates of a model's confidence in its prediction, which
can cause highly state-dependent errors. Furthermore, fundamental advances in
motion planning are required to robustly plan with models that are not
guaranteed to be valid everywhere. Thus this project will explore foundational
methods for 1) estimating the confidence of a dynamics model's prediction while
accounting for epistemic uncertainty; 2) improving dynamics predictions using
limited data during execution; and 3) principled motion planning that uses these
predictions and confidence estimates to avoid areas of the state space where the
model is unreliable. The key insight that enables tackling this difficult
problem is that a dynamics model need not be globally-accurate to be useful for
planning motion. The effectiveness of these methods will be demonstrated by
integrating them into a framework that allows robots to manipulate objects such
as rope, cloth, and debris for a wide range of practical
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.