* 2113854
* Improving Understanding of Non-Equilibrium Surface-Layer Stress-Strain-Rate Relationships Using a Novel Stationarity-Analysis Technique and Large-Eddy Simulation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ying Pan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 739,184.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical weather modeling of the
atmospheric boundary layer, which is the lowest layer of the atmosphere, is
extremely complex due to the different scales of motion of the air and the
interaction of flow with the Earth’s surface. Scientists attempt to simulate
flows in the boundary layer using several techniques, some of which can take up
enormous amounts of computing power. In this project, the researcher will
investigate a simplified technique for modeling the boundary layer that requires
fewer computational resources and better fits existing observational data. The
project has the potential to impact numerical modeling of the boundary layer,
which is especially relevant to convective scale processes and near-surface wind
predictions. The project also contains a strong educational component which will
provide training activities for the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for a research project with the
goal of reducing errors in numerical simulations of turbulent atmospheric flows.
These errors are induced by unrealistic assumptions of equilibrium relationships
between unresolved turbulent fluxes and resolved fields. Currently, the most
straightforward approach to addressing this problem is by computing the time-
evolution of the unresolved fluxes, which is known as the second-order closure.
However, this method has multiple issues, including significant computational
expense. The researcher plans to work with a simplified version of this
approach, known as the pseudo-second-order closure model. The major research
objectives in the proposal are to: 1) Reduce uncertainties in field-data
estimates of turbulence statistics by applying a multi-sensor stationarity-
analysis technique (MSATv2) to existing field campaign data, 2) Investigate
external driving forces that enable Large Eddy Simulation (LES) to reproduce
field data by conducting LES runs of field campaign data, and 3) Evaluate and
refine pseudo-second-order closure models using the field and LES
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.