* 2113903
* IUCRC Phase I: The University of Arkansas: Center for Infrastructure Trustworthiness in Energy Systems (CITES)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Homer Mantooth, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 331,000.00

The Center for Infrastructure Trustworthiness in Energy Systems (CITES), a new
Phase I IUCRC, focuses on research issues in the critical area of cyber
resilience and the trustworthiness of energy systems (e.g., electric grid
generation, transmission, and distribution), which have an extensive dependence
on cyber technology. Composed of three University sites (University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, University of Arkansas, and Florida International University),
CITES seeks to advance research and technologies that addresses unmet and
underserved industry needs to better secure energy systems. In close partnership
with its members (Offices of Emergency Medical Services, energy providers,
national labs, and industry associations), CITES will help secure the national
defense by developing research that leads to practical means of protecting
energy systems against failure within and attacks upon their cyber
infrastructures. The fundamental issues addressed by CITES concern cyber
resilience in the context of the specialized requirements for these “operational
technology” (OT) systems, issues which include the heterogeneity of OT
equipment, and integration with much more widely used informational technology
(IT) equipment. The Center will focus on detecting and quickly responding to
attacks on the cyber infrastructure, rapidly recovering from the impacts of
successful attacks, decreasing the costs and risks of patching operational
systems, and ensuring that communication between devices happens fast enough and
with enough volume to support operations. CITES will also serve an important
role in augmenting the nation’s workforce in OT-knowledgeable cyber-security
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methodologies include system
design, system analysis, formal methods and other mathematics, and empirical
evaluation of prototypes. CITES technical contributions include knowledge
creation, knowledge transfer, and empirical proofs of concept that utilize the
power system facilities at the University of Arkansas. Energy providers benefit
by observing the potential for increased cybersecurity and resilience; Equipment
manufacturers benefit from proven ideas and other stakeholders benefit from
increased knowledge. CITES research at the University of Arkansas is organized
around five thrusts: 1) Vulnerability assessment and mitigation – methods for
assessing the risks of security vulnerabilities and mitigating vulnerabilities
in optimal ways; 2) Artificial intelligence-based attack detection – methods for
detecting attacks, incidents, and anomalies timely and effectively, leveraging
recent advances in artificial intelligence; 3) Secure and resilient
communications – methods to make energy system networks and communications
secure against attacks and resilient against failures; 4) Supply chain security
– methods for provisioning integrity, provenance, and other security properties
in supply chains; and 5) Power electronic device hardening and security-by-
design – reference designs and technologies for securing power electronics, such
as firmware security and in-device attack detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.