* 2113866
* Collaborative Research: Chronological Modeling and Pictograph Stratigraphy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Carolyn Boyd, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 59,742.00

This project will study the chronology of painted murals in southwest Texas, one
of the oldest and most complex art forms in the Americas. Strong parallels exist
between the hunter-gatherer belief systems portrayed in these U.S.-based murals
and the myths and cosmologies of later Mesoamerican agriculturalists. These
parallels suggest deep prehistoric origins. Although researchers maintain that
complex concepts persisted across time and across cultural, linguistic, and
geographical boundaries, they lack well-dated archaeological evidence to support
their argument. This project will utilize radiocarbon dating to establish the
age of Pecos River style production in the context of this hypothesized Archaic
core system. The investigators will examine changes over time in these murals,
including iconography, mural production, and geographic distribution. This study
will add significantly to an understanding of how past cultures managed social
identity, territory, mobility, labor organization, and graphic communication.
The project will train graduate students, college interns, and high school
students in chemistry and new technologies used in archaeology, addressing a
national need for providing students with experience in interdisciplinary
research, STEM, and team-based projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newly developed
scientific dating methods can now provide the accuracy and precision to date the
material and place it within the context of material culture, socioeconomic
reorganization, climate change, fluctuating population densities, and extra-
regional influences. The investigators will conduct a formal analysis to
document and describe diagnostic pictographs, determine paint application order
through a stratigraphic study using digital microscopy and the construction of
Harris matrices, and examine spatial patterning using GIS. Based on these data,
they will collect 60 paint samples from 10 murals for plasma oxidation and
accelerator mass spectrometry radiocarbon dating. Results will inform research
into possible drivers for the emergence and decline of the style. The
investigators will use the results to model the timing of the introduction and
development of complex l concepts which also are present in later Mesoamerican
traditions. This will address a cognitive aspect of hunter-gatherer complexity
often overlooked by studies focusing on social organization, technology, and
subsistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.