* 2113424
* Collaborative Research: phyloregion, computational infrastructure for biogeographic regionalization and macroecology in the R computing environment
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Barnabas Daru, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 585,050.00

Establishing geographical comparisons based on shared biota is crucial to the
study of biogeography and for managing biological diversity in the face of rapid
warming of the Earth’s climate. However, the computational tools to analyze and
manipulate the massive-scale species biogeography data has not been fully
developed. Historically, classifications of biogeographic regions were based on
descriptions of the ecology, taxonomic composition or vegetation features of
regions. Recent approaches provided more quantitative, and objective
classifications, but broadly recapitulated earlier efforts and overlooked the
evolutionary implications captured by the shared phylogenetic relationships of
species. Because the field of biogeography has traditionally developed as an
observational science rather than an experimental one, developing replicable
analytical tools for biogeography into reproducible workflows is critical. The R
software package phyloregion – designed for biogeographic regionalization and
macroecology – can overcome these computational challenges. It contains tools
for biogeographical regionalization, macroecology, conservation, and
visualization, and has potential application in various disciplines including
evolution, microbial diversity, systematics, ecology, phylogenetics, and many
others. In this project, the research team plans to substantially increase
computational efficiency of functions in phyloregion, to add new functionality,
and create a model for user-guided software development in
biogeography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and implement new
tools in phyloregion for biome evolution and biogeographical investigations.
Novel Grade of Membership model that represents sampling units as partial
memberships in multiple groups will be established to analyze large
biogeographic datasets. It will extend phyloregion with new tools to visualize
patterns of biogeography, macroecology and evolution. Phyloregion will be
enhanced to pass objects between R and RevBayes (a C++ tool for Bayesian
phylogeography) for phylogeographic visualization through R. Finally, it will
introduce new tools for conservation that reflect the key dimensions of
phylogenetic diversity including richness, divergence and regularity.
Phyloregion is already widely used and represents one of only a few
biogeographical resources in R tailored for megaphylogenies and macroecological
datasets. This research will create new, open-source, and freely distributed
software tools with potential for transformative impact in biogeography and
beyond. Workshops and conferences will be used for dissemination, and to provide
introduction to intermediate R coding and implementation of biogeographical
tools. Workshops will target a mix of faculty, postdocs, and especially graduate
and undergraduate students, who will be trained on the use and application of
phyloregion in their research, and to help develop their own novel biogeographic
functions to assemble into an R package. The research team will work with
existing diversity programs at Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi and
Southeastern to recruit diverse undergraduate participants, and provide
resources for them to learn about graduate school. All products from this
project will be disseminated free and open-sourced through computer codes,
publications, conferences, workshops and vignettes. Phyloregion vignettes will
be used to create an upper-division course for undergraduate and early graduate
students. The grant will support the mentoring of one postdoctoral researcher
and a graduate student and many undergraduates. Women and traditionally
underrepresented groups will be specifically encouraged to apply for the
postdoctoral research position, as well as for the workshops. The phyloregion
project can be accessed at
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=phyloregion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.