* 2113432
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining the effects of small mammal structures and population changes on biogeochemical cycling in Arctic soils
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Austin Roy, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2022
* USD 34,895.00

Arctic tundra covers approximately 6% of the earth's land surface yet stores 25%
of the world’s soil carbon. As the climate warms, this stored carbon is released
to the atmosphere, further enhancing climate warming; properly modeling this
feedback requires information on what controls the carbon cycle in Arctic soils.
To date, most studies of the Arctic carbon cycle have neglected the possible
roles played by Arctic animals in controlling soil biogeochemical cycles. One
important way that animals may affect these cycles is by building structures
such as burrows, trails, latrines, and nests, each of which disturbs the soil
and alters its biogeochemistry. In addition, because the effects of each
species’ structures may be different, changes in the population distribution of
animal species as the climate warms may lead to changes in Arctic soil cycles.
This project is combining these two factors – herbivore structures and community
change – and examining how changes in either may affect carbon and nutrient
cycling in Arctic ecosystems. This research is expanding our understanding of
Arctic systems and can be used to improve predictions of how the Arctic may
respond to environmental change. This project includes mentorships of K-12 and
college-aged students, public outreach in arctic communities, and dissemination
of science to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic herbivores, including
small mammals, impact environmental processes that feedback on ecosystem
function. While most research has focused on effects through herbivory, small
mammals may also act as ecosystem engineers, modifying the biophysical
environment around them. This project is examining how, and through what
mechanisms, small mammal structures influence nutrient availability and
microbial activity. The researchers are also evaluating how differences in the
functional roles and abundances of two competitor small mammal species (brown
and collared lemmings) may alter soil biogeochemical cycling. Near Utqiaġvik,
Alaska, researchers are sampling soils from beneath four types of small mammal
structures (runways, winter nests, latrines, and burrows) from each species to
examine their impacts on soil biogeochemical responses. Using the proportional
cover of each activity type on the landscape and their relative impacts on
biogeochemical cycling, the data are then used to model the impacts of each
species during the peak of their population cycle. This research is
incorporating herbivores into the greater understanding of Arctic ecosystem
function and is being used to improve a pre-existing ecosystem model to better
predict carbon cycling in the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.