* 2113171
* Advances in Causal Inference With Continuous Exposures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Theodore Westling, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 177,828.00

Determining cause and effect is one of the fundamental goals of scientific
inquiry. For instance, does a vaccine reduce risk of disease? Is a chemical such
as lead or ammonia in drinking water harmful to human health? Causal inference
is the area of statistical research concerned with developing methods for using
data to answer such questions. The majority of causal inference research has
focused on binary exposures; that is, exposures that can only take two values,
such as treatment and control. However, many exposures of interest can take a
large or even infinite number of values, such as the dose of a drug or vaccine
received, or the concentration of a substance in drinking water. These are
called "continuous exposures", and are commonplace in many disciplines,
including biomedicine, epidemiology, public health, and economics. In this
project, the PI will develop flexible statistical methods for assessing the
causal effects of continuous exposures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop
three methodological innovations for causal inference with continuous exposures.
In the first two aims, the PI will focus on the causal dose-response curve,
which describes how the causal effect changes as a function of the exposure
level. In order to make valid statistical inference regarding the shape of this
curve, the PI will develop a uniform confidence band for the causal dose-
response curve and develop tools for assessing the fit of parametric models for
the dose-response curve. These methods will permit researchers to understand the
qualitative effect of a continuous exposure while making minimal assumptions. In
the third aim, the PI will address nonparametric inference on the effect of
incremental shift interventions, which provide useful one-number summaries of
the causal effect of continuous exposures under weaker assumptions than those
necessary for the dose-response curve. User-friendly software implementing the
methods developed in each of these aims will be made freely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.