* 2113468
* Causal Inference for Extremes via Tropical Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ngoc Tran, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 144,091.00

Monitoring and predicting extreme events such as flooding, financial collapses
or engineering risks are of huge importance to societies. However, extreme
events by definition are rare and concern large, unlikely values, while
traditional statistical techniques are based on averages and large numbers of
observations. This project will create new, fast methodologies to uncover the
causes and potential cascading failures when an extreme event hits a system,
such as a river, computer network, or financial network. Concrete applications
include flood risks predictions, tracing the source of contaminants in
underground waterways, and modeling risks of airplanes runway overrun. This
research will advance society’s ability to monitor, predict and prevent such
adverse events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme value statistics
concerns the maxima of random variables and relations between the tails of
distributions rather than averages and correlations. Unique challenges to this
field are lack of data and lack of smoothness in the likelihood, which severely
limits statistical learning and inference. Goal A of this research aims to
advance causal inference for extreme value statistics with provably accurate
algorithms that can handle datasets with thousands of variables and missing
data.Goal B of this research aims to solve the Identification Challenge for deep
neural networks with rectified linear (ReLU) activation, a difficult variant of
the reverse-engineering problem. These problems are intimately connected and
both will be tackled in this proposal via tropical algebraic and convex
geometry. Preliminary work by the PI and co-authors on hydrology data have shown
that the proposed methods achieve the state-of-the-art in the Hidden River
Network, the benchmark problem in causal inference for extremes. The proposed
research will advance society’s ability to monitor and predict extreme events in
finance, engineering, and natural disasters. It will simultaneously advance both
extreme value statistics and tropical geometry, widening their applications and
create new interdisciplinary, data-driven research at their
intersections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.