* 2113494
* NSF-BSF: Quantitative Evaluation of Aerosol Impacts on the Microphysical Composition, Electrification and Radiative Forcing of Deep Tropical Convective Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Robert Holzworth, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 584,347.00

Atmospheric aerosol particles range in size from a few nanometers to tens of
micrometers and have both natural and anthropogenic sources. Aerosol particles
act as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN), and therefore changes in aerosol
particle abundance can alter the cloud drop concentrations and subsequently
cloud reflectivity and lifetime as well as associated precipitation. Tropical
deep convective clouds (DCC) are important to Earth’s global energy balance and
hydrologic cycle and can induce high impact weather with significant
precipitation and lightning. However, the effects of aerosol particles on DCC
properties, including the onset and amount of precipitation, vertical
development, electrification and associated lightning, and the extent and
lifetime of associated high altitude ice clouds, remain poorly quantified. In
this project, the effect of aerosol particles on such weather and climate
related phenomena is studied, addressing a major open question of whether and
how human-induced aerosol particle pollution has altered weather phenomena
(e.g., potentially moving tropical showers to thunderstorms), and climate.
Global climate models are being used to inform socioeconomic policy decisions
around the world, but the processes investigated in this project are practically
absent from these models. Therefore, the outcome of this study could have broad
impacts on our understanding of the anthropogenic aerosol impacts on climate
predictions and in turn upon policies being developed for mitigation and
adaptation. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students through
international collaboration in the fundamental physics and chemistry of the
atmosphere and developing their technical skills in the analysis of large
multivariable datasets, 3-dimensional computer models of the atmosphere, and
satellite remote sensing technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical marine
regions are likely most sensitive to the additional input of aerosol particles
which act CCN. Ultrafine aerosol particles (UAP) &lt; 40 nm in size are not
typically considered CCN, but they may in fact nucleate cloud droplets in DCC.
Observations of UAP, specifically, and CCN, are lacking in such clean regions
needed to test hypotheses about the aerosol impacts on deep convective clouds
and associated effects on climate. To address these limitations, this joint NSF-
BSF project between University of Washington (UW), The Hebrew University
Jerusalem Israel (HUJI), and collaborators, leverages i) remote sensing of DCC
microphysics to constrain CCN and UAP impacting individual convective events,
ii) analysis of 15 years of global tropical lightning stroke fields guided by
chemical transport model predictions of UAP and CCN, and iii) cloud resolving
modelling of key domains constrained by the satellite remote sensing insights,
lightning observations, and chemical transport model predictions of UAP and CCN.
The project will evaluate how CCN, including UAP, perturb the microphysics of
tropical deep convective clouds and to what extent such perturbations affect
lightning and cloud radiative effects, and provide a test of the hypothesis that
increases in CCN and UAP since preindustrial time, due to human activities
associated with fuel combustion, have induced a positive radiative forcing
(warming) on climate through deep convective clouds. Such a climate forcing
would be in opposition to the negative radiative forcing in which CCN increases
affects low cloud albedo and lifetime and would alter our understanding of
climate sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.