* 2113075
* CIF: Mobile Rapid Scanning Radar for Enhancing Weather Radar Research and Education
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Robert Palmer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 07/31/2024
* USD 401,774.00

This Community Instruments and Facilities (CIF) award will provide funding for
the support of a truck-mounted Rapid scan X-band Polarimetric (RaXPol) radar as
a community instrument. Development of the radar was originally funded by the
NSF Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program in 2008. The CIF RaXPol award
will provide community access to a rapid-scan, highly flexible, dual-
polarization radar that can enable new scientific discoveries and provide unique
educational opportunities. Rapid scan radar data can enable novel research in
tornadogenesis, deep convection and electrification, post-wildfire hydrology and
flash floods, lake-effect and orographic snowstorms, and tropical cyclones. The
radar will also be used as an educational and outreach tool, providing
opportunities for students to interact with state-of-the-art instrumentation.
RaXPol will be maintained by the Advanced Radar Research Center (ARRC) at the
University of Oklahoma, which has long-standing experience in design and
operation of complex radar systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RaXPol provides rapid
updates of direct and reliable dual-polarization weather observations which are
much needed for the study of high impact and fast evolving weather events. It
can be rapidly deployed with real-time data transmission capabilities and offers
flexibility in scanning strategies to focus observations on areas of interest at
high spatiotemporal resolution. The mobile RaXPol facility can travel to
different locations for scientific exploration and research which allows diverse
institutions and underrepresented groups to engage in learning experience with
hands-on activities. This award will enhance the ability of the broader
scientific community to use the radars through the Atmospheric and Geospace
Sciences facility request process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.