* 2113978
* AccelNet-Implementation: FLUXNET Coordination to Understand Ecosystem Function through Continuous Observations of Ecosystem-Atmosphere Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* David Moore, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,983,930.00

Global ecosystems provide services that sustain society, including providing
food, fiber and timber, and water cycle regulation. An important service is the
sequestering of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, which greatly slows the rate
of climate change. Understanding ecosystem-atmosphere interactions, and the
response of these to environmental change, is an urgent challenge. This AccelNet
Implementation Track award will link over ten existing national and
international networks focused on continuous observations of ecosystem-
atmosphere interactions at over 1000 locations around the world. The FLUXNET
Coordination Project will fill fundamental knowledge gaps in science,
engineering, and societal issues associated with ongoing changes in ecosystem
function and the related cycling of carbon and water. FLUXNET is a global
network of regional networks, consisting of scientists measuring the exchange of
carbon dioxide, water, energy, and other greenhouse gas fluxes between
ecosystems and the atmosphere. This project will develop the next generation of
the FLUXNET network of networks to be a self-sustaining global collaboration
focused on supporting early career scientists, expanding the diversity of
scientists, biomes, and climate regions involved, and empowering international
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the diversity of life on Earth, a
full understanding of the role of ecosystems in the Earth system can only be
achieved through a network-of-networks approach. The central goals of the
FLUXNET Coordination Project are to provide novel training and exchange
opportunities, develop strong international collaborations, and build tools and
protocols that ensure continued capacity of FLUXNET to provide continuous
observations of ecosystem-atmosphere interactions across the globe. Such
measurements have proven essential for understanding ecosystem function,
calibrating space-borne observations, and developing models used to project
future climate. The project will develop data-focused processing protocols and
pipelines, as well as people-focused education and exchange opportunities.
Network activities include annual in-person meetings at national and
international venues, monthly webinars, workshops and synthesis publications,
and student and early-career researcher personnel exchanges. The project will
use creative and transformative approaches to international collaboration and
networked science to achieve its goal of building the next generation of FLUXNET
to be a self-sustaining flagship of networked global scientific
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this
award is provided by the Macrosystems Biology and NEON-Enabled Science Program
and the NEON Program in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.