* 2113042
* AGS-CIF: A Sea-Going and Land Deployable Polarimetric (SEA-POL) Radar for the Science Community
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Steven Rutledge, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 07/31/2026
* USD 495,927.00

This Community Instruments and Facilities (CIF) award is for support of the
Colorado State University Sea-Going Polarimetric (SEA-POL) radar. SEA-POL is a
unique community resource as the only advanced technology, community-
requestable, sea-going radar facility. The radar can be used to address a wide
range of maritime or land-based science topics that deal with precipitation. The
radar will also be used as an educational and outreach tool, providing
opportunities for students to interact with state-of-the-art instrumentation.
Programs to enhance diversity in radar meteorology are also
included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEA-POL is a C-band, dual-polarimetric radar that
is capable of being deployed at sea or on land. The radar is designed to be
portable and rugged, with platform stabilization for oceanic environments, while
still having high-quality polarimetric capabilities for all-purpose use. Through
2020, SEA-POL has been deployed in four research cruises on ships in the U.S.
Academic Research Fleet (ARF) and is planned for an island-based deployment in
the 2022 PRECIP campaign. This award will enhance the ability of the broader
scientific community to use the radar through the AGS field campaign request
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.