* 2113931
* IUCRC Phase I, San Jose State University: Wildfire Interdisciplinary Research Center (WIRC)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Craig Clements, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2026
* USD 673,075.00

This Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) on Wildfires,
located at San Jose State University, provides tools, observational and
predictive, and research results for use by first responders, those interested
in risk analysis, and policy makers for communities and companies/utilities
impacted by, and concerned about, wildfires. Center research thrusts include
fire weather and atmospheric modeling and forecasting; fire behavior monitoring
and modeling; wildfire management and policy, and climate change and wildfire
risk. IUCRCs are innovative collaborations between universities and industry
where funding from the National Science Foundation is used to fund Center
administrative costs and industry provides financial support via membership
fees, and other funding, to support Center research projects and student/postdoc
salaries. Industry members contributing to the Center form its industrial
advisory board that helps select research projects, proposed by Center faculty,
that address the members’ collective research needs. Thus, research in an IUCRC
is pre-competitive and fundamental with topics directed by its industrial
advisory board to remove obstacles that are preventing their sector of the
economy from moving forward. The San Jose State University IUCRC on wildfires
will be working with industry, utilities, and government agencies to increase
our knowledge of wildfires and their spread and explore their social and
economic implications. It will also examine means of generating better
evacuation compliance from impacted populations. The Center will develop tools
and models resulting in better and more accurate simulations of wildfire
initiation and simulation. The broader impacts of this Center are strong and
multifaceted with significant societal and economic relevance because wildfires
in the western US and around the world are a serious problem that cause loss of
life, loss of property, and serious environmental and ecosystem damage that
lasts for decades. The present exacerbation in global warming will increase
wildfire occurrence, so research products produced by this Center will help
industry, communities and countries impacted by wildfires. Products to be
generated include improved understanding of file and firebrand transport,
modeling tools to help utilities better manage their assets in times of high
fire danger, provision of critical information to first responders during the
fire season, and prediction of fire front paths and fire line rates of advance.
Other impacts include education and workforce training efforts and the
involvement of groups underrepresented in the sciences and engineering.
Underserved communities, impacted by wildfires, will be targeted for wildfire
education and informational efforts as these populations tend to be the most
negatively impacted by wildfires. Interest in the Center by organizations in
foreign countries impacted by wildfires, like Australia and Portugal, will
extend the results of this Center’s work globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Wildfire Interdisciplinary Research Center (WIRC) is an Industry-University
Cooperative Research Center whose purpose is to conduct high-impact wildfire
research to provide tools and informed policies to communities and industry
stakeholders around the world. Its mission is to develop new prediction and
observational systems to better understand extreme fire behavior in a changing
climate. The Center will also develop an integrated approach to solving the
nation’s wildfire problem by providing cross-disciplinary solutions that span
the physical, social, and economic scientific fields. The Center will contribute
to the following wildfire sciences: fire weather and coupled fire-atmosphere
modeling and forecasting which will involve the development of new fire danger
metrics for industry stakeholders; fire behavior monitoring and modeling for
which new theories, observations, and fire and fire brand spread models for will
be developed for forecast systems; wildfire management and policy which examines
the nexus of the social and natural contexts of wildfire management and
adaptation across wildfire prone landscapes; and climate change and wildfire
risk. For these research thrusts, high-resolution reanalysis and in-situ data
will be used to determine historical trends and models will be used to quantify
the influence of these determinants on fire behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.