* 2113667
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating Community Resilience across Repeated Volcanic Events in Katmai, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Jose Capriles Flores, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 10/31/2024
* USD 58,050.00

This archaeological project explores the occupation history of the volcanically
active Katmai region of the Alaska Peninsula. Archaeological research at two
villages abandoned after the massive Novarupta eruption of 1912 will quantify
how investments in human, natural, social, economic and built capital affected
communities. In a region where the rate of volcanic eruptions in the
archaeological record appears to far outpace cultural change, persistent
community investments across repeated volcanic events are anticipated to reveal
both local and regional strategies for mitigating disaster. Identifying
community characteristics that contribute to resiliency has potential to inform
planning around current and future hazards. Understanding these past
interactions is critical, as climate change and rising sea levels continue to
alter lifeways, affect resource access and destroy cultural heritage across the
Arctic and Subarctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The holistic community capitals
framework will be applied to two multicomponent village sites on the Alaska
Peninsula. Katmai Village and Savonoski, situated in different environmental
zones on either side of a major volcanic epicenter, were occupied until 1912
when they were buried by approximately 60 cm of volcanic ash. Archaeological
features at the sites will be identified and mapped using magnetometry, while
targeted excavations will recover radiocarbon samples and diagnostic artifacts
to produce absolute chronologies. Analysis of lithic and ceramic artifacts,
including X-ray fluorescence and neutron activation, will contribute to
reconstruction of regional exchange networks. Because Katmai Village and
Savonoski continue to hold significant meaning for Alutiit/Sugpiat communities
living on the Alaska Peninsula today, project participants will co-design an
educational curriculum and experiential program that engages local K-12 students
and culture bearers with the archaeological study of their history and
heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.