* 2113768
* Robust and Efficient Statistical Inference in Large Scale Semi-Supervised Settings
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Abhishek Chakrabortty, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 169,977.00

This project will develop methods for robust statistical inference in semi-
supervised settings. Unlike more traditional data settings, semi-supervised
settings are characterized by two types of available data: 1) a typical small or
moderate sized labeled (or supervised) data containing observations for a
response (or outcome) and a set of covariates (or predictors), and 2i) a much
larger sized unlabeled (or unsupervised) data having observations only for the
covariates. Such settings arise naturally whenever the covariates are easily
available for a large cohort, while the response may be difficult and/or
expensive to obtain due to practical constraints. These are increasingly
relevant in modern studies in the big data era with large unlabeled databases
(often electronically recorded) becoming easily available (and tractable) on top
of a labeled data. Examples are ubiquitous across many disciplines, including
computer science, machine learning, econometrics, and biomedical applications
like electronic health records and integrative genomics. Statistical inference
in semi-supervised settings is therefore of substantial interest. The ultimate
question here is to investigate when and how one can use the extra information
available from the large unlabeled data to “improve” upon a corresponding
supervised approach, where improvement could be in terms of efficiency or
robustness or both. This project aims to provide answers to such questions by
developing a class of novel, provable and scalable semi-supervised inference
methods for a range of fundamental problems in two fairly distinct and active
research areas: 1) causal inference in semi-supervised settings, and 2) semi-
supervised inference in the presence of selection bias in labeling. The research
outlined in the project will lead to advances in bridging some major gaps in the
existing literature and providing a much-needed unified understanding of semi-
supervised inference and its subtleties. The methods will also have wide
applicability to various domain areas, e.g. biomedical studies for precision
medicine and causal inference. The project also has a significant education
component, including mentoring of graduate students and curriculum development
via short courses to raise awareness about these exciting new areas in modern
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first part of the project,
the PI will consider causal inference in semi-supervised settings under the
potential outcome framework, and explore semi-supervised inference for popular
causal parameters, e.g. the average treatment effect and the quantile treatment
effect, both of which have been widely studied in supervised settings but rarely
so under semi-supervised settings. The PI will aim to develop semi-supervised
methods for so-called doubly robust estimation of such parameters that can lead
to improved (if not optimal) efficiency, as well as much stronger robustness
properties than their best achievable supervised counterparts. The second part
of the project will consider semi-supervised inference where the labeling
mechanism has inherent selection bias, thus making the labeled and unlabeled
data unequally distributed. Such settings, while of great practical relevance,
have rarely been addressed so far, partly because their analysis is quite
challenging since the labeling fraction decays to zero leading to a natural
violation of the so-called positivity/overlap assumption. Under this setting,
the PI will explore efficient and rate-optimal semi-supervised inference for
various parameters, e.g. the mean response and the average treatment effect
(under a causal framework), via doubly robust estimation methods, as well as
modeling strategies for estimating the decaying propensity score which arises as
an inevitable challenge and is of independent interest. Throughout, the PI's
emphasis will be on developing methods with rigorous theoretical guarantees as
well as efficient implementation that meets the scalability demanded by the
intended applications on large modern datasets. The proposed methods will also
bring together a synergy of tools and ideas from classical semi-parametric
inference and modern high dimensional statistics
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.