* 2113201
* CIF: Storm Peak Laboratory â€“ Facility for Research and Research Training in Atmospheric Sciences
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Anna Gannet Hallar, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 07/31/2026
* USD 180,811.00

This Community Instruments and Facilities (CIF) award is for support of the
Storm Peak Laboratory (SPL), a mountain-top research station in northwestern
Colorado. SPL is a unique, cutting-edge, high-elevation, mid-continental,
atmospheric research station. Instruments available at SPL will provide valuable
measurements for research focused on aerosol chemical and physical properties;
cloud and snow microphysics; atmospheric transformation and transport of
mercury; and detection of long-range transported dust and regional wildfire
smoke. NSF funding will provide baseline support to sustain atmospheric
measurements, and provide quality-controlled data, including quality
assessments, metadata, and supporting ancillary information from existing SPL
instrumentation to the broader atmospheric science community. Programs to
support education and training are part of the proposed effort. The proposal
also includes plans to enhance diversity in the atmospheric and related
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility infrastructure and an array of
fifteen cutting-edge meteorological instruments at the Storm Peak Laboratory
serve as a national resource to advance research and research training in high
elevation atmospheric science. The laboratory also fosters interdisciplinary
research collaboration by hosting intensive field campaigns and field training
courses, providing long term measurements of meteorology, clouds, aerosols, snow
hydrology, and atmospheric gases. This award will enhance the ability of the
broader scientific community to use SPL instruments and the laboratory as a
research site through the AGS facility request
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.