* 2113364
* Topics in Threshold Models: Efficient Procedures under Endogeneity in Regression Discontinuity Designs and Distributed and Robust Estimation of Change-Points
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ya'acov Ritov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The project concerns two different kinds of challenges. The first challenge
involves a class of regression discontinuity designs where the question is
whether a treatment, like a grant, scholarship, or being accepted to a lucrative
program, directly impacts the outcome, for example, the future income of the
student. The difficulty is that the treatment is given precisely to those
expected to have a better outcome. Hence, it is not easy to sort whether the
treatment made an impact, or, simply, the better candidate got it. A standard
approach uses only the data about students near the threshold, comparing those
students who barely got the scholarship to those just below the threshold. The
method considered in the project uses all the data. The second problem in this
project concerns a situation in which the distribution of the observations
changes abruptly. This can happen if, for example, there is a change in the type
of infectious agent in the environment. The project's main concerns are when
this change is monitored in different sites, in each of them, the change occurs
at approximately the same time. However, we need to strongly constrain the
amount of information passed from each site to the central control because of
privacy or traffic concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project deals with new
estimation and inference techniques for several classes of problems that exhibit
uni- or multi-dimensional discontinuities as key features of interest. The
studied problems present two different kinds of challenges: The first is
determining whether there is a tangible treatment effect in a class of
regression discontinuity design (RDD) models, where the treatment group is
determined by a pre-fixed threshold value of a core covariate. The model will be
addressed via a novel point of view that introduces new estimating equations
allowing the statistician to take advantage of the entire data at hand to
propose semiparametric efficient estimates of the treatment effect in the
presence of endogeneity. The second problem involves estimating single or
multiple change-points in parallel data sequences/data-streams. Part of this
plan deals with distributed computing for change-points, where the data sequence
for each entity is stored on a single platform, and one has hard constraints on
exchanging data across platforms. The modeling involves misaligned change points
across the various data sequences, and the solutions involve computationally
efficient methods with tractable statistical properties. The other part of this
agenda aims to develop deeper theoretical insights into robust estimation of
change-points in the presence of heavy-tailed response variables for canonical
models and to develop effective methodologies in more complex incarnations of
such problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.