* 2113642
* Deep Learning on Manifolds: New Architectures and Theoretical Foundations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Zhiliang Xu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 179,998.00

Over the last couple of decades, deep learning approaches have achieved
breakthrough performance in a broad range of learning problems from a variety of
applications fields such as image recognition, speech recognition, natural
language processing and others. Deep learning has also served as the main
impetus for the advancement of recent artificial intelligence (AI) technologies.
The main goal of this project is to develop new deep neural network (DNN)
architectures, computational algorithms and foundational theory for deep
learning in complex domains where the data are complex geometric objects. The
underlying geometry of the space will be utilized and exploited for developing
the DNNs. Such development will enable the application of deep learning models
in medical imaging, computer vision, computer graphics, recommender systems and
neuroscience to learning problems where the inputs are complex images, diffusion
matrices, shapes or other geometric objects. In addition, results of the project
will be integrated in a course on Geometry and Statistics for undergraduate and
graduate students. The principal investigators will also be involved in the
research training of students, possibly students from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the research program are to
develop general deep neural network architectures on manifolds and take some
major steps toward understanding their theoretical foundations. Specifically,
this project will (1) develop extrinsic deep neural networks (eDNNs) on
manifolds by generalizing the popular feedforward neural networks in the
Euclidean space to manifolds utilizing equivariant embeddings; (2) develop
intrinsic deep neural networks (iDNNs) on manifolds employing a Riemannian
structure of the manifold; (3) develop general retraction-based convolutional
neural networks (RCNNs) on manifolds; (4) characterize theoretical properties of
eDNNs, iDNNs and RCNNs on manifolds by studying their approximation properties
as well as the estimation error for a class of empirical risk minimizers over
the DNN class on manifolds; and (5) develop user-friendly software packages that
can be readily used by the practitioners. The research program explores the
interface among geometry, statistics and machine learning, and aims to broaden
the paradigm of deep learning by extending geometric deep learning to
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.