* 2113798
* AF: Small: Algorithm and Incentive Design for Modern Resource Allocation Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Kameshwar Munagala, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,990.00

The last decade has witnessed the rapid development of large-scale online
platforms and marketplaces for effective allocation of resources, whether it be
cloud-computing systems for allocating CPU, disk, and network bandwidth among
competing jobs; online marketplaces for the sharing economy that match sellers
of services such as rides, lodging, and skills with buyers of these services; or
large-scale advertising platforms that match advertisers with publishers of
content. This project will address the key challenges in algorithm and incentive
design for these platforms, in particular those arising from three fundamental
sources. The first is uncertainty in the characteristics of the set of
participants interacting with the platform, whether it be job durations in a
cloud-computing system, or buyer and seller valuations and the asymmetric
knowledge of these in an online marketplace. The second is the dynamic nature of
the set of participants, where jobs in a cloud system, as well as buyers and
sellers in an online marketplace, dynamically arrive and depart. The third is
multi-dimensionality of the resource-allocation problems, where jobs or buyers
derive utility from several types of resources simultaneously. This project will
develop holistic algorithmic approaches to address these challenges, while
ensuring the resulting formulations remain computationally tractable. The
resulting algorithmic techniques will provide guiding principles for obtaining
practical improvements in the performance of these platforms. The project has an
integrated education and outreach plan, whereby the next generation of students
will be equipped with the relevant algorithmic skills via effective teaching and
mentorship. Results from the project will also be broadly disseminated via
publications in major conferences and journals; via organizing workshops that
bring together researchers with diverse backgrounds; and finally, via developing
course materials and tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level,
the project is developing approaches that go beyond the worst-case via novel
stochastic models of uncertainty and dynamics that will circumvent the
computational hardness and existential impossibility results in worst-case
models. The project is first developing new stochastic models for scheduling in
data centers based on the multi-armed bandit framework, where jobs with
multidimensional resource requirements dynamically arrive and have dependencies
between them. The project is then developing an algorithmic theory for the
strategic aspects of two-sided marketplaces arising from sharing economy
applications. This involves developing Bayesian models for how the platform can
use asymmetric information about the marketplace to influence the outcome of
mechanisms run by sellers. It also involves developing techniques to address the
dynamic aspect of matching and pricing buyers and sellers, when both sides
arrive and depart over time according to stochastic processes. The project is
borrowing modeling tools from and contributing tools to the topics of optimal
control theory, Bayesian auctions and persuasion, dynamic pricing, and
stochastic matchings. The key novelty of the project is in developing techniques
at the intersection of well-studied and classic disciplines, such as at the
intersection of stochastic optimization, learning theory, and scheduling theory;
or optimal control, approximation algorithms, and computational
economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.