* 2113470
* GP-IN: Alaska Aquaculture Science Knowledge (ASK)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Lisa Busch, SITKA SOUND SCIENCE CENTER INC
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 412,917.00

This project is jointly funded by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program and IUSE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GEOPath
Informal Networks: Alaska Aquaculture Science Knowledge (ASK) will strengthen
and sustain the educational and career pathways that engage and retain Alaska
Native and rural Alaska precollege students who are currently under represented
in STEM fields. ASK will build skills and competency in aquaculture which is
critical to feeding the nation and world in the coming decades and vital to the
national economy and workforce. The goals of the project will advance prosperity
and welfare by creating a labor force that can help assure food security in the
coming decades. This project will evaluate the strategies of including and
validating rural and Alaska Native culture into a field science curriculum,
provide hands on learning experiences and engage populations that have
historically been excluded in STEM. The project will demonstrate to other
coastal communities, biological field stations, and hatcheries in rural areas
how a collaboration between industry, school districts and a university or
community college, can facilitate student engagement in research and engage the
aquaculture industry and universities in recruiting students who have basic
geoscience skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of ASK is to provide
aquaculture educational experiences to pre-college rural and Alaska Native
students to transition successfully into undergraduate programs or directly into
the STEM workforce by demonstrating that their cultural background, worldview
and experiences are relevant and valuable to academic study and careers in
geosciences. This will be done through four objectives: 1. Institute an off
campus, salmon hatchery-based course that introduces upper level high school
students to aquaculture 2. Provide mentored, hands-on research opportunities for
pre-college students. 3. Create a job fair for aquaculture and fisheries related
fields specifically for these students and 4. Offer a paid summer internship for
upper level high school students at a working salmon hatchery. The Sitka Sound
Science Center, the University of Alaska Southeast Sitka, Mt. Edgecumbe High
School, Sitka High School and Pacific High School have extensive experience
working together and creating successful STEM programs that serve the specific
needs of Alaska Natives and rural Alaskan students. The needs of engagement for
these populations require inclusion and validation of cultural experiences and
an emphasis on how new STEM skills and knowledge can be extensions of
traditional Native and rural cultures. The class for three high schools that
serve low income, Alaska Native and rural students, will cover a broad range of
aquaculture content, including oceanography, marine science, forest ecology,
ecological studies of watersheds and aquatic and marine sciences as well as
hatchery skills, fish culture and mariculture concepts. Place-based, hands on
teaching will validate rural and Alaska Native cultural experiences in the
outdoors and demonstrate how those experiences apply to aquaculture. Students
who successfully participate in this program will be offered an independent,
mentored research project for dual credit. Outcomes of this project will be a
clear pathway for rural and Alaska Native high school students into university
programs and industry jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.