* 2113242
* Matrix Completion with Non-uniform Missing Patterns, a New Measure of Conditional Dependence, and Applications to Feature Selection
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Sourav Chatterjee, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to study three classes of problems in mathematical statistics.
The first class of problems is about matrix completion. Suppose that we have an
array of numbers with missing entries, such as a database of ratings from users
of a product. Matrix completion is the problem of predicting the missing values.
Much work has been done on this problem in the last ten years, but the vast
majority of it is under the assumption that the matrix entries are missing
uniformly at random. In practice, however, that is not usually the case. This
project will implement a method where the matrix completion problem can be
solved under more realistic assumptions. This will impact all areas of science
and technology where matrix completion algorithms have applications, such as
recommender systems, collaborative filtering, computer vision, and genetics, to
name a few. The second class of problems concerns the development of an approach
for measuring conditional dependence. Measuring conditional dependence is
important in many applications of statistics, such as in the analysis of
graphical and causal models, which are widely used in the social sciences. The
third class of problems is about developing a new approach for selecting the
right variables for performing regression analysis when presented with a large
number of variables. This part of the project will impact all areas of science
and technology where regression problems with many predictors are commonplace,
such as biology, medicine, and genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project on
matrix completion aims to solve the low rank matrix completion problem when the
pattern of missing entries is deterministic. The PI has recently published an
asymptotic solution of the problem. The project will yield a non-asymptotic
version of the theory, and an algorithm for matrix completion when the
probability of an entry to be missing is a function of the entry itself. The
project on a new measure of conditional dependence will analyze the asymptotic
properties of a coefficient proposed recently by the PI and one of his students.
The results of the analysis may help in devising new tests for conditional
independence. The project on feature selection will analyze the properties of a
non-parametric feature selection algorithm proposed recently by the PI and one
of his students. The results of the analysis may guide better implementation of
the algorithm, as well as yield new and better selection
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.