* 2113873
* IUCRC Phase II Boise State University: Center for Atomically Thin Multifunctional Coatings (ATOMIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Harish Subbaraman, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 260,240.00

The Center for Atomically Thin Multifunctional Coatings (ATOMIC) investigates
the fundamental science of 2-dimensional (2D) material systems to enable a wide
range of industrial and defense related applications. Phase II of the ATOMIC
IUCRC adds a new site to the ATOMIC Center at Boise State University, thus
extending the geographical reach of ATOMIC into the Pacific Northwest. A large
focus of the work at the Boise State site is related to the fundamental
chemistry needed to accelerate industry-scale synthesis of 2D materials via
atomic layer deposition and large volume synthesis of 2D material inks for
additive electronics manufacturing via inkjet, aerosol jet, plasma jet, and
micro dispense/extrusion-based printing. The partnerships between ATOMIC
universities, the industry members, and government partners are designed to
serve the national interest by promoting the progress of 2D materials in science
and engineering. Undergraduate and graduate students will have the opportunity
to engage in research projects across all three sites, interacting with a
diverse range of faculty and industry partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase II
builds on the robust foundation of scientific innovation in 2D materials at Penn
State and Rice University and expands it into scalable 2D materials printing
enabled by the addition of Boise State University. Penn State and Rice have
successfully pioneered fundamental research programs in novel 2D materials, such
as graphene, hBN, MoS2, and WS2; and Boise State has excelled in the area of
nanomaterial ink development and controlled precision printing such as inkjet,
plasma jet, aerosol jet, and micro-dispensing. This combination of expertise
will ensure relevant pre-competitive research of interest to the industrial
members in areas related to large-scale production processes, electronics,
sensing, energy, and protection. The joint research efforts chosen and designed
by ATOMIC will concentrate on addressing key societal and industrial problems in
areas of U.S. national interest that can be mitigated through advanced
multifunctional coatings, such as infrastructure protection, internet of things
(IoT) sensing, electronics, energy harvesting/storage, autonomous systems, and
biological threat reduction. Student-centric activities include transformational
and applied research, developing intellectual property, low-cost nano-
manufacturing and industry internship opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.