* 2113770
* Collaborative Research: Experimental constraints on the solidification time scales and fragmentation of submarine lava flows
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ingo Sonder, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 60,592.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fragmentation of Submarine Lava
Flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 75 percent of volcanoes on Earth
erupt under submarine conditions. This project deals with investigating the
interaction between submarine lava flows and seawater. As lava comes in direct
contact with seawater during submarine volcanic eruptions, the water cools the
lava rapidly causing the formation of solid crust on its surface. This affects
the rates of submarine lava flows, and the formation of lava flow morphologies.
Poor understanding of lava cooling time scales is a significant gap in our
ability to model the dynamics of submarine lava flows. Using laboratory
experiments with melted natural rocks, this project will investigate the effects
of salinity, speed, and temperature of water on the solidification time scales
of lavas with a range of compositions. The preliminary results indicate that a
film of water vapor forms as soon as it comes in direct contact with the hot
lava sample. Depending on the lava and water temperatures, the vapor film breaks
down forming numerous bubbles at the lava-water interface and changing the rate
of heat loss from the sample. This project will (1) investigate the onset and
stability of vapor film during the cooling of lava, (2) quantify the cooling
time scales for a range of lava and water temperatures, (3) investigate the
effects of water salinity, water speed and lava composition on the cooling of
lava, (4) evaluate how submarine lava flow morphologies are formed. This project
will train undergraduate and graduate students, and will provide research
support to early career investigators. The state-of-the-art experimental
facility will be uniquely placed in the southwest US facilitating national and
international collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
conditions behind the formation of lava morphologies is important for estimating
effusion rates and dynamics of submarine lava flows. The heat flux from lava to
external water is one of the key quantities that govern the solidification time
scales and thus the flow dynamics of submarine lavas. The direct field
measurement of heat flux at the interface of lava and water is currently absent.
Current models assume a convective water flow regime or use heat flux parameters
from existing metal-to-water heat transfer studies in order to estimate the rate
of heat transfer from lava to water. Due to much lower thermal conductivity of
lava as compared to metals, the existing heat transfer formulations from metal-
to-water heat transfer studies require experimental validation, and if
necessary, new theoretical frameworks need to be developed. This project will
use a novel experimental approach to quantify the lava cooling rates in the
presence of external water using lava samples from remelted rocks of silicic to
mafic compositions. The water boiling regimes and their duration in direct
contact with hot lava will be determined from the experiments. The temperature,
speed and salinity of water will be varied for a range suitable under submarine
conditions. The temperature-dependent thermophysical properties of the
experimental samples will be measured. Using these well-constrained properties
of the lava sample in the heat transfer model, the convective heat flux from
lava to water will be estimated. By integrating experimental and numerical
analyses with theoretical development, the project will provide a holistic
approach for studying the solidification time scales of lava in the presence of
external water. New theoretical frameworks for heat transfer from thermally poor
conductive lava to external water will be developed in this project. This will
advance our understanding of submarine lava solidification time scales, and will
thus provide an important basis to improve our understanding of the dynamics of
submarine volcanic eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.