* 2113803
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: A Case- and Play-Based Learning Module for Cybersecurity and Artificial Intelligence Education for Early Teen Learners
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Shuchi Grover, Looking Glass Ventures, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 05/31/2023
* USD 299,995.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) are expanding into more
aspects of our daily lives as well as key infrastructure. As a result,
understanding these concepts and their relationship with cybersecurity is
becoming increasingly important both for all students and the nation’s
workforce. Providing engaging learning experiences for K-12 learners around
cybersecurity and AI education is critical, especially during the early teen
years when individuals are developing career aspirations and interests. This is
beneficial at the level of both individuals and the nation, as it contributes to
the development of the nation’s future STEM workforce and citizenry. Current
K-12 cybersecurity education is largely accomplished through ‘digital literacy’
activities in classrooms or out-of-school initiatives with few authentic
programming elements for younger learners. Moreover, AI/ML do not feature in
these curricula even though AI efforts in K-12 schools are separately garnering
attention. This case- and play-based learning (CAPABLE) module for cybersecurity
and AI education project will address this gap in cybersecurity and AI/ML
education for K-12 learners. The project will develop an authentic, engaging
learning experience that will introduce students in grades 8-10 to the
fundamentals of cybersecurity and its interplay with AI.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will innovate in the areas of curriculum and
pedagogy to systematically integrate ideas from cybersecurity, AI, and ML. These
topics are typically taught separately, if at all, and providing integrated
learning experiences in these critical computer science (CS) topics will empower
learners in their early teen years. The project will involve development and
empirical investigation of a 40-hour learning module—AI &amp; Cybersecurity for
Teens (ACT)—to motivate and engage students aged 13-15. The ACT module will be
made available for use in cybersecurity camps and/or as an extension to CS
and/or AI curricula in school classrooms. The curriculum and pedagogy will
utilize collaborative board or card games to orient students to cybersecurity
concepts. It will also include an innovative collection of authentic, real-world
‘cases’ related to cybersecurity issues (such as cyberfraud, cyberbullying,
hacking, phishing) with which young teens can identify. These will be paired
with related, transformative programming exercises in the NetsBlox programming
environment and involving AI/ML, which will help build student understanding of
ML models and AI/ML techniques including text classification, neural networks
and generative adversarial networks. The project team will also design a
Cybersecurity Scenario-Based Assessment to assess understanding of cybersecurity
and AI/ML concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special
initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster
new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.