* 2113882
* IUCRC Phase II Rice University: Center for Atomically Thin Multifunctional Coatings (ATOMIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Pulickel Ajayan, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 216,000.00

This Phase II proposal seeks to continue and expand the Center for Atomically
Thin Multifunctional Coatings (ATOMIC), devoted to the design and development of
advanced coatings based on two-dimensional (2D) materials. ATOMIC Phase II will
synergistically integrate students, faculty, and staff from Pennsylvania State
University, Rice University, and Boise State University to advance coating
science across multiple technology readiness levels. Research performed at Rice
will focus on multifunctional hexagonal boron nitride(hBN) coatings,
photocatalytic coatings, printed nano-antennas, and advanced microscopy
characterization of 2D materials. Because of the aligned partnership among
academia, government, and industry, ATOMIC phase II will seeks to impact the
education and training of students, particularly those who are underrepresented
minorities. To encourage young people to pursue science-technology research
degrees, the center will jointly conduct outreach activities and leverage
ongoing NSF Engineering Research Centers (REU), Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) and Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) programs at
Rice. ATOMIC will leverage the Rice Alliance for Technology and Entrepreneurship
to foster academic-industry relationships and enhance the transfer of knowledge
from the Universities to the marketplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional
(2D) materials exhibit a variety of unique properties, different from bulk
phases, that will enhance the performance of existing coating technologies.
Phase I of ATOMIC laid the foundation for demonstrating these ultrathin
materials with improved performance in corrosion resistance, extreme
environmental tolerance, energy harvesting/storage, biocompatibility, and
enhanced molecular sensitivity. ATOMIC Phase II plans to build on the foundation
of scientific innovation in 2D materials at Penn State and Rice University and
expand it into scalable 2D materials printing enabled by the addition of Boise
State University. Penn State and Rice have successfully employed fundamental
research programs in novel 2D materials, such as graphene, hBN, MoS2, and WS2;
and Boise State has joined with experience in nanomaterial ink development and
controlled precision printing such as inkjet, plasma jet, aerosol jet, and
micro-dispensing. The joint research efforts chosen and designed by ATOMIC will
concentrate on addressing key societal and industrial problems in areas of U.S.
national interest that can be mitigated through advanced multifunctional
coatings, such as infrastructure protection, internet of things (IoT) sensing,
electronics, energy harvesting/storage, autonomous systems, and biological
threat reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.