* 2113003
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Electrophysiome: comprehensive recording and integrated modeling of the C. elegans nervous system
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Eli Shlizerman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 317,972.00

The integrated function of the human brain allows every individual human to have
unique thoughts, perceptions, memories, and actions. One of the grand scientific
challenges of our time is to mechanistically understand how collections of
neurons accomplish these incredibly sophisticated functions. However, it turns
out, that this is a daunting task that requires a comprehensive understanding of
a brain at every level of complexity, from molecules to neurons, the circuits
and systems they form, and the underlying computational principles. To reach the
goal of understanding the brain, we must first be able to understand and
simulate simpler brains like the nervous system of the nematode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans. Given its simplicity, scientists have been able to map
the physical wiring of the entire nervous system – the connectome – in the
attempt to reconstruct the worm brain. However, without knowing the biophysical
properties of the diverse neuron types and the activity pattern they produce,
scientists have been unable to generate a unifying model that explains how the
brain of this simple worm works. This project aims to address this problem by
comprehensively characterizing the biophysical properties of a large portion of
C. elegans neurons and constructing accurate mathematical models for these
neurons and the circuits they constitute. The goal is to reproduce neural
activity patterns in different neuron types and neural circuits, and eventually
simulate how the worm brain generates simple behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish this goal, the researchers will take a systematic approach of
recording from 42 selected neuron types in C. elegans using electrophysiology.
This set of neurons was selected based on their known function in multiple well-
studies behavioral circuits including chemosensory, mechanosensory,
thermosensory, nociceptive circuits, and downstream integrating and motor
circuits. Detailed electrophysiological parameters, and recordings of neural
dynamics will be obtained from experiments for each neuron type and deposited
into a public database available for the scientific community. Following the
comprehensive characterization of these neurons, the researchers will model the
single neuron dynamics and currents according to the Hodgkin-Huxley equations.
Novel machine learning methodology based on Deep Reinforcement Learning (Deep
RL) will be developed to find parameter candidates such that they fit the
equations to satisfy multiple optimized objectives in the recordings. Optimal
single neuron models will subsequently be integrated into a connectome-based
whole-brain framework to develop anatomically and biophysically correct circuit
models. The robustness of these dynamic models will be tested with various
computational ablations. This exploratory study is a proof-of-principle test
case to evaluate the impact of biophysical single neuron models on the full-
scale whole-brain electrophysiome simulation and provide initial insights into
the level of abstraction possible for systemic modeling of the entire C. elegans
nervous system. Ultimately, the knowledge gained from this project is expected
to act as steppingstone for understanding and modeling more complex nervous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.