* 2113850
* IUCRC Phase I RPI: Center for Research toward Advancing Financial Technologies (CRAFT)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Mohammed Zaki, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2026
* USD 382,500.00

This project establishes the Center for Research toward Advancing Financial
Technologies (CRAFT) devoted to research on fintech, the conjunction of finance
and technology. The fintech industry is growing as a result of advances in
computer science coupled with practical advances in computing hardware, and it
affects almost all other industries in the broader economy. The vision of CRAFT
is to bring together industry partners, academic researchers, federal agencies,
and students to conduct and advance interdisciplinary fintech research,
innovation, and workforce training in support of new products, services and
ventures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRAFT @Rensselaer brings a range of complementary
capabilities combining Rensselaerâ€™s well-established strengths in computer
science, data sciences, and quantitative finance, and focusing on specific
methodological thrusts in machine learning, artificial intelligence, natural
language processing, distributed ledger technologies, and network analytics. The
center will support innovations in core financial services, such as, trading,
investing, payments, lending, and insurance, and develop innovations in
important segments of the real economy, such as, health care, supply chains,
sustainability &amp; green finance. CRAFT @Rensselaer will also conduct research
on developing and evaluating financial technologies innovations and their
applications to support policy and regulatory needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRAFT
will have a broad impact on the economy by helping to better understand the
benefits and risks of potentially disruptive technologies. The research projects
will allow policy makers and industry participants to better understand and
manage risks, thus reducing the possibility of unintended consequences and
disruptions. Since new technologies are often associated with innovation and
growth, CRAFT may contribute to a more vibrant economy. With respect to
education, the projects will lead to technologies and processes that can be used
in education and training. The proposed workshops for high school students will
broaden participation in all disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center
repository will be hosted at Stevens library. The data, code, and the results of
projects will be well organized and maintained on the CRAFT server according to
the Center data management policy for at least ten years or longer. After the
training modules and software packages are documented and tested, they will be
released and made available through popular public code hosting services such as
GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.