* 2113506
* Mathematical Connectivity through Research and Equity for Women
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Kathryn Leonard, Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 937,811.00

The Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM) is the leading professional
society for women in mathematics and plays a critical role in increasing the
presence and visibility of women in the mathematical sciences. This award will
provide support for new and ongoing programs of the AWM that are central to its
mission. The objectives of this MathCREW project are 1) to strengthen, extend,
and mobilize the successful Research Network (RN) Model developed by the
Association for Women in Mathematics; and 2) to make visible the outstanding
work of women and minority mathematicians. This project will provide conference,
workshop, and travel support for cross-disciplinary activities that will have an
impact at the national scale. Establishing supportive and vibrant mathematical
communities will enable successful research collaborations and advance
mathematical knowledge. This award will support the 22 established AWM Research
Networks and allow the formation of new ones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gender
gap in science is very real, across all regions, all disciplines, and all
development levels. Women’s experiences in both educational and employment
settings are consistently less positive than men’s. The programs supported by
the award will reach across all of the mathematical sciences, will touch all
types of institutions, and will engage mathematicians at all career-levels. The
project includes support for more than 726 mathematicians at many career stages,
most of whom are women and many of whom are from underrepresented backgrounds.
Networks will be broadened to center minority women and promote
interdisciplinary research. Graduate students and research mathematicians will
be brought together at AWM symposia and at workshops held during national
meetings. New interdisciplinary networks and networks designed to promote the
work of minority women will be formed to attack the most challenging problems of
our time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.