* 2113402
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging the Collective Strengths of e4usa and FiRST for Greater Impact on the Future Engineering Workforce (e4usa+FIRST)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Petronella James, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 06/30/2024
* USD 260,871.00

Industry demands for highly trained science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) professionals are growing at a rate not supported by current post-
secondary student enrollments. Efforts have been made primarily in isolation at
the pre-college level to educate and excite students about possible careers in
STEM. The e4usa+FIRST project is an unprecedented effort that establishes a
partnership between two existing programs - Engineering for US All (e4usa) and
For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology (FIRST) - in an effort
to leverage collective strengths toward furthering the democratization of
engineering education. This collaborative effort prepares teachers to educate,
inform, and excite youth about careers in engineering for greater overall impact
on the future engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s
overarching goal is to design and test a myriad of blended e4usa and FIRST
models to be implemented within underserved communities that have been unable to
offer or maintain engineering experiences at their schools. Targeting unserved
communities is designed to intentionally expand the reach and impact of these
two programs. The overarching goal is accompanied by four objectives: 1)
establish blended e4usa+FIRST models for high schools in underserved
communities, 2) prepare teachers and schools to implement an e4usa+FIRST model,
3) link teachers with mentors, universities, and industry, and 4) explore
program scalability and sustainability through innovative business models and
technological tools. The overall effort entails a kick-off workshop, multiple
development sprints, summer professional development, academic year community of
practice, mentorship, university and industry partnerships, and scalability and
sustainability initiatives. Implementation will be evaluated using teacher
interviews, student focus groups, classroom observations, and surveys.
Additional efforts exploring mechanisms to support scalability, sustainability,
and incorporation of new schools into the engineering education ecosystem are
intended to increase the longevity and overall impact of the e4usa+FIRST
program. This effort provides the foundation for testing the likelihood of the
collaboration’s future success, specifically within underserved communities. The
blended approach has the potential to contribute greatly to recruitment and
retention of a more diverse future engineering workforce, while demonstrating
the value of such efforts to university and industry partners. The result will
be a better educated citizenship with a growing interest in engineering and
engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.