* 2113173
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Inception loops for interpretable tuning in macaque area V4
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Andreas Tolias, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2024
* USD 700,000.00

A long-standing hypothesis posits that along a hierarchy of visual areas of the
brain, increasingly complex humanly interpretable features are represented.
Moreover, vision in primates is an active process, where information about a
scene is acquired through sequences of short fixations of the eyes. Despite
decades of study, the characterization of response properties of neurons along
the visual cortical hierarchy and the tuning dynamics associated with free
viewing is still far from complete. Two major reasons are the non-linear nature
of information processing in the brain, and the high dimensionality of the
visual input itself. To address these inherent challenges, the investigators
will apply an innovative method called Inception Loops, that combines big data
and artificial intelligence (AI) to study the dynamics of how information is
represented along the cortex during visual perception. This work will shed light
on the mechanisms of one of the greatest mysteries of life -- the biological
basis of perception and cognition. An algorithmic understanding of visual
perception will have impact beyond neuroscience in developing smarter AI with
more humanlike capabilities. The team is committed to broadening participation
in science through educational outreach focused on neuroscience and AI. Outreach
activities include public events, apprenticeships, research internships, and
courses. The team will also engage in public discussions about brain research,
AI, society and ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inception Loops, an innovative
method developed by the investigators, combine multi-neuronal recordings and
deep learning (DL) predictive models. This enables a systematic in silico
characterization of neural tuning which can be verified in vivo. In aim 1, the
investigators will record neural responses from macaque V4 to rendered
naturalistic stimuli during fixation. The responses of neurons will be modeled
with DL models, using the images and geometric features of the visual scene
extracted from the rendering process. This will enable them to systematically
characterize the nonlinear tuning functions of the neurons, in particular single
cell invariances, in terms of interpretable geometric scene features such as
slant, surface curvature and object identities. In aim 2, the investigators will
use DL models together with an experimental paradigm of interleaved fixating and
free viewing trials to study how the spatial receptive fields and tuning
functions of V4 neurons are modulated by saccades and salient features in
natural scenes under natural viewing conditions. Saliency will be determined
from eye movements in free viewing experiments on the same images and modeled
using a state-of-the-art DL saliency model. They hypothesize that receptive
fields are attracted towards salient features in an image even when saccades are
not executed. Together, these two aims will yield a more comprehensive and
interpretable understanding of the representation of latent geometric scene
features in V4 and how they are modulated by salient features and saccades
during free viewing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany
(BMBF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.