* 2113314
* EAGER: Turning Uncertainty into Advantage: Novel Policies that Exploit Randomness of Lead Times in Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Qiong Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2023
* USD 145,746.00

As environmental, political and business risks motivate companies to diversify
their supply sources, and technology progress makes distributed networks of
suppliers competitive, randomness in lead times remains an important and
challenging issue in inventory management. Contrary to prevailing wisdom that
variability degrades the performance of inventory management strategies, very
early evidence suggests that lead-time variability can, in certain cases, be
used to advantage to produce strategies that reduce overall cost of inventory.
This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will provide
further experimental evidence for understanding whether and how lead time
uncertainty can be exploited to reduce inventory costs. The project will
investigate how distributional information and variability in lead-time and
demand patterns may yield new insights into adaptive approaches to inventory
management that can dynamically adjust to changes in lead times.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will thoroughly investigate the premise that
variability can be effectively exploited in an adaptive fashion to develop data-
driven algorithms that identify strategies to reduce overall cost of inventory.
This stands in contrast with the vast majority of inventory literature, which is
focused on explicit analytical methods that require assumptions on the
(stationary) distribution of lead time and demand. These assumptions are often
not supported in realistic inventory management scenarios. This project examines
realistic and general model settings, with the goal of identifying the key
factors affecting the performance of new policies and quantifying this
performance. While still very preliminary and experimental, the results of this
project are expected to lead to testable hypotheses that could potentially have
great implications for inventory theory and application and therefore broad
practical effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.