* 2113881
* IUCRC Planning Grant, Purdue University: Center for Accurate Georeferencing of the Environment (CAGE)
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Ayman Habib, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 11/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The global economic impact of Global Positioning System (GPS) use is estimated
at ~$1B/day. GPS and resulting geospatial location information (i.e.,
georeferencing) serves a diverse ecosystem of companies across the spectrum of
users including manufacturers, system integrators, service providers, and end
users. It is a technology that has exploded in recent decades with the private
sector superseding the historic dominance of U.S. federal agencies in geospatial
technology development and deployment. However, this proliferation has revealed
vulnerabilities due rapidly advancing technology and data analytics for both
commercial and government entities. The resulting evolution and fragmentation of
geospatial technologies has precipitated a need for strategic investment in
foundational elements related to GPS and georeferencing. To address this issue,
funding is being provided for The Ohio State University, Purdue University, and
Saint Louis University to explore the formation of a three-Site industry-
university cooperative research center: The Center for Accurate Georeferencing
of the Environment (CAGE). The Center will generate and disseminate new
foundational knowledge in three interrelated areas of potential strong interest
to prospective Members. These include foundational research on GPS-based and
alternative AI-based navigation and mapping technologies to advance geospatial
data referencing platforms upon which commercial innovation depends; refine and
work with industry to codify and adopt geospatial data standards and best
practices for functions such as acquisition of multi-sensor/multi-
platform/multi-temporal geospatial data such that diverse members will be able
to build interoperable systems; and develop new AI-based methods for the
reconstruction and labelling of physical locations/object space from diverse
geospatial data will unlock significant potential for geospatial data analytics.
Through a Center planning meeting, The Ohio State University, Purdue University,
and Saint Louis University faculty and administrators will engage a broad
spectrum of public and private entities to identify and discuss collective needs
with the goal of creating a viable research roadmap and associated research
thrusts in which partners are willing to participate and invest. Topics and
potential Center research thrusts will be discussed at the meeting, and those of
highest importance to industry will be identified upon which a viable Center can
be created. Broader impacts of the work include increased economic productivity
and integration of the economic sectors that use or wish to use georeferencing;
workforce training where students participate in industry-relevant, basic, pre-
competitive research projects proposed by university faculty; the engagement of
underrepresented groups via various partnerships with institutional entities
focused in recruiting and retraining students from underserved populations; and
outreach to the public and K-12. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industry-university
cooperative research centers, like the three-Site Center jointly proposed to be
focused on georeferencing in the environment and geospatial techniques and
applications by The Ohio State University, Purdue University, and Saint Louis
University are powerful partnerships between universities; the private sector;
government; non-profits; and local communities. These Centers operate as
consortia where university faculty and students perform fundamental research
that addresses collective industry and community needs and where projects are
funded by membership fees and other financial contributions from Center members.
In this construct, the intellectual power; infrastructure; and student talent of
universities is focused on real world problems of critical interest of a segment
of the economy in need of innovation to overcome conceptual and technological
hurdles that individual entities are unable to overcome themselves. The planning
meeting proposed will bring together interested parties to hear proto-Center
leadership describe the Centerâ€™s value proposition and potential return-on-
investment of those entities wishing to become members of the Center. Those at
the planning meeting will also help the Center create a research road map and
research thrusts that best address the most pressing needs of the collective
membership in the Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.