* 2113682
* Non-centrosymmetric Quantum Materials through Metal-amine Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Efrain Rodriguez, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2024
* USD 420,684.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, principal investigator (PI) Prof. Efrain Rodriguez and his research
group at the University of Maryland will develop new types of quantum materials
consisting of elements such as iron, cobalt, and nickel that are sandwiched
between thin layers of other elements such as sulfur. The concept of developing
new types of electronic materials that possess unique quantum properties can
enable the revolution in quantum information long sought after by many
scientists. A unique aspect of the work is that the incorporation of metal
sulfide layers invokes other physical properties such as magnetism that are
enticing for quantum information applications. These layers, however, do not
randomly stack on top of one another and instead molecules are inserted that
guide the stacking sequence. Chemical control at the atomic level therefore
allows these molecules to ‘twist’ or ‘bend’ the metal sulfide layers into
producing attractive properties for quantum technologies. This precise control
at the atomic scale allows the design of novel quantum materials. These research
activities also include outreach to the local community around College Park in
education through the use of 3D printers. The PI and his students have taken
close to 50 different molecules and materials from chemical databases and turned
them into 3D printed structures. Their model kits called MolecularCraft serve as
instructional tools in the chemistry classroom in local high schools. The PI
collaborates with the faculty at the nearby International High School at Langley
Park (IHSLP), which is a school that serves students underrepresented in STEM.
The PI and students from the University of Maryland propose to engage with IHSLP
students using their local 3D printers but also resources on the university
campus. The aim is to teach the students about materials that make technologies
possible and to inspire them to consider STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the
Division of Materials Research, will examine how two or more disparate
components can be formed to create new types of hybrid materials which can open
new avenues towards emergent phenomena. In the proposed research activities,
hybrid materials consist of metal-amine complexes inserted into two-dimensional
(2D) metal chalcogenides. The metal-amine molecular units are chiral and serve
as structure directing agents to form crystal structures that break inversion
symmetry. The research activities also investigate how much hydrogen bonding
between the –NH2 groups of the metal amine complexes and the terminal Q2- anions
(Q = S and Se) of the metal chalcogenides dictates crystal structure. To give
rise to non-centrosymmetric quantum materials, such interactions should either
twist or bend the 2D layers. The crystal growth of non-centrosymmetric quantum
materials takes place under solvothermal conditions. The solvent for crystal
growth is an amine bidendate ligand L that forms [ML3]n+ complexes, where M =
Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, or Cu. The hosting MQ layers are classified as tetrahedral
transition metal chalcogenides (TTMCs), which in contrast to the well-studied
transition metal dichalcogenides (e.g. MoS2, WTe2), have a square metal
sublattice and accommodate smaller transition metals of the first row. The
targeted phases include Fe- and Ni-based TTMCs for non-centrosymmetric
superconductivity and Co- and Mn-based TTMCs for ‘ferroelectric’ itinerant
magnetism. Outreach to the local school, IHSLP, uses 3D printing to teach
students about inorganic molecules and inorganic materials. Students learn about
structure-property relationships and about materials that play important roles
in technology such as rechargeable batteries, solar cells, and superconductors.
The 3D printing MolecularCraft kits start with Valence Shell Electron Pair
Repulsion (VSEPR) theory, to teach students the basics of structure. IHSLP also
has 3D printing capabilities, and the PI has a webpage where all the 3D printing
files are currently hosted. Representation matters too, so another goal includes
demonstrating to the students a more diverse representation in the sciences. The
3D printing project serves as a bridge to connect them with information on the
pathways to different STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.