* 2113011
* Theoretical Analysis of N-carbophenes: a novel class of 2D hydrocarbons
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chad Junkermeier, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,998.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal and moreover may prove to be a model for similar
engagement at other small community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
tenets of Native Hawaiian philosophy is aloha 'aina (respect for the land). Part
of a modern expression of aloha 'aina comes in the form of stewardship of the
Earth. In part, the project seeks to demonstrate this stewardship by reducing
the emission of gasses responsible for global warming (CO2 and CH4). This
project intends to contribute to better devices to capture CO2 and CH4 using a
recently proposed class of materials: [N]-carbophenes (CARBS). To determine the
effectiveness of CARBS for absorption of CO2 and CH4, the proposer plans to
compare CARBS port structures with other proposed materials. In addition to
greenhouse gas absorption, the work will seek to determine other physical
properties of CARBS so they can be reliably used in devices. Understanding the
electronic structure can show how (pristine and functionalized) CARBS will
interact with the rest of the device when in operation. Understanding the
mechanical stability can help determine what forces can be applied to it without
the material breaking. Knowing the thermal stability helps know the temperature
range at which a device made with this material can operate. The proposer plans
to examine computationally, using at least two complementary methods, the
electronic structure, mechanical stability, and thermal stability of
CARBS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.