* 2113819
* IUCRC Phase I:  University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign: Center for Infrastructure Trustworthiness in Energy Systems (CITES)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* David Nicol, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 720,000.00

The Center for Infrastructure Trustworthiness in Energy Systems (CITES), a new
Phase I IUCRC, focuses on research issues in the critical area of cyber
resilience and the trustworthiness of energy systems (e.g., electric grid
generation, transmission, and distribution), which have an extensive dependence
on cyber technology. Composed of three University sites (University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, University of Arkansas, and Florida International University),
CITES seeks to advance research and technologies that addresses unmet and
underserved industry needs to better secure energy systems. In close partnership
with its members (Offices of Emergency Medical Services, energy providers,
national labs, and industry associations), CITES will help secure the national
defense by developing research that leads to practical means of protecting
energy systems against failure within and attacks upon their cyber
infrastructures. The fundamental issues addressed by CITES concern cyber
resilience in the context of the specialized requirements for these “operational
technology” (OT) systems, issues which include the heterogeneity of OT
equipment, and integration with much more widely used informational technology
(IT) equipment. The Center will focus on detecting and quickly responding to
attacks on the cyber infrastructure, rapidly recovering from the impacts of
successful attacks, decreasing the costs and risks of patching operational
systems, and ensuring that communication between devices happens fast enough and
with enough volume to support operations. CITES will also serve an important
role in augmenting the nation’s workforce in OT-knowledgeable cyber-security
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methodologies include system
analysis, formal methods and other mathematics, and empirical evaluation of
prototypes. CITES technical contributions include knowledge creation, knowledge
transfer, and empirical proofs of concept that utilize University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign (UIUC)’s specialized OT system testbed. Energy providers
benefit by observing the potential for increased resilience; Equipment
manufacturers benefit from proven ideas, and other stakeholders benefit from
increased knowledge. CITES research at UIUC is organized around three thrusts.
The first of these thrusts is understanding security - developing ways of
understanding the security properties of a system, including analysis of
organization and configurations, and of the data derived from the system.
Research about security properties formalizes representations of systems and
develops security proofs. Research in data analysis makes the task of
interpreting data manageable and provides insights and understanding of system
behaviors. The second thrust - security at the edge - has a focus on
vulnerabilities that exist where subsystems join. The team develops means of
detecting both potential and actualized flaws. The technology is tailored to the
special security needs (e.g., cross-system authentication) that occur at the
edge. The third thrust - useable security technologies - ensures that new
security technologies do not increase the risk of the system failing and do not
violate any of the system’s operating constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.