* 2113662
* Network Time Series: From Dynamics to Coevolution
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Vladas Pipiras, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 219,990.00

The last few years have seen a large increase both in the amount of data on
real-world networks in numerous research areas and the impact in people’s daily
lives. One increasingly important field is in an area called network time
series. Some examples include networks that evolve over time (dynamic or
temporal networks), or time series over nodes in a network whose dynamics is
intricately tied to the underlying network structure; and time series over
dynamic networks where the two structures coevolve. Applications specific to
this project include social networks with social connections changing owing to
social dynamics, vertex specific streams such as text influenced by other
vertices, neuroscience with brain functional connectivity networks from fMRI
signals and brain structural connectivity networks or sociology and urban
planning with migration and economic flows over spatial networks. Despite
concerted activity over the last decade, rigorous understanding of network time
series models and their applicability in various domains is still challenging
owing to the complex emergence of macroscopic structure through microscopic
interaction rules between individual network components. The aim of this project
is to develop general theoretical foundations for network time series to inform
the application of statistical methodology as well as computational techniques
in practice whilst being guided by PIs’ collaborations with domain scientists in
the areas mentioned above. Additionally, the project will contribute to the
training of students with an envisioned data science lab, populated in part by
projects from this work providing vertical integration of research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three major pillars to this project,
arranged sequentially in order of complexity. (1) Network modulated time series.
The focus is on multivariate nodal time series with an underlying, possibly
latent static network structure. Motivated by recent work on network vector
autoregressions, network factor and propagation of chaos models are studied as
superior alternatives and extensions. Special cases of the models include
opinion dynamics in social networks and network versions of Hodgkin-Huxley and
FitzHugh-Nagumo models in neuroscience. Motivated by applications in urban
planning, spatial versions of these models will be studied through large network
asymptotics. (2) Dynamic networks driven by possibly latent multivariate time
series. The PIs will work on their systematic analysis leveraging general time
series methods and approaches, especially for discrete-valued time series.
Temporal migration and economic flow networks form one targeted area of
applications. (3) Co-evolving networks. The PIs study Network models in the
scenario where multivariate time series are affected by the underlying network,
which itself is affected by the multivariate time series. The PIs will develop
mathematical techniques to understand various salient phenomena including the
role of self-excitation (the greater the number of times a node interacts with a
neighbor the higher the influence this neighbor has in the future including the
creation of new connections) and information decay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.