* 2113197
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Computations for spatial-chromatic interactions and their physiological implementation in primary visual cortex
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Butts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2024
* USD 649,791.00

Color and form are often treated as separable features of an image. One can
recognize shapes in achromatic photographs and conceptualize the color of an
object abstracted from shape. Yet color-specific processing is embedded
throughout the visual pathway from the first stage of the visual pathway, where
three different types of light sensors (“cones”) with sensitivity to different
parts of the visual spectrum initially convert light into electrical impulses.
The color of a given point can in principle be determined by comparing the
activation of the three different cone types, but the separate color channels
are maintained until the primary visual cortex (V1), where they are finally
combined in neurons that concurrently have sensitivity to different spatial
patterns. Indeed, while it was initially thought that color and form were
processed through separate pathways within V1, recent experiments have
highlighted that a surprising fraction of V1 neurons mix them together in a
diversity of ways. Exactly how the mixing occurs, and for what purpose, are
critical open questions in understanding human vision, and have been difficult
to answer because such mixing is too complicated to characterize using
traditional approaches. This project combines large-scale recording of V1 neural
activity during tailored “spatio-chromatic” visual stimulation with new
computational approaches that offer an unprecedented high-resolution description
of color processing within V1 while allowing determination of the underlying
function of spatio-chromatic mixing in supporting natural color vision. The
project also provides opportunity for cross-disciplinary training in
neurophysiological and machine-learning based statistical modeling of
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
tight combination of visual neurophysiology, data-driven computational modeling,
and simulation. The investigators perform large-scale multi-electrode recordings
across cortical lamina to determine the transformations of spatio-chromatic
representations from cortical inputs (where color channels are separate) to
cortical outputs (where they are mixed). These recordings are interpreted using
nonlinear data-driven models that can provide high-resolution spatio-chromatic
maps of the stimuli driving each V1 neuron, and distinguish the underlying
computations being performed at each stage. Such characterizations are pushed to
achieve cone-resolution by leveraging novel model-based eye-tracking that can
account for small eye movements with an order-of-magnitude finer sensitivity
than standard approaches. The first Aim determines the set of principles
governing how spatial and chromatic information is combined in V1, which sets
the foundation for processing throughout the visual pathway. The second Aim
determines whether these rules are the same in the area of cortex processing the
center-of-gaze (fovea), which is responsible for high-acuity color vision.
Finally, the last Aim establishes a population decoding framework for linking
spatio-chromatic sensitivity of individual V1 cells to the larger systems-wide
goals of the visual cortex in processing natural color
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.