* 2113785
* ICBR Capacity: Biological Collections: Updates to the Operation of the Algal Resources Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Catharina Alves-de-Souza, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 436,511.00

Toxic microalgae have serious adverse effects varying from fish kills to human
illnesses caused by the consumption of shellfish contaminated with algal toxins.
The economic impact from blooms of these algae can be devastating to fishing and
shellfish industries and tourism. Over the years, much effort has been dedicated
to researching new methods for the detection, prevention, and management of
toxic algal blooms to mitigate their ecological and economic consequences. The
Algal Resources Collection (ARC) is the only public culture collection in the
U.S. focused on the growth and maintenance of toxic or otherwise harmful
microalgal species covering a broad taxonomic and geographic range. Many of the
species hosted at the ARC are challenging to find in other public collections
and include strains used in the description of several new species that can be
found nowhere else. The ARC cultures have been extensively used by the national
and international research community in studies encompassing diverse subject
areas, including ecology, taxonomy, phylogeny, and toxicology. Additionally, ARC
researchers and staff are involved in outreach activities that involve various
educational levels, including K-12 teachers and students, undergraduate,
graduate and PhD students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports updates to
the operation of the ARC through the implementation of automated imaging flow
cytometry and cryopreservation capability to increase the efficiency in the day-
to-day activities and better serve the research community. The imagery flow
cytometry will allow for more efficient quality control of the cultures and
provide additional information on microalgal strains (i.e., morphometric data,
cell biovolume, maximal cell abundance, image libraries) that will be made
freely available on the ARC website. Cryopreservation storage capability will
allow the ARC staff to continue incorporating strains into the collection and
bring many advantages, such as protecting the cultures against genetic changes
and avoiding loss of strains due to errors during transferences. The project
also extends the scope of the ARC outreach and educational activities by
increasing toxic microalgal awareness among K-12 students through the
development of an educational e-game to teach kids about the importance of
reducing the nutrient load to water bodies to decrease the frequency and
magnitude of toxic blooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.