* 2113755
* Collaborative Research: The Making of Engineers: Influence of Makerspaces on the Preparation of Undergraduates as Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2021,06/30/2021
* Idalis Villanueva, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2021
* USD 32,404.00

Makerspaces are physical locations that include equipment and tools to allow its
users to create and invent prototypes, develop ideas into models, and
collaborate to design new products and solutions. The presence of makerspaces
has increased substantially over the last 5 years and are now commonly
integrated into undergraduate engineering preparation programs. The increased
attention makerspaces are receiving in the STEM disciplines, and particularly
within engineering education, provides justification for examining the influence
of these spaces on undergraduate student development into professionals. There
is wide speculation that access to and interactions within makerspaces enhance
engineering students' undergraduate learning experiences by exposing the
students to activities that enhance their development as engineers. Yet there is
a lack of data supporting the notion that engineering students' involvement in
university affiliated makerspace experiences and activities positively
influences their professional development. This project is conducting six case
studies of university engineering education makerspace programs to determine the
influence of makerspaces on the professional formation of undergraduate
engineering students and the use and impact of makerspaces on faculty members.
Building upon the case studies, the project will develop and disseminate a
national survey to engineering education students and faculty members working in
makerspace-affiliated engineering education programs. The project will increase
our understanding of how makerspaces influence students' professional identity
development, motivation, expertise, and propensity for persistence. Data
gathered from this project will document the sustainability and scalability of
makerspaces in engineering education programs through examination of
undergraduate engineering education students, faculty, programs, and
institutions. Finally, the work informs new lines of research regarding
makerspaces in postsecondary professional engineering preparation programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using six two-year long case studies and a nationwide
survey, this project is examining the influence of makerspace integration into
undergraduate engineering programs. The project uses interviews, observations,
focus groups and artifact analysis (e.g. course syllabi) to longitudinally study
6 makerspace-affiliated engineering education programs. The project focuses on
faculty members' and students' interactions with makerspaces and the impact the
makerspaces are having on the development of students' professional identities,
motivation, achievement, and persistence. Case study data is being examined
using content analysis applying both a priori and inductive coding approaches.
Case study analysis will inform the development of surveys for a nationwide
assessment of makerspace-affiliated university engineering preparation programs.
The research project will inform new lines of inquiry about the formation of
engineers and will provide those promoting makerspaces in engineering education
programs with data to inform their development and support of their programs.
Results will be shared though host webinars and other virtual outlets. In
addition, via STEM-Central.net, the information is being shared with the larger
STEM community and the American Association of Colleges and Universities about
models of leadership and organizational structures in makerspaces that can
improve the development of engineering students' professional identities.
Furthermore, in collaboration with the Cooperative Extension program at each of
the investigators' home institutions, teaching and informative briefs will be
disseminated to K-16 STEM teachers and communities through conferences such as
the National Science Teacher Association, American Education Research
Association, American Society of Engineering Education, and STEMTech. Overall,
this work could influence makerspace leaders, engineering faculty members,
undergraduate engineering students, and researchers and policymakers interested
in makerspaces and STEM education.