* 2113729
* SBIR Phase I:  Augmented Reality (AR) Web Commerce for Footware Retailers
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Suresh Thankavel, AUGRAY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable footwear retailers to allow
consumers to virtually try-on products on their eCommerce websites. Research
suggests product fit and look are important parameters for over 66% of eCommerce
shoppers. This research and development effort provides a convenicence for
consumers that is readily implemented by existing eCommerce site. The technology
allow customers to measure their foot size using a smartphone camera without a
need for an app. The project develops and commercializes a novel Augmented
Reality (AR) eCommerce platform, enabling retailers to offer customers unique
and immersive online product-try-on shopping experiences instantly, reduces
inventory instory, provides seamless conversion of existing e-Commerce websites
to AR-enabled commerce platforms contributing to satisfied customers, higher
sales, reduced returns, and decreased cost per sale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will employ artificial
intelligence, machine learning, augmented realiity (AR), and 3D modelling
solutions to create eCommerce platforms that convert physical products into 3D
models that work on all smart devices seamlessly. The successful product will
provide high levels of performance and precision in the superimposition of
images. Solution must ensure that the AR model ensures split second inference
overlays and tracking streams with lightweight 3D visualizations and &gt; 95%
accuracy to fit into the real world. If successful, the proposed AR Commerce
platform may be applicable to a variety of applications including retail and
medical industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.