* 2113096
* CRCNS: Transcortical and spinal circuit contributions to hand shaping in primates - Real-time neuromorphic implementation for robotic demonstration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Francisco Valero-Cuevas, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2024
* USD 946,799.00

Engineering of robots primarily relies on prescribed algorithms for centralized
control. This results in robots with limited versatility because every function
must be preprogrammed. Animals, by contrast, rely on adaptable neuronal networks
distributed throughout the body that convert and modulate brain signals into
specific and well-coordinated muscle actions and corrections. It has now become
possible to record signals from these large neuronal networks in primates in the
part of the spinal cord controlling hand function. Therefore, our goal is to
extract the functional features of these neuronal networks, and validate their
function by controlling bio-inspired robotic hands, as well as human cadaveric
hands. This validation will allow the first physical test of the biological
mechanisms for grasp function, and will help understand hand disabilities and
treatments in, for example, stroke, spinal cord injury and cerebral palsy. It
will also launch a new generation of versatile robots that use the mechanisms of
our nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is to create a
synthetic functional analogue of the cervical spine that controls multiple grasp
modalities in bio-robotic hands. This is made possible by the advent of
specialized massively parallel computer chips that allow the implementation of
networks of hundreds of simulated neurons and their spiking dynamics
(neuromorphic chips). Therefore, in this project, we will extract network
architectures for the control of the hand from the nervous system of primates
(Japan) and implement them as neuromorphic circuits to create a new class of
versatile robotic hands (USA). Using specialized recording system, will record
neural data from hundreds of spinal interneurons and alpha motoneurons in the
cervical spinal cord of awake, behaving monkeys during manipulationâ€”while also
recording EMG and hand kinematics. This will be the most complete data set to
date for cervical control of the hand (Aim 1). Then, we will create neuromorphic
implementations of that neural circuitry using state of the art very large scale
integration chips. Special attention will be paid to implementing
physiologically valid versions of alpha-gamma motoneuron interactions, and
realistic plasticity rules. We will also create a Domain Specific Language that
allows the translation of general neuroanatomical circuits into neuromorphic
code to make this technology accessible by the general neuroscience community
(Aim 2). We will test, refine and validate the neuromorphic circuits by using
the neuromorphic chips to control neuro-robotic hands using electric motors
programmed to behave as muscles, and sensors to replicate the function of muscle
spindles and Golgi tendon organs (Aim 3). We will also control cadaveric human
hands to validate the neuromorphic controller for the anatomy of the human hand.
This will pave the way to a better understanding of hand function and disability
and serve as the proof of concept for a new class of neuromechanical robotic,
prosthetic and brain-controlled hands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
companion project is being funded by the National Institute of Information and
Communications Technology, Japan (NICT). This project is jointly funded by the
following NSF programs: Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering, Collaborative
Research in Computational Neuroscience, Robust Intelligence, and Mind, Machine
and Motor Nexus program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.