* 2113247
* CIF: Mobile Atmospheric Profiling Network (MAPNet) Facility for Boundary Layer and Precipitation Investigations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Ryan Wade, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 07/31/2026
* USD 477,142.00

This Community Instruments and Facilities (CIF) award is for the University of
Alabama in Huntsvilleâ€™s Mobile Atmospheric Profiling Network (MAPNet). MAPNet
consists of a suite of instruments that specialize in remotely retrieving
temperature, moisture, wind, and other properties of the atmospheric boundary
layer. MAPNet has been used to study topics from severe thunderstorms to winter
weather, and this award will provide for broader scientific community access to
the instrumentation, leading to new research ideas and findings. The facility
will also be used as an educational and outreach tool, providing opportunities
for students at a variety of institutions to interact with state-of-the-art
instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CIF award is for the provision of
four existing mobile profiling systems that are integrated into the Mobile
Atmospheric Profiling Network (MAPNet). MAPNet consists of the Mobile Integrated
Profiling System (MIPS), the Rapidly Deployable Atmospheric Profiling System
(RaDAPS), the Mobile Doppler Lidar and Sounding system (MoDLS), and the Mobile
Alabama X-band radar (MAX). The combination of wind profilers, lidars,
radiometers, and other instruments can be integrated to provide high-resolution
profiles of wind, temperature, humidity, aerosols, cloud base, and precipitation
in the atmospheric boundary layer over a broad range of conditions. The
University of Alabama at Huntsville profiling facilities have been used over the
past 20 years in field campaigns on a variety of topics such as convective
initiation, severe weather, and winter storms. New areas of science where the
MAPNet instruments could be used include boundary layer impacts from surface
heterogeneities, temporal (morning, evening, rain-induced) transitions in the
boundary layer, fog, air quality, and cloud electrification and lightning
studies. This award will enhance the ability of the broader scientific community
to use MAPNet through the AGS field campaign request
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.