* 2113498
* IUCRC Phase III: Worcester Polytechnic Institute: Center for Resource Recovery and Recycling (CR3)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Yan Wang, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 132,997.00

The Center for Resource Recovery and Recycling, CR3, is a multi-institution
IUCRC that focuses on sustainable stewardship of the earthâ€™s material resources.
As it enters Phase III, CR3 will build on its Phase I and Phase II
accomplishments to advance sustainable technologies that recover, remanufacture,
and reuse all types of materials throughout the manufacturing process. These
advancements will help reduce energy costs and increase profitability for a
variety of industrial sectors, while protecting natural resources and the
environment. Materials use in 2020 is approximately 90 Gt globally, and is
likely to reach 170 Gt in the next forty years. The manufacturing industry that
converts these materials into commodities needs technologies that enable this
conversion more efficiently while generating less production waste and consuming
less energy. The recycling industry that processes the production and post-
consumer wastes needs methods that are cleaner and profitable. Research
supporting materials recovery and recyclability is multidisciplinary and must
respond to the needs of a multiplicity of commercial stakeholders across the
supply chain. CR3 brings two leading universities with expertise in materials
science and engineering (Worcester Polytechnic Institute and Colorado School of
Mines) together with key constituents in the resource recovery and recycling
area to develop comprehensive technology transfer pathways to industry. CR3
research efforts address product manufacturing waste, post-consumer waste,
instrumentation, sensors and controls, design for disassembly and conversion of
trash to treasure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of CR3 is on key
sectors of iron and steel, non-ferrous structural metals, light metals, rare-
earths, energy materials and photovoltaic metals, high value refractory metals
and electronic materials. Key unmet industrial needs in these sectors are
driving the following research thrusts for the Center: (a) polymeric material
remanufacturing and use, (b) environmentally sustainable materials recovery, (c)
reduction of the carbon and water footprint, (d) low-cost alternatives to
current materials, and (e) natural resource depletion. CR3's research projects
utilize core and supporting technical competencies across both academic sites.
Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) brings competencies to the Center that
include thermodynamic and kinetic modeling, hydrometallurgy and
electrometallurgy, physical metallurgy and inorganic chemistry. Competencies
also include physical, chemical, and mechanical property testing, and additive
manufacturing, as well as sensor and measurement device application development.
WPI brings competencies in life-cycle assessment (LCA) and environmental impact
assessments, commercial feasibility assessments, robotics, sorting technology,
and industry 4.0 concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.