* 2113207
* CIF: Community Instruments and Facilities: Mobile and Quickly Deployable Radars
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Stephen Nesbitt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 07/31/2024
* USD 497,428.00

This Community Instruments and Facilities (CIF) award is for support of the
University of Illinoisâ€™s mobile and quickly deployable Doppler on Wheels (DOWs),
Rapid-Scan DOW, and C-band on Wheels (COW) radar network, collectively termed as
the DOWNET. The radar network will provide customizable, flexible, and targeted
observations of various types of weather, including severe storms, flooding
events, tornadoes, lake-effect snow, fire plumes, orographic precipitation,
hurricanes, and coastal winter storms. The DOWNET will be packaged with next
generation visualization and field coordination software for the scientific user
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DOWNET CIF award is for a baseline level of
maintenance and operations support to make the radar systems available to a
diverse research and education community. The DOWNET system will provide
cutting-edge radar to educational institutions, including Historically Black
Colleges and Universities through educational proposals. The award will enhance
public weather awareness and educational training at local and national levels.
DOWNET will support research to improve warnings of high-impact weather events,
which will mitigate loss of life and property to weather hazards. Data from
DOWNET can also be used to improve representation of critical small-scale
processes in weather and climate models. Participation in local and national
outreach events and a robust educational program each year of the award will
broaden participation from diverse and underserved communities. Additionally,
this award will enhance the ability of the broader scientific community to use
the radars through the AGS facility request process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.