* 2113403
* Toward a Mechanotransduction Mimic of the Neural Stem Cell Niche
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Rebecca Willits, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 11/30/2023
* USD 445,012.00

In recent years, scientists have identified special regions of tissues -- known
as niches -- within the human body that help sustain and rejuvenate it. These
tissue regions contain specialized units called stem cells that provide new life
and support to tissues as we grow and age. The stem cells reside locally within
the tissues. The tissue acts like a parent to a child - it provides a nurturing
environment to live. When the time is right, the environment signals the stem
cells to move out and support the surrounding community. However, with disease
or with aging, stem cells do not have the same survival or supportive response.
It is not known how changes that occur in the stem cells' environment influences
their response. In the brain, stem cells reside in a complex environment,
directly interacting with other cells, blood vessels, and the surrounding
matrix, each of which provides its own influence over the stem cells. The goal
of this research is to understand how specific changes in the matrix environment
alter the neural stem cell response. The results will be used to better inform
how changes in the brain that occur with disease or aging can influence the
neural stem cells. This would then allow for better design therapies to sustain
stem cell support of the brain. Through both hands-on involvement and the
analysis of images, engineering students, high school students, and middle
school students will become more engaged in integrating the topics of mechanics,
materials, and biomedicine through computer analysis and statistics involved
with imaging. Student involvement in research is key to this engagement, and the
PI will continue to have students of all ages supporting the research goals of
the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to
investigate the role of mechanotransduction in maintenance and neurogenesis of
neural stem cells in order to identify the critical components involved with
physiological changes to the neural stem cell niche. It is hypothesized that
stem cell maintenance and differentiation are instructed through
mechanotransduction by the matrix and cells. This hypothesis will be addressed
through two aims. First, by determining how engaging integrin receptors and
mechanotransduction signaling pathway alter neural stem cell maintenance and
neurogenesis. Second, by determining how cadherin mechanotransduction alters the
maintenance and neurogenesis of neural stem cells. These aims will involve the
use of microgel-based scaffolds that allow the decoupling of scaffold elasticity
from peptide concentration, isolating changes in the mechanical environment from
the biochemical environment. Activation of integrins and cadherins will be
characterized through various molecules that relate to the mechanocoupling
between a cell and its environment or act as mechanical
transducers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.