* 2113891
* Game Theoretic Modeling for Improved Management of Water and Wastewater Resources Using Equilibrium Programming and Feedback Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Steven Gabriel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 553,407.00

This grant will support the modeling of novel management approaches for improved
cooperation among independent water resources users and stakeholders. Such
cooperation is not naturally incentivized because the actions beneficial to
upstream users can often negatively impact downstream users. These asymmetrical
benefits create the potential for non-cooperative behavior in three key areas:
1) water withdrawal rights, 2) water quality responsibilities, and 3) risks
associated with flooding. Historically, cooperative agreements among independent
entities have required static legal agreements that created barriers to
adaptation or policy improvement. This research will explore novel management
approaches, such as market-based mechanisms, to overcome these challenges to
cooperation. The anticipated efficiency and equity gains in these systems will
advance prosperity and welfare for municipal, industrial, and agricultural water
users; treatment plant and network operators; and the natural environment. Two
contrasting use cases will be considered in this research: urban river
restoration in the Anacostia Watershed (Use Case #1) in the metropolitan
Washington, DC, area and economic development and ecological preservation in the
Duck River Watershed (Use Case #2) in Tennessee. The work will establish new
interdisciplinary collaborations between experts in operations research and
water resources management, which will promote the progress of science and
intellectual merit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will use rigorous mathematical
techniques to model deterministic and stochastic water infrastructure systems
from a one-level and two-level equilibrium problem perspective based on non-
cooperative game theory. The developed models combine engineering, water policy,
machine learning, risk analysis, resilience planning and economic elements. The
novelty of this work is that it accounts for risk and benefits in a systematic,
unified, and endogenous manner across all entities and their interactions and
allows the system operator/regulator to effectively balance risk and cost under
uncertain and/or changing conditions. Furthermore, it is anticipated that the
work will lead to algorithmic advances in decomposition methods for water
equilibrium problems as well as stochastic equilibrium models for this general
class of infrastructure equilibrium problems. Also, a rolling-horizon,
stochastic mathematical program with equilibrium constraints will develop
strategic learning algorithms for water stakeholders to improve their decision-
making over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.