* 2113892
* IUCRC Planning Grant: University of New Hampshire: Center for Digital Factory Innovations (CDFI)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Nicholas Kirsch, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The objective of this planning grant is to organize and plan for the
establishment of an IUCRC Center for Digital Factory Innovations (CDFI). Funding
will support an industry-focused workshop to gather input regarding the critical
role that sensors, connectivity, automation, and enterprise models, along with
machine learning and big data technologies, can play in transforming advanced
manufacturing in the US. The Internet of Things for Manufacturing (IoTfM)
harvests capabilities to enable the digital factory and drives sustained
performance improvements in manufacturing. Interconnected, self-aware factories
and processes that manufacture products through automation and intelligent
human-machine interactions are envisioned. Consistent with this vision, the
proposed centerâ€™s long-term objective is to catalyze IoTfM advancement and
adoption by providing pre-competitive, fundamental knowledge to industry for the
purposes of improved product performance, enhanced productivity, work force
development, and economic growth. Collaborators at the University of New
Hampshire (UNH), North Carolina State University (NCSU), and Georgia Institute
of Technology (GT) will join to create this new center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed planning meeting will focus on critical
knowledge gaps in four thrust areas: 1) Self-aware processes that contribute
integrated sensors and accompanying adaptive, cloud-based optimization and
control systems for processes such as machining, forming and robotics; 2)
Augmented artificial intelligence (AI) that promotes human-machine cooperation
in a cyber-physical system environment for applications such as discrete
processes and cobots; 3) Protocols and interoperability that assure seamless,
wireless connectivity in communication platforms with time-sensitive networks
and the secure transfer of data within the digital factory environment; and 4)
Self-organizing systems that represent an alternative way of organizing factory
operations for increased flexibility, reconfigurability and robustness in
contrast to highly centralized approaches. CDFI envisions a forum for
collaborations among academic, industrial, national laboratory, and
international researchers and a vehicle for educating the next generation of
scientists and engineers in this industrial focus
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.