* 2113928
* SHF:Small:  Data-Driven Thermal Monitoring and Run-Time Management for Manycore Processor and Chiplet Designs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Todayâ€™s high-performance processors, and even emerging mobile platforms, are
more thermally constrained than ever before due to continuing increase in on-
chip power densities. Emerging Chiplet-based heterogeneous integration further
exacerbates the thermal problems as heat dissipation is limited due to stacking
integration. An increase in temperature exponentially degrades reliability of
semiconductor chips and hence is one of the leading concerns today. Furthermore,
long-term reliability represents a significant challenge for the design of
current nanometer integrated circuits (ICs). To address this trend, runtime
power, thermal, resource and long-term reliability management schemes are being
studied and implemented in most new generations of processors. However, there
are still many challenging problems to be solved such as accurate full-chip run-
time thermal and power estimation, workload-dependent true hot-spot detection
and prediction, run-time control policy for true hot-spot reliability
management, and more intelligent reliability-aware performance maximization in a
thermally-constrained multi/many-core and emerging chiplet designs, to name a
few. At the same time, deep-learning-based on deep neural networks (DNN) are
gaining significant traction, as they provide new computing and optimization
paradigms for many of the challenging and complex design-automation problems.
The new techniques developed in this project will make future VLSI chips more
robust and reliable amid continued aggressive transistor scaling and increasing
power density. This project will also contribute significantly to the core
knowledge and technologies of emerging machine learning based approaches for
full-chip power, thermal modeling and runtime control and optimization
techniques for multi/many-core processors. This award will enable the
investigator to engage with more female and underrepresented minority students
to further contribute to the diversity in US science and technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a new generation of data-
driven real-time thermal monitoring and smart run-time thermal/power and
reliability management techniques by harnessing the latest advances in machine
leaning and numerical methods for commercial many-core processors. First, the
research will develop new data-driven fast online full-chip thermal- and power-
monitoring techniques for commercial many-core processors, and emerging chiplet
designs considering practical heat-sink cooling conditions under arbitrary
workloads. The project will explore recent advances in DNN networks such as
recurrent neural networks (RNN), conditional generative neural networks (CGAN),
graph neural networks (GNN) etc. Composable and scalable thermal modeling will
also be explored for chiplet design. Second, this project will also explore
learning-based thermal/power/reliability management for commercial many-core
processors and chiplets based on the proposed DNN-based thermal/power/
reliability monitors considering practical control
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.