* 2113611
* Central Limit Theorems and Inference in High Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Arun Kuchibhotla, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The Central Limit Theorem (CLT) is a fundamental result in probability theory,
asserting that the aggregate behavior of large ensembles of small and
approximately independent stochastic quantities follows a universal law,
informally known as the bell curve. The CLT approximation is a cornerstone of
statistical inference, as it provides the theoretical underpinning of the vast
majority of statistical methods for estimation, hypothesis testing, and
confidence intervals. It is also routinely used for uncertainty assessment
across the sciences and in many industrial applications. Despite the immense
popularity, most existing CLT results are unable to fully express mathematically
the degree of complexity that is typical of modern, large datasets. In addition,
they are inadequate for high-dimensional statistical modeling. As a result,
reliance on classic CLT approximations to verify the validity of statistical
procedures is no longer justifiable in high-dimensional settings. Instead, new,
more refined CLT guarantees are in order. Recent breakthrough advances have led
to the formulation of new high-dimensional CLTs (HDCLTs), whose validity holds
but only under fairly restrictive assumptions. The broad goal of this project is
to develop new HDCLT approximations that are applicable across a significantly
wider range of conditions and settings and to elucidate their uses in high-
dimensional statistical problems involving large and complex
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research components of this project include five
main research aims: (1) to produce HDCLTs for independent observations under
weak conditions that allow for heavy-tail data and singular covariances; (2) to
derive new high-dimensional Edgeworth expansions; (3) to obtain new HDCLTs for
sums of dependent random vectors and time series processes; (4) to study HDCLTs
for high-dimensional random matrices, such as the sample covariance matrix, and
their spectra; and (5) to deploy HDCLTs in multiple-testing problems targeting
FDR and FWER control. The research outcomes of this project will advance in
important ways the theory and applications of HDCLT approximations and will lead
to novel, practicable tools for inference in high-dimensional
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.