* 2113399
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Light and Governance in the Russian Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Douglas Rogers, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,249.00

Russia has recently initiated infrastructural and socio-economic re-development
projects in Arctic coastal towns. These state-led governance initiatives have
occurred amidst the expansion of corporate energy infrastructure, transforming
local practices. This research explores the concept of a “light regime”—the
configurations of power and identity surrounding use of and access to artificial
light within the broader context of extreme seasonal variation in the Arctic.
Results from this work will contribute to two dimensions of Arctic
sustainability: on-going transitions to renewable energy sources in remote
locations and questions of urban sustainability related to energy security,
economic diversification, and transportation
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project entails ethnographic and
archival research, including fieldwork in Tiksi and two months of research in
Yakutsk, the capital of the Sakha Republic. Work will focus on three
populations: state officials, employees of energy companies, and local residents
and visitors. Ethnographic data will be collected through photo and diary
solicitations, interviews, collaborative mapping, policy analysis, object-based
research, and auto-ethnography. Research will result in a dissertation and peer-
reviewed publications. Broader impacts will be achieved through a collaborative
museum exhibit and presentation of research findings in public
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.