* 2113908
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Another piece of the Arctic carbon puzzle: quantifying emissions from Arctic lakes in drier regions
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jasmine Saros, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 58,396.00

Lakes are a dominant feature of the Arctic landscape and can be important
sources of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, but large-scale Arctic carbon
budgets usually neglect carbon emissions from lakes. Moreover, studies of carbon
emissions from northern lakes have largely been limited to regions where lakes
are connected to thawing permafrost. Emissions from lakes located in drier
landscapes, which cover about 25% of the northern permafrost region, have been
relatively understudied. Consequently, it is uncertain to what degree lakes
located in drier regions contribute to carbon emissions, a problem that likely
will worsen as much of the Arctic is predicted to become warmer and drier in the
future. This project addresses both critical gaps. First, the researchers are
using automated sensors to measure carbon emissions from lakes in West
Greenland, a region experiencing rapid warming and declining precipitation. The
researchers are also synthesizing their lake emission measurements with
previously published observations to assess how differences in climate patterns
impact fluxes of carbon dioxide between lakes and the atmosphere. The results of
this research will be presented in interdisciplinary academic panels, popular
science magazines, youth science programs, and discussed with West Greenland
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kangerlussuaq region in West Greenland
located along a hydro-climatic gradient serves as a model landscape for studying
the implications of warmer and drier Arctic conditions for carbon dynamics in
inland waters. The researchers are quantifying carbon emissions from a suite of
lakes along a climate-precipitation gradient that mimics shifts from cooler and
wetter climate to drier and warmer conditions throughout the whole year, using
high-frequency, in situ sensors. These sensors are providing the first annual,
temporally well resolved measurements of carbon dioxide emissions from lakes in
poorly hydrologically connected, arid Arctic landscapes. The researchers are
upscaling their measurements to the regional level and comparing them with
terrestrial carbon fluxes in the surrounding landscape. This research is
highlighting the heterogeneity of the Arctic carbon cycle and its role in the
full Arctic system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.