* 2113019
* Scope of collateral fitness effects and their mechanisms
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Marc Ostermeier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 04/30/2024
* USD 992,128.00

Understanding the effects of protein mutations is fundamentally important in the
study of molecular evolution. Harmful mutations are generally understood to
cause negative effects by disrupting the normal functions of the affected
protein. However, the deleterious effects of mutations might also arise from
causing the mutated protein to do things it should not do, such as interfere
with unrelated biological processes. This project is a systematic study of the
effects of all possible mutations in three proteins. This will contribute to the
understanding of how proteins evolve and the mechanisms by which mutations can
affect cell physiology. Such knowledge is important for understanding human
disease and the evolution of antibiotic resistance. Each year of this research,
three graduate students, two undergraduates, and one high school student will be
trained in research. The graduate students will present research at scientific
conferences and gain mentorship experience supervising the undergraduate and
high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distribution of fitness effects
of mutations plays a central role in setting protein evolution rates, but the
molecular underpinnings of this constraint are unclear. One possibility is that
mutant proteins misfold or misinteract with other proteins with deleterious
consequences. Such effects are examples of collateral fitness effects, as
opposed to primary fitness effects that derive from changes in the physiological
function of the protein. Very little is known about the frequency, magnitude,
and mechanisms of collateral fitness effects, but such information is critical
for understanding protein evolution. This research will comprehensively
determine the collateral fitness effects of mutations in three proteins using
growth competition and next-generation sequencing techniques in Escherichia
coli. Molecular biology techniques will be used to discover the mechanisms
behind select mutational effects. This study will generate a wealth of data from
which to understand the contribution of collateral fitness effects to
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.