* 2113134
* RUI - An integrative study of covariances between behavioral and morphological life-history traits
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Flavia Barbosa, Lake Forest College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 11/30/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Trade-offs are a key concept in evolutionary biology: when resources are
limited, organisms must strategically allocate resources to different functions.
As a result, higher investment in one trait results in lower investment in
others, and the optimal allocation strategy can vary with the environment. Most
studies on evolutionary trade-offs focus either on the mechanisms that result in
different strategies or in their fitness consequences, rather than integrating
these two questions. The goal of this project is to investigate both causes and
consequences of trade-offs using the bean beetle, Callosobruchus maculatus. A
previous study by the investigator and two undergraduate researchers revealed
that resource competition between juveniles leads to trade-offs between wing
size and reproduction in adults. This project will explore the role of hormones
during development in determining adult allocation strategies into wings versus
reproduction, as well as the effects of resource allocation to immunity.
Consequences of these trade-offs will also be investigated by measuring the
evolutionary fitness of individuals with different behavioral strategies. In
addition to making significant contributions to our understanding of life-
history trade-offs, this project will contribute to a more diverse STEM
workforce through the recruitment and training of undergraduate researchers from
underrepresented groups: This project will be entirely conducted by
undergraduate researchers under the investigator’s supervision. Additionally,
this project will promote the integration of teaching and research through the
development of inquiry-based laboratory experiments with C. maculatus for an
Animal Behavior course. This classroom research experience will serve as a
pipeline for undergraduates to get involved in research outside the classroom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trade-offs are a central concept to life-history theory,
arising due to differential trait investment within an organism and resulting in
negative covariances between traits. A full understanding of why trade-offs
occur requires the integration of their proximate mechanisms and fitness
consequences. In Callosobruchus maculatus, larval density induces differential
resource allocation: High density results in the development of dispersal morphs
with large, functional wings, as opposed to the short-winged flightless morphs
that develop under low densities. A previous study by the investigator and two
undergraduate collaborators revealed that high-density individuals develop
larger wings and smaller gonads, and larval density also affected a suite of
mating behaviors in both sexes. This project will investigate the role of
Juvenile Hormone in the developmental mechanisms involved in these trade-offs,
as well as how sex differences and resource allocation to immunity affect
overall resource allocation. The ultimate explanations will also be investigated
by measuring fitness effects of differential allocation to gonads and mating
behaviors such as courtship and oviposition
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.