* 2113030
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Combining computational modeling and artificial intelligence to understand receptor function in physiology and disease
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Rob Meijers, INSTITUTE FOR PROTEIN INNOVATION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 409,152.00

G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are cell surface receptors that translate
external signals (e.g. binding of drugs) into the activation of processes inside
the cell. The three-dimensional shape of the receptor changes depending on the
molecule that is binding to it and the external environment (e.g. injured versus
normal tissue). To sample all possible conformations of a GPCR, a powerful
computational simulation approach is used that combines traditional molecular
dynamics simulations with artificial intelligence. This novel approach is
applied to opioid receptors, a prominent subfamily of GPCRs. These receptors
mediate pain relief in injured and inflamed tissue, but also have adverse side
effects in healthy tissue, such as depression of breathing or sedation in the
brain. The opioid receptors change their conformation as a result of the
inflamed environment. If there were drugs that selectively targeted this
"pathological" form of opioid receptors, they would treat acute pain without
affecting receptors in a healthy environment, and thereby avoid the adverse side
effects observed for conventional opioids. This approach can be used in the
future to discover safer pain killers that only affect opioid receptors in
injured tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovative combination of molecular
dynamics simulations with artificial intelligence enables the sampling in silico
of large numbers of opioid receptor conformations. Efficient simulation will
take advantage of a recently developed artificial neural network approach that
efficiently represents the dynamics of high-dimensional molecular interactions.
The corresponding mathematical theory is not restricted to molecular simulation;
in principle, it could apply to any generated Markov process. The molecular
simulations will provide insight into the effects of environmental factors such
as pH and the presence of free radicals and will be used to suggest experiments
in the laboratory. Computational models will be tested in the lab using opioid
receptor mutants and antibodies that can lock the receptors into an active
state. Antibodies and miniproteins mimicking G-protein subunits will be
generated using a combination of protein design and yeast display technologies.
Once these methods have been established for opioid receptors, they may be
extended to GPCRs involved in other nervous system disorders. Ultimately, the
combination of novel computational methods with in vitro experiments will enable
a systematic study of GPCR signaling in healthy versus injured
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by the
Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany
(BMBF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.