* 2113842
* Research at Multiple Scales: A Vision for Continental Scale Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Clifford Duke, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2024
* USD 755,923.00

Recent advances in biological science infrastructure, technology, and culture
and associated data and information science have given us the tools to begin to
refine small and large-scale understanding about how living systems function.
Furthermore, these studies highlight the importance of understanding how micro-
scale and macro (or continental) scale studies give insights to the living world
but how these multiple processes interact remains unclear. This study will
explore questions and recommend research structures that can guide biological
research across this range of scales to inform our understanding of the
relationships and interdependencies of living systems. With support from this
award, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine Board on
Life Sciences (NASEM) will conduct a consensus study to identify how biological
research at multiple scales can inform the development of a continental scale
biology. The committee will convene a series of virtual community workshops to
inform its deliberations. The committee will identify and discuss practices that
have been used successfully to translate knowledge, approaches, and tools from
small-scale biological research to regional- and continental-scale, and vice
versa; challenges that prevent uptake of these practices; and specific research
questions that could serve as pilots for implementing research projects that
integrate one or more successful practices. The outcomes from these discussions
will be include a proceedings, which will be peer reviewed and published through
the established NASEM processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing critical
scientific and societal challenges related to climate and biodiversity changes
requires a convergent strategy that builds on our understanding of how processes
at multiple scales inform and constrain critical processes at continental
scales. A critical gap exists in our ability to understand these changes at
continental scales and how both top down and bottom-up processes control the
dynamics occurring at continental scales. What is lacking is an understanding of
how these efforts can contribute to a more wholistic understanding necessary to
address rapidly emerging biodiversity and climate changes. The assessment and
synthesis activities supported by this award are designed explicitly to provide
a vision for continental-scale biology that takes advantage of recent cultural,
technological, and infrastructural advances to address the emergence of new
fundamental questions and help respond to global challenges to biodiversity and
coping with the impacts of the many sources of environmental change. NASEM has
published several reports describing the Nation’s environmental and biodiversity
challenges which will inform discussions and the project outcomes. The goal for
the report is to assist NSF, other funding organizations, and the biological
science community in identifying productive routes for the development of
continental-scale biology and strategies to facilitate the concomitant
reunification of biology across structural and functional
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.