* 2113967
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Understanding Formation and Removal Mechanisms of Micron-sized Non-metallic Inclusions in Steel Refining by Computational and Experimental Studies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sunday Abraham, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2024
* USD 223,819.00

Steel is one of the most versatile structural materials and has played a vital
role in history and societal advancements. With the increasingly harsh
environments demanded of steel, steelmaking requires strict engineering of
chemistry, microstructure, and surface and interior quality characteristics of
the ladle - the vessel used to transport and pour out molten steel. In
steelmaking, steel cleanliness, defined as the amount and size of non-metallic
inclusions, is a critical issue and directly influences both subsequent
processing steps and the quality of steel products. Micron-sized non-metallic
inclusions are typically removed using argon and/or electromagnetic stirring.
These processes, though very difficult, are crucial to minimize such inclusions
for lightweight high-performance components. The lack of fundamental knowledge
of complex mechanisms and the ability to quantify the formation and transport of
inclusions has hindered progress in the inclusions control in ladle refining.
This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry project,
collaboration between two institutions and two steel companies, pursues
fundamental research on the formation and removal of micron-sized non-metallic
inclusions during liquid steel refining in a ladle. The strong partnership in
this project uniquely facilitates the know-how transfer to steel manufacturers
with improved product quality and productivity, and therefore, increases the
competitiveness of U.S. steel and relevant industries. The award will also
provide students with opportunities of academic and industrial research and the
project results will be showcased in outreach events to inspire K-16 students to
pursue STEM education and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To tackle the challenge
associated with inclusions in a ladle refining process, this project aims at
obtaining basic knowledge that will address such questions as: what are the
mechanisms that generate micron-sized inclusion particles during argon and/or
electromagnetic stirring; can flow shear instability at the slag/steel interface
generate micron-sized inclusions and are slag-based inclusions the primary
source to the total concentration of non-metallic inclusions in molten steel?
The team will integrate computational fluid dynamics (CFD) modeling with
laboratory water modeling and microfluidic experiments as well as on-site
measurements in steel plants for fundamental studies. The outcomes of the
project are expected to provide the following technical insights: (1) the
relationships between flow instability at the steel-slag interface, slag-based
inclusions, and the total amount of non-metallic inclusions, (2) the
quantitative effects of stirring rate on the slag inclusion generation and
entrainment, as well as inclusion flotation, (3) experimental technique and
methodology for validating the CFD model, and (4) a high-fidelity comprehensive
three-dimensional multiphase multi-scale, multi-physics, and multi-species CFD
model for steel ladle refining, which can be employed to provide best practice
guidance for steel cleanliness control and high-quality mass
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.