* 2113301
* A Shape Annealing Approach to DNA Origami Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jonathan Cagan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 899,999.00

The goal of this project is to automate the design of nano-sized biomechanical
structures using DNA, the building block of life. These devices can be used to
manufacture nanomachines, sensors, and nanorobots for use in fields ranging from
biophysics to physical computing. These designs require the building of long
strands of DNA that are joined in ways to provide shape and structural
integrity. Although computer aided design (CAD) tools exist to help the designer
to place these strands into usable configurations and determine locations to
join strands together, the designer must first fully conceive of the overall
design of the structure; the CAD tools are there to fill in the detail but not
generate the design layout and features themselves. This research seeks to
change the way DNA nanostructures (also called “DNA origami” because of the way
they are folded and joined together) are designed from automated concept
generation to layout to manufacture. Resulting design tools, to be made freely
available, will enable the DNA nanotechnology and design communities to
automatically generate nanostructure designs that are optimized for both form
and function, and enable a broader audience of researchers in biosensing,
manufacturing and robotics to apply DNA origami to their fields of study. This
work broadens the advancement of design research to a new field of application,
seeking efficiency and design innovation. In addition, this work will lead to
new educational endeavors, including a virtual DNA origami lab
tour.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this work will merge automated design
search through shape-based production grammars and stochastic search (a method
called shape annealing) for the bottom-up design of DNA origami structures and
their layouts. Shape grammars enable the representation of feasible and
preferred DNA combinations and will be built based on the physical properties of
DNA strands and their combination; simulated annealing allows for the optimal or
preferred sequential build of complete DNA origami structures. A multi-tiered
shape grammar approach will be explored that begins with a macro structure and
then refines the detailed features through a lower-level grammar. Providing real
time feedback on the quality and progress of the design, analysis will also be
multi-tiered and leverage the progression of simulated annealing from nearly
random to deterministic, with pre-trained physics-based performance simulation
transitioning to coarse grained molecular dynamics simulation and then to all-
atom simulation. Solutions will be compatible with current DNA origami CAD tools
such as caDNAno and verified through manufacture in the wet
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.