* 2113676
* Inference for Stationary Processes: Optimal Transport and Generalized Bayesian Approaches
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Andrew Nobel, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,944.00

This project will address the problem of making inferences about sequences of
observations that exhibit dependence arising from physical or other
interactions. Observations of this sort occur in many fields, including finance,
ecology, natural language processing, and biology. We will explore ways to fit a
sequence of observations to a family of statistical models using ideas from the
theory of optimal transport. Informally, we will identify models in the family
into which the generating mechanism of the observations can be transformed with
the least overall cost. We will address both the theory and efficient
computation of these transformation costs, and will consider applications to
biomedicine and computer science. The project will involve collaborations with
graduate students and more senior researchers working in genomics and
bioinformatics. Both undergraduate and graduate students will receive training
through involvement in supported research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a
more technical level, this project will address inference for stochastic
processes, in particular, how to fit a family of stationary processes to an
observed ergodic process, revealed sequentially. Research will focus on the use
and extension of ideas from optimal transport, including stationary couplings of
stationary processes and related variational quantities, with a focus on methods
development and supporting theory. The research has two primary aims. The first
aim is to investigate minimum divergence estimation based on joinings, including
the use and properties of entropy regularization. The second aim is to
investigate the efficient computation of optimal transition couplings of Markov
chains, with applications to graph distances, graph alignment, and hidden Markov
models. The project will involve collaborations with graduate students and more
senior researchers working in genomics and bioinformatics. Both undergraduate
and graduate students will receive training through involvement in supported
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.