* 2113350
* CAREER: Spatial Network Deep Generative Modeling, Transformation, and Interpretation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Liang Zhao, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 344,409.00

As we enter the modern big data era, spatial data and network data are popular
types of high-dimensional data with continuous and discrete properties,
respectively. Spanning these two data types, spatial networks represent a
crucial data structure where the nodes and edges are embedded in a geometric
space. Nowadays, spatial network data is becoming increasingly popular and
important, ranging from micro-scale (e.g., protein structures), to middle-scale
(e.g., biological neural networks), to macro-scale (e.g., mobility networks).
The modeling of spatial networks is extremely difficult due to the significant
challenges involved, including: 1) incompatibility between the treatments for
continuous spatial properties and discrete network properties, 2) the close
interactions between spatial and network topologies, and 3) their extremely high
dimensionality. These challenges echo numerous unsolved critical issues in the
real world such as modeling and understanding the "protein structure folding
process" and "mental disease mechanisms in brain networks". Until now, there has
been a significant gap between our lack of powerful models and the extremely
complex research issues involved in modeling the generation of spatial networks.
To fill this gap, this project focuses on developing a transformative framework
for spatial network generative modeling, which can automatically learn the
underlying complex generation process from massive spatial network
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project generalizes existing generative
models of spatial networks into deep and expressive architectures. The developed
framework aims at: 1) automatically learning new generation and transformation
process of spatial networks, 2) embedding user-specified principles to constrain
and regularize the generated spatial networks, and 3) pursuing the model
interpretability and automatically distill new understandable principles of
spatial network process. The research activities are conducted along the
following themes: i) novel spatial and spectral graph decoders for large spatial
networks, ii) deep generative modeling and optimization with spatial and
topological constraints and regularization, iii) a variety of novel spatial- and
spectral- graph transformation strategies, and iv) a novel system for
interacting the predefined and distilled principles between human and models.
The techniques developed in this project aim at benefiting various social and
natural science domains by enabling efficient and accurate discovery and
synthesis of complex spatial network behavior. The success of this project can
benefit crucial domains including medicine design, mental disease early
diagnoses, and disaster management. Core products of this project, including
publications, software, and datasets, are published in various websites with
active user support, in order to largely benefit the research communities and
the society. The proposed unified framework is also used for teaching spatial
and network data mining concepts, as well as providing graduate and
undergraduate students with new courses, research, and internship opportunities.
This project actively includes underrepresented students and outreach to local
high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.