* 2113671
* Inferring the Past on Markovian Models of Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Min Xu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,999.00

A major challenge in statistics and data science is the analysis of network
data. Network data describe interactions and relationships between individual
entities. The most prominent example is social network data, but other important
examples include internet hyperlink networks, protein interaction networks, air
route networks between cities, and disease transmission networks between people.
These interaction networks generally start with a few individuals and, as time
goes on, they attract, infect, or recruit more members and create more
interactions. The goal of this project is to develop probabilistic models that
accurately describe the growth process of real-world networks and to use these
models to extract important information from large scale network data.
Algorithms and software packages will be developed that enable users to answer
questions such as, which individuals were the earliest members of a social
network, or does the network contain one growing community or multiple? The
results of this project will have applications in public health, social science,
computer science, and national security. The project also provides research
training opportunities for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
framework developed by the PI models a random network as a combination of a
preferential attachment (PA) tree and Erdos-Renyi (ER) random edges. The PA tree
describes the growth process of a network and may be regarded as the signal and
the ER random edges can be interpreted as the noise. This framework includes
many existing network models as special cases and allows practitioners to trade-
off model complexity and computational complexity. Scalable methodology based on
Gibbs sampling will be developed to tackle inference problems such as
constructing confidence sets for the root nodes or inferring the community
membership of the nodes of a network. Theoretical analysis, based on existing
probabilistic properties of preferential attachment models, will also be
conducted to assess the quality of statistical inference as a function of the
signal-to-noise ratio and to understand the information limits of these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.