* 2113572
* I-Corps:  Quantitative Train-of-Four monitoring device for quantitatively monitoring neuromuscular blockade in patients undergoing surgery
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Ahmet Sabuncu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a Train-of-Four (TOF) device to provide a method of
quantitatively monitoring neuromuscular blockade in patients undergoing surgery.
Neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) are used extensively to temporarily
paralyze patients during surgery. Current methods of measurement have a risk of
postoperative residual neuromuscular blockade, where NMBAs remaining in the body
after surgery. This postoperative problem can cause muscle weakness and critical
respiratory episodes. The current standard Train-of-Four (TOF) monitoring method
is qualitative, and anesthesiologists must depend on their eyesight and
experience to judge the correct dosing of patients. The proposed device produces
a quantitative output, TOF data, to help anesthesiologists gauge how much
neuromuscular blockade to administer to each patient and when to reverse its
effects. By ensuring complete neuromuscular recovery, the proposed device
minimizes respiratory complications and the unpleasant symptom of muscle
weakness caused by residual neuromuscular blocking agents in the body post-
surgery. The device may prevent unwanted post-operative stress, while
potentially saving money for hospitals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a mechanomyography device that uses
medical grade balloons for converting patient response to Train-of-Four (TOF)
data. In the device, the use of a peripheral nerve stimulator on the ulnar nerve
causes thumb twitches that apply pressure on a balloon. These pressure
fluctuations are picked up by a sensor and converted into TOF data to accurately
measure the level of neuromuscular blockade in the body by using pressure as the
physical analog of muscle numbness and converting it into an electrical signal.
The proposed device utilizes mechanomyography, which is thought to be the gold
standard and most accurate technology for monitoring neuromuscular blockade,
since it directly measures the motion generated as the muscle responds to the
ulnar nerve stimulation. There is currently no mechanomyography device on the
market to monitor neuromuscular blockade. Furthermore, the proposed device
assesses the TOF count and TOF ratio even in positions where the thumbâ€™s
movement is restricted; for example, when the hands are tucked beside the body.
These types of surgical positions are becoming more frequent with increased use
of laparoscopic surgeries. The current technologies in assessing neuromuscular
blockade are not functional in these types of surgical
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.