* 2113830
* IUCRC Phase II: University of Georgia: Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites (CB2)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jason Locklin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 166,000.00

The Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites (CB2) at Iowa State University
(ISU), University of Georgia (UGA), Washington State University (WSU), and North
Dakota State University (NDSU) seeks to develop and build on an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) that focuses on
bioplastics and biocomposites. The mission of CB2 is to develop fundamental
knowledge related to bioplastics and biocomposites, to disseminate research-
based findings to industry to promote sustainability, and to educate future
scientists and engineers. As such, there is an expressed industrial interest in
leveraging research efforts to accelerate systematic development of standardized
material and processing data for these novel plastics and composites. The center
focusses on the development of jobs in the area of sustainable manufacturing and
the conversion of agricultural and woody crops to bio-based materials that
contribute to job creation in the United States. The center also strives to
support education and diversity through engagement of undergraduate and graduate
students in research on sustainable materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
CB2 is to improve the basic knowledge of synthesis, processing, properties, and
compounding of bioplastic and biocomposite materials, to develop reliable
materials characteristics data for industrial partners, and to support large-
scale industrial implementation of renewable materials. The vision of the center
is to develop knowledge that will facilitate the production of an array of high-
value products, including plastics, coatings, adhesives, and composites, from
renewable feedstocks. The materials are compatible with current industrial
manufacturing systems and promote rural development as well as national growth.
The goals of the Phase II are fourfold: 1) expand the knowledge and develop the
science for recycling and end of life treatment of sustainable materials, in
particular as they are mixed with petrochemical plastics; 2) expand membership
by engaging new companies that have expressed a need for recycling and end of
life treatment; 3) develop fundamental knowledge on sustainable materials; 4)
prepare students to join the workforce equipped with the knowledge and skills
required by industry. The team of researchers includes experts in the fields of
polymer processing, polymer chemistry, materials science, and crop utilization.
UGAâ€™s research focuses on end-of-life assessment, plant biomass valorization,
coatings and adhesives, and polymers for various industry
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.