* 2113070
* CIF: Millimeter-wavelength Radar Facility for Cloud and Precipitation Research
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Pavlos Kollias, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 07/31/2024
* USD 230,251.00

This Community Instruments and Facilities (CIF) award is for support of a state-
of-the-art 35-GHz (Ka-band, 8-mm wavelength) Scanning Polarimetric Radar (KASPR)
and a supporting set of modern auxiliary, microwave, and optical sensors as a
truck-mounted, transportable, “cloud” radar-based instrumentation suite for
studying a range of dynamical &amp; microphysical cloud processes. This
comprehensive millimeter-wavelength cloud radar facility can provide
measurements in a wide spectrum of cloud and precipitation conditions from
coastal fog to winter storms. The facility is complementary to other airborne
and surface-based community observing facilities and is suitable for both land
and ship-based deployments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility and will enable
the study of cloud systems critical to climate applications such as boundary
layer clouds, convective anvils, mid-latitude cirrus, and mixed-phase stratiform
clouds. It is expected to provide unique, high spatiotemporal resolution
microphysical and dynamical observations that are needed for investigation of
the role of meteorology and aerosol in altering cloud and precipitation systems
using a combination of observational and modeling analyses. The CIF will bring
together scientists, engineers, and undergraduate and graduate students from
universities across the nation including underrepresented students in the
Geosciences. The facility will provide foundational training in observational
research and operation of remote sensing facility to the next generation of
atmospheric scientists. This award will enhance the ability of the broader
scientific community to use the radars through the Atmospheric and Geospace
Sciences facility request process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.