* 2113922
* Hidden X: Using spatial and magnetic symmetries to guide first principles search of compounds with hidden quantum properties  X
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Alex Zunger, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2024
* USD 390,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education aimed at discovering new materials with
novel electronic and magnetic properties. The validation of abstract physical
theories and the development of practical novel technologies both depend on the
identification of critical materials that harbor specific properties enabling
such applications. The discovery of such special materials has proceeded
historically either by lucky accidents, or by time-intensive Edisonian empirical
or computational search of many examples. Yet, many unique physical effects are
fundamentally enabled not just by specific materials constants, but also by
critical symmetry conditions pertaining to the pattern of atomic geometries or
arrangement of electronic spins. Textbook symmetry rules, on the other hand,
often overlook pertinent possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the PI will search for “Hidden Effects X”, which refers to the general
conditions where some effect X is possible even when the nominal symmetry would
apparently disallow it. For example, electronic states with the same momentum
but opposite spins can have slightly different energies typically in crystalline
materials without inversion symmetry and/or when the material contains heavy
elements. In this project, the PI will search for materials in which this slight
energy splitting for electrons of different spins occurs under the unexcepted
circumstances when the crystal has global inversion symmetry, or when the
material contains only light elements, or when the global lattice symmetry
conceals the lower local symmetry. A few of such ‘breaking of the textbook
rules’ have recently been validated experimentally. This research is expected to
reveal and validate many more such possibilities in real materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject matter of this research is instrumental for
educating and training students and postdocs to lead the transformation to a
durable, vibrant, and fundamental research community that cuts across
disciplinary boundaries and creates new ways for materials science and
engineering to bring benefits to society. In particular, this award will support
the education and training of a postdoctoral research associate in the areas of
fundamental condensed matter physics and materials theory. The PI will work with
the Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning at his
institution to encourage postdoctoral researchers to be involved in college-
level teaching, preparing them for future STEM faculty
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education aimed at
discovering new materials with novel electronic and magnetic properties. In
particular, the PI will search for “Hidden Effects X”, which refers to the
general conditions where effect X exists even when the nominal global
crystalline symmetry would apparently disallow it, or that the enabling symmetry
is an easily overlooked local symmetry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
focus on three such Hidden X categories, where the enabling symmetries are (i)
local real-space site symmetries that enable the Rashba and Dresselhaus spin
splitting effects even in globally centrosymmetric compounds, or (ii) unusual
spin texture patterns, which are unexpected on the basis of the space group
symmetry of the compound, as they are determined by the (lower) symmetry of the
specific wavevector, or (iii) magnetic symmetry, which gives rise to a Rashba-
like momentum dependent spin splitting in certain antiferromagnets, except that
unlike the Rashba effect this can happen even without relativistic physics –
such as in the absence of spin-orbit coupling. In addition, the PI will work to
formulate theoretically the symmetry conditions enabling the coexistence of
different effects in the same compound, such as ferroelectricity and Rashba
effect; or Rashba effect and topological insulation. For these Hidden X
categories, the PI will (a) determine theoretically the pertinent enabling
unexpected symmetries, (b) use them as material selection filters to identify
specific compound realizations of such effects, to the benefit of future
experiments, and (c) calculate the relevant electronic structure of prototype
materials via the Density Functional Theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
also supports the education and training of a postdoctoral research associate in
the areas of fundamental condensed matter physics and materials theory. The PI
will work with the Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and
Learning at his institution to encourage postdoctoral researchers to be involved
in college-level teaching, preparing them for future STEM faculty
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.