* 2113505
* Understanding the Nanoscale Interactions of Surface Plasmon Mediated Semiconductor Surfaces with Water and Light for Renewable Energy Harvesting and Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Shanlin Pan, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 02/28/2025
* USD 233,638.00

New surfaces and interfaces for clean energy harvesting and storage and for
ultrasensative chemical analysis are needed. This project involves design of
ultrasensitive noble metal tips to investigate solid semiconductor surfaces and
interfaces under photoelectrochemical operation conditions. Light energy
absorption and conversion capabilities of these surfaces in the presence of
noble metal nanoparticles can be resolved at the nanometer scale. This research
would precisely quantify surface enhancement factors that contribute to light
energy storage into chemical bonds, and also allow direct comparison with
theoretical calculations. The results of this research would greatly help
understand light-matter interactions in the presence of noble metal antenna. The
education activities include science caf√©s, undergraduate research experience,
and classroom module demonstrations to enhance student-centered learning and
public awareness of nanotechnology and clean energy. The educational activities
will help inclusive recruiting and training and the retention of
underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop an electrochemical apertureless plasmonic antenna technique and
theoretical platform to study the interactions of plasmonic nanomaterials and
photoactive semiconductors under electrochemical operation conditions. The key
feature of this system is a nanoelectrode with a single plasmon nanoparticle for
electrochemical, optical, and surface topology imaging of photoelectrochemical
activities of a semiconductor electrode with nanometer spatial resolutions. This
research would experimentally validate light absorption, charge carrier
generation, and transport and storage into chemical bonds in the presence of a
plasmonic metal. The research design creates a model system that can fit
multiphysics simulation prediction and also enables spectroscopy enhancement
capability for resolving local redox reaction kinetics of catalysts. The
educational activities will be integrated with the proposed research for student
training in an interdisciplinary research environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.