* 2113004
* BEE: Testing a phylogenetic trait framework for soil microbiomes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Martiny, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 899,374.00

Soil microorganisms provide essential services to society including the
regeneration of soil fertility, decomposition of waste, and carbon storage. It
has become increasingly clear that the composition of soil microbial communities
(microbiomes) influence soil functioning and so, the provisioning of these
services. However, soil microbiomes are so incredibly diverse and spatially
variable that our understanding of how their composition relates to their
functioning remains elusive. To address this knowledge gap, the research will
conduct field and lab experiments on a model organism to test a predictive
framework that links microbial characteristics (traits) to its distribution and
functioning in soil and thus, will advance the ability to predict how soil
microbiomes will respond to future environmental changes. An additional impact
of this work is the development of a model organism for terrestrial bacteria and
the production of genomic and culture resources that will be widely shared and
available for future studies. The project will also provide support for numerous
trainees at a Hispanic-serving and Asian American, Native American, and Pacific
Islander serving institution. Finally, to disseminate the importance of
microbial research to a public audience, science-education interns will develop
and implement a middle school curriculum on the role of microorganisms in
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate evolution and
ecology by spanning two endpoints along a continuum â€“ on the one hand, the
macroevolution of bacterial traits and on the other hand, the ecological role of
a bacterium in the carbon cycle. Specifically, the research will investigate
whether the macroevolutionary distribution of traits can predict the
distribution and functioning of microbial communities. The research will (1)
identify the phylogenetic structure of traits in an abundant surface soil
bacterium, Curtobacterium; (2) quantify the relationship between the
phylogenetic structure of Curtobacterium traits and its biogeography; and (3)
test whether Curtobacterium trait distributions are linked to functioning in the
field. The work will employ a combination of physiological assays on cultured
isolates, phylogenetics and population genomic analyses, biogeographic surveys,
transplant and common garden experiments, and metagenomically-enabled activity
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Population and Community Ecology Cluster and the Systematics and Biodiversity
Science Cluster in the Division of Environmental Biology at
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.