* 2113028
* CRCNS Research Project: Collaborative Research: Experimental, Numerical, and Robotic Study of the Role of Dynamic Load Sensing in Legged Locomotion
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Sasha Zill, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 629,806.00

Insects are highly mobile walkers who adapt their muscle output to their
ever‐changing environment. Force sensors in their legs detect increasing and
decreasing forces, which may help them coordinate their legs and compensate for
external forces, for example, when walking on an uneven surface. This
Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience (CRCNS) project
investigates the dynamics of the sensors that enable them to detect force
increases and decreases, measuring the differences or similarities in these
dynamics across the body, and exploring how these dynamics affect the control of
walking. Recordings from stick insect and cockroach legs will inform a
neurorobotic model of insect locomotion. The model is a six‐legged robot with
force sensors like those in insects. The robot's control system is based on the
insect nervous system, enabling the investigators to test how dynamic force
sensing affects muscle control. Learning how to integrate dynamic force sensing
into the robot's control system may lead to more successful walking robots for
agriculture, mining, and exploration, and may shed light onto how humans utilize
dynamic force sensing during locomotion. This project will also increase
training in STEM through robotics workshops for West Virginia middle- and high-
school students, and teaching and mentoring activities focused on women and
first-generation college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand the
importance of sensing dynamic load (dF/dt) to the neural control of locomotion,
the investigators will study the force sensing of stick insects and cockroaches,
which are amenable to experimentation due to their external force sensing
organs, campaniform sensilla (CS). Evidence suggests that CS support the
synergistic activation of muscles throughout the leg, enhancing them to overcome
postural perturbations and regulating them to limit muscle forces. To better
understand the organization of such synergies, the investigators will construct
a neuromechanical model of the insect leg, whose kinematics and dynamics will
provide necessary context for their afferent and efferent recordings. The
investigators hypothesize that CS throughout the leg are tuned to rapidly
recruit muscle synergies when the stance phase begins, to adapt motor outputs to
variations in load during stance, and to support interleg coordination by
signaling decreasing forces as the stance phase ends. To immerse the CS model
into the mechanical context of a walking body and perform experiments that would
be impossible in vivo, the investigators will apply the model to their
dynamically‐scaled neuro‐robotic model of an insect, Drosophibot, and record
from strain sensors on all legs as it walks. Actuator torques and CS responses
will be compared between the robot and animal to refine the investigators'
models of dynamic force sensing and synergistic muscle
recruitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.