* 2113375
* Default Bayesian Analysis of Spatial Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Victor DeOliveira, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 159,996.00

The collection and analysis of spatial data are ubiquitous in most natural and
earth sciences, such as ecology, epidemiology, geology and hydrology. This
research project will develop statistical methodology for automatic Bayesian
analysis of Gaussian models that does not require any subjective input. These
models play a prominent role due to their versatility to model spatially varying
phenomena, and because they serve as building blocks for the construction of
more elaborate models. The Bayesian approach is especially appealing when the
main goal is spatial interpolation, but implementing it for such models faces
two big challenges: (i) Automatic formulation of sensible prior distributions
that are adapted to the scale of the data under investigation and (ii) Analysis
of massive data sets that are the norm nowadays. The project aims at developing
theory and practice to overcome both challenges, which will make practicably
feasible the automatic Bayesian analysis of large spatial data sets. In
addition, the project will train graduate students in spatial statistics in
general, and the topics of this project in particular. The results derived from
the project will be disseminated in diverse outlets, and software to implement
the methodology will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project will make practicably feasible default Bayesian analyses of
large spatial data sets, by contributing innovations to the two parts of the
Bayesian model. First, approximate reference priors for the parameters of
covariance models will be developed that allow carrying out Bayesian analyses
for these models in an automatic fashion, not requiring subjective elicitation.
These will be based on the spectral approximation of stationary random fields.
Second, likelihood approximations feasible for large spatial data sets will be
elaborated by developing strategies to tune a recently proposed approximation
for stationary covariance functions. The tuning of the approximation aims at
striking a balance between accuracy and computational effort. Both
approximations rely on the spectral density, rather than the covariance
function, of the model. Together, the reference prior and likelihood
approximations will make possible carrying out default Bayesian analyses that
include model selection and assessment. In addition, the project will critically
assess the common practice of fixing the smoothness of the random field at a
value, chosen by convention or tradition, that bears no relation to the data
under analysis. The project will investigate methods to quantify the information
content in spatial data about smoothness parameters, and uncover how this
depends on the sample design. The methodology will be tested on diverse data
sets from the earth sciences, with special focus on spatial rainfall
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.