* 2113689
* New Oxysulfide Perovskites for Photocatalytic and Photovoltaic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Robin Macaluso, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 316,336.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;Perovskite materials are ternary metal
oxides known to be useful as solar cell materials where solar energy can be
absorbed and stored. They are stable in aqueous and acidic environments and are
generally composed of highly abundant elements; however, they are plagued by low
photovoltaic efficiencies and low stability. The primary challenge is to
increase this efficiency while maintaining the stability and use of abundant,
nontoxic elements. To address this issue at a fundamental materials chemistry
level, this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, is focused on establishing
synthetic strategies to prepare a new class of materials, sulfide and oxysulfide
perovskites. The syntheses of sulfide and oxysulfide perovskites are not well
known or understood. Outcomes from this project will lay the foundation to
impact solar energy technology to benefit society’s future energy needs.
Additionally, as part of this project, graduate and undergraduate students are
actively involved in hands-on training, scientific workshops and conferences,
and mentorship experiences. A suite of literature-based active learning and
teaching tools on solid-state and materials chemistry is developed as part of
this project as well and will be disseminated via the IONIC VIPeR website.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, is focused on establishing synthetic strategies of a new
class of sulfide and oxysulfide perovskite materials, for which the syntheses
are currently unknown or not understood. Conventional perovskites, ABO3 (A = s,
d, or f metal and B = transition metal) are appealing solar energy materials
because of their stability and inclusion of highly abundant elements. One major
limitation of ABO3, however, is that they typically possess band gaps that are
too large to efficiently absorb and store solar energy. The motivation for
synthesizing novel sulfide and oxysulfide perovskites, ABS3 and AB(O,S)3 is to
establish stable inorganic materials that could exhibit higher efficiency when
integrated into photovoltaic devices. This project provides scientific training
and career development of graduate and undergraduate students through hands-on
experiences, scientific workshops and conferences, and mentorship. A suite of
literature-based active learning and teaching tools advancing solid-state and
materials chemistry education of chemistry undergraduates is developed as part
of this project as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.