* 2113938
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Economic and Environmental Tradeoffs of Concrete Construction in Urban Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Stephen Young, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,233.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
project examines the processes that result in concrete being a leading
construction material in rapidly developing cities despite environmental impacts
that may reduce resilience to extreme weather events. The research examines the
financial investments that drive the growth of concrete residential buildings.
The research also highlights the environmental impacts of urban infrastructure
development, such as increased in flood risks, by studying the extraction of
sand from riverbeds for subsequent use in concrete construction. The project
provides data that can inform attempts to reduce the impacts of sand and stone
extraction on weather-related disasters, including floods and landslides. In
addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in the
methods of scientific data collection and analysis, the project contributes to
localized efforts to advance sustainable construction methods. The findings from
this research have the potential to contribute to policy conversations that seek
to improve working conditions for construction workers, thereby providing
security and acceptable working conditions to laborers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers examine development of concrete construction in urban areas,
particularly those that are impacted by extreme weather. In these settings, the
widespread use of concrete is implemented amid concerns that it increases the
risk of impacts from natural disasters. Drawing on theory from economic
geography and urban political ecology, the researchers examine the financing of
residential construction, the tradeoffs faced by laborers in the construction
industry, and the processes by which the extraction of sand contributes to
concrete production and related environmental impacts. The research includes a
complementary set of ethnographic methods, such as participant observation,
semi-structured interviews, and focus groups with diverse stakeholders in the
construction industry. These stakeholders include real estate developers,
architects, urban designers, building and labor contractors, government
bureaucrats, and sand traders. Findings from this study will address the
imbalance between rapid urban economic growth in developing contexts and the
social and environmental impacts of concrete, the primary raw material for
construction in many settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.