* 2113213
* CRCNS Research Project: Multiply and Conquer: Replica-Mean-Field Limit for Neural Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Francois Baccelli, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 650,000.00

Artificial intelligence can now rival human performance in tasks such as speech
or object recognition, language translation, and autonomous navigation. However,
by contrast with artificial computations supported by fragile, hardwired
circuits, biological computations appear to robustly emerge in noisy, disordered
neural networks. Understanding how meaningful computations emerge from the
seemingly random interactions of neural constituents remains a challenge. To
solve this, one can hope to mine biological networks for their design
principles. Unfortunately, such a task is hindered by the sheer complexity of
neural circuits. Deciphering neural computations will only be achieved through
the simplifying lens of a biophysically relevant theory. To date, neural
computations have been studied theoretically in idealized models whereby an
infinite number of neurons communicate via vanishingly small interactions. Such
an approach neglects that neural computations are carried out by a finite number
of cells interacting via a finite number of synapses. This approach precludes
understanding how neural circuits reliably process information in spite of
neural variability, which depends on these finite numbers. To remedy this point,
the PIs will develop a novel theoretical framework allowing for the analysis of
neural computations in neural circuits with finite-size structure. The PIs will
leverage ideas from the theory of communication networks to understand how
biophysically relevant neural network models can reliably process information
via noisy, disordered circuits. This approach will provide the basis for
categorizing distinct brain operating regimen based on their stability and will
help designing strategies to stabilize neural systems in their healthy
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to “divide and conquer” approaches,
which equate a system with the mere sum of its parts, the PIs will decipher the
activity of neural networks via a “multiply and conquer” approach. This approach
considers limit networks made of infinitely many replicas with the same basic
neural structure. The key point is that these so-called replica-mean-field
networks are in fact simplified, tractable versions of neural networks that
retain important features of the finite network structure of interest. The
finite size of neuronal populations and synaptic interactions is a core
determinant of neural activity, being responsible for non-zero correlation in
the spiking activity and for finite transition rates between metastable neural
states. Accounting for these finite-size phenomena is the core motivation for
the development of the replica approach. The expected outcome is a mechanistic
understanding of the constraints bearing on computations in finite-size neural
circuits, especially in terms of their reliability, speed, and cost. This will
involve characterizing the finite-structure dependence of: (i) the regime of
spiking correlations, which is a fundamental determinant of the neural code and
(ii) the transition rates between metastable neural states, which are thought to
control the processing and gating of information. In both cases, the methodology
will be based on the comparison between solutions to reduced functional
equations, discrete-event simulations, and neural data sets. The ultimate goal
will be to analyze biophysically detailed models in order to produce a fitting
framework that is restrictive enough to formulate and validate experimental
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded by the MPS
Division of Mathematical Sciences and the CISE Information and Intelligent
Systems (IIS) through the CRCNA and BRAIN Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.