* 2113914
* SHF: Small: Reliable Storage and Computation in Memory Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Nur Touba, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 480,602.00

Memory circuits are a core building blocks for electronic systems and often are
a bottleneck limiting system performance. A number of promising new memory
technologies have emerged, including phase-chase memory, spin transfer torque
memory, and resistive random access memory (RRAM), which offer significant
improvements over conventional memory technologies in terms of speed, density,
power consumption, and scalability. An exciting application for RRAM is its
ability to perform matrix multiplication through current summation which
significantly speeds up matrix-vector multiplication and thus making it ideal
for implementing neural networks. A major challenge preventing widespread
adoption of these emerging memory technologies is that they have a number of
reliability issues that can cause errors during operation and shorten their
useable lifetime. The goal of this project is to develop transformative
approaches for improving the reliability of these emerging memory technologies
to address these challenges. The educational impact of this project will include
training of researchers in high impact areas, dissemination of new educational
materials, and providing research opportunities for undergraduates and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Error correcting codes (ECC) are
widely using for conventional memories including in caches and main memory as
well as secondary storage to protect against transient and permanent errors.
However, direct application of the conventionally used ECC codes for emerging
memory technologies in these applications is not feasible for several reasons,
including significantly higher error rates, the need for faster decoding, and
efficient application in multilevel memories. This project will investigate new
ECC codes that can handle high error rates and are efficient for multilevel
memories while providing high-speed decoding. RRAM is prone to a number of
failure mechanisms that can result in either hard or soft errors that can affect
the accuracy of matrix multiply computations. New methodologies to ensure
reliable computation in RRAM will be investigated including both application-
independent as well as application-dependent schemes that can use functional
properties to reduce overheating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.