* 2113408
* Calibrating olivine crystallographic preferred orientation as a mantle water detector
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Jessica Warren, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Curtis Williams
* 07/31/2024
* USD 317,667.00

The Earth is distinguished from other planets by the occurrence of plate
tectonics and the presence of liquid water on its surface. Flow of the solid
mantle drives the plate tectonic cycle and deep Earth water cycle. The
investigators will study the interaction between water stored in olivine, the
most abundant upper mantle mineral, and flow in the mantle. The occurrence of
tiny amounts of water, in the form of hydrogen substituted into the olivine
lattice, can modify the way in which the olivine crystal lattice aligns during
flow. The conditions for this transition in crystal lattice alignment are within
the expected water content and stress conditions of the upper mantle, but almost
no laboratory experiments on polycrystalline olivine have recreated these
fabrics. To address this, the investigators will combine laboratory experiments
on olivine aggregates with analysis of mantle rocks from the Talkeetna
intraoceanic arc in Alaska. The process of conducting laboratory experiments
will be documented through a video and slideshow designed for university-level
courses. The project will involve the advanced training of a postdoctoral
researcher and a summer research project for an undergraduate student that will
apply machine learning algorithms to rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small amounts
of water in nominally anhydrous minerals such as olivine can greatly influence
the viscosity, melting temperature, and anisotropy structure of the mantle and
its overall dynamics. Interpreting measurements of water abundances in mantle
minerals has proven challenging as hydrogen diffusion is so fast that water
contents can be significantly modified during exhumation of the mantle. Previous
experiments suggest that deformation-induced fabric development is sensitive to
olivine water content and therefore olivine fabrics may provide an independent
constraint on the water content of mantle minerals. This project will constrain
the water content and stress conditions associated with E-type fabric formation
through deformation experiments on olivine aggregates in a recently updated
high-pressure experimental apparatus. Detailed microstructural analysis of
experimental samples and Talkeetna samples will be performed to evaluate their
similarities, which will be used to support the extrapolation of experimental
results to Earth conditions. This project will address the following questions:
(1) What are the conditions favorable to producing an E-type olivine fabric? (2)
Can olivine E-type fabrics be used as a mantle water detector in natural
samples?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.