* 2113283
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Colonial Associated Community Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Christopher Pool, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 24,948.00

The goal of this project is to investigate socioeconomic variation in the
impacts of culture contact, focusing specifically on conquest and colonization.
Archaeologically, material culture provides a perspective that allows
researchers to observe how people in the past coped with external stresses when
facing broader sociopolitical changes. Previous research has argued that Quality
of Life (QOL) embedded in inequality is a factor in how households incorporate
or reject material elements from new traditions after culture contact. Their
project will focus on ceramic hybridity, a common phenomenon in colonial
societies where potters incorporate foreign cultural elements into the
traditional ceramic production sequence. The project will contribute to the
anthropological understanding of culture contact demonstrating that a great
amount of cultural continuity is commonly overlooked when studying processes of
conquest; and it will contribute to the methodological issue of identifying the
agency of underrepresented groups in the past who did not leave their mark in
the written records, usually created by colonizers. The project will demonstrate
how inequality interacts with changes brought by colonization such as land use,
forced labor, and health among unequal households, thus serving as an example to
shed light on how inequality interacts with how people cope with catastrophes in
the present. How are we different from populations who experienced epidemics in
the past? What were the unfair circumstances that made it more difficult for
unequal households back then? What can we learn?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate cultural continuity of indigenous populations between
the prehispanic and colonial eras. It will consider how unequal QOL impacted the
ways in which households incorporated elements of European and African styles.
It is argued that strongly negative impacts of colonization on QOL, as in
populations that labored at sugar plantations, encouraged continuity in material
culture to reaffirm indigenous identity. Populations that were not as negatively
affected are therefore expected to have adopted a wider range of foreign styles.
The project will use household inventories to assess the impacts of colonization
from an archaeological perspective of QOL of indigenous communities at various
points in time. The project will include members of the local communities, both
in fieldwork and in the dissemination of the knowledge produced, also
contributing to education working with archaeology students. This research will
result in a more nuanced understanding of localized experiences when facing
broad scale stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.