* 2113707
* Advancing Statistical Methods for Multi-Study Predictions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Giovanni Parmigiani, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 233,697.00

Scientific predictions are more valuable when their accuracy is stable across
studies. Steps towards more replicable predictions would increase public
confidence in the scientific process, facilitate dissemination of results, and
enhance public engagement with science and technology. As many areas of science
and technology are becoming data-rich, multiple datasets are more commonly
available for training prediction models. This project aims to develop new
general strategies for multi-study ensemble learning and prediction that enhance
replicability. The long-term goals are to help improve the well-being of
individuals in society (for example, via algorithms for individualized disease
prevention and medical treatment), improve national security, and benefit
industries that use prediction approaches as key elements of their business
plans (including for example finance, marketing, and real estate). The
investigators plan to build free, open-source software to implement the
successful strategies and to provide research training opportunities to graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work developed a novel strategy for multi-
study prediction, which groups together prediction models, each trained on a
single study, and weights them to reward those that perform well outside their
training study. This technique, called multi-study ensembling, shows promise to
substantially improve prediction replicability. In this project, the
investigators plan to generalize this approach in two ways. The first goal is to
extend the study to include resampling concepts tailored to the multi-study
setting. Specifically, they will consider the study strap ensemble, which fits
models to bootstrapped datasets, or "pseudo-studies." These are generated by
resampling from multiple studies with a hierarchical resampling scheme that
generalizes the randomized cluster bootstrap. The study strap is controlled by a
tuning parameter that determines the proportion of observations to draw from
each study. When the parameter is set to its lowest value, each pseudo-study is
resampled from only a single study. When it is high, the study strap ignores the
multi-study structure and generates pseudo-studies by merging the datasets and
drawing observations like a standard bootstrap. The second goal is to extend the
concept of weight by building statistical models on the weights themselves to
both handle high dimensionality and exploit useful structure of the multi-study
collection. The work will be carried out within the framework of multi-study
stacking, where predictions generated by study-specific models are used as
features in a second-stage analysis (typically a regularized regression)
performed on the merged dataset collection. Coefficients in this step reflect
cross-study replicability. The research will evaluate a range of specific
prediction techniques within this paradigm, investigate their statistical
properties theoretically and empirically, and compare them to existing
alternative multi-study statistical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.