* 2113615
* DMS-EPSRC Collaborative Research: Advancing Statistical Foundations and Frontiers for and from Emerging Astronomical Data Challenges
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Xiao-Li Meng, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 240,000.00

Statistical theory and methods play a fundamental role in scientific discovery
and advancement, including in modern astronomy, where data are collected on
increasingly massive scales and with more varieties and complexity. New
technology and instrumentation are spawning a diverse array of emerging data
types and data analytic challenges, which in turn require and inspire ever more
innovative statistical methods and theories. This research is guided by the dual
aims of advancing statistical foundations and frontiers, motivated by
astronomical problems and providing principled data analytic solutions to
challenges in astronomy. The CHASC (California-Harvard Astrostatistics
Collaboration) International Center has an extensive track record in
accomplishing both tasks. This research leverages CHASC’s track record to make
progress in several new projects. Fitting sophisticated astrophysical models to
complex data that were collected with high-tech instruments, for example, often
involves a sequence of statistical analyses. Several projects center on
developing new statistical methods that properly account for errors and carry
uncertainty forward within such sequences of analyses. Additional work will
focus on developing theoretical properties of novel statistical estimation
procedures to address data-analytic challenges associated with solar flares and
X-ray observations. Other projects involve fast and automatic detection of
astronomical objects such as galaxies from 2D or even 4D data. The PIs will
develop statistical theory and methods in the context of these projects,
building statistical foundations and pushing the frontiers of statistics forward
for broad impact that will extend well beyond astrostatistics. The PIs plan to
offer effective methods and algorithms for tackling emerging challenges in
astronomy, with the aspiration of promoting such principled data-analytic
methods among researchers in astronomy. Its provision of free software via the
CHASC GitHub Software Library will enable the distribution and impact of the
proposed methods and algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects reflect
three broad themes: (1) Exploring fundamental statistical theory with immediate
impact in astronomy, including a general approach for obtaining confidence
regions by leveraging the pivot-property of maximal product spacing, which is
then applied to assess the power law of solar flares, and a statistically
principled correction to the use of the popular C-stat in astrophysics; (2)
Assessing the misspecification of models and prior distributions in multi-stage
statistical analyses, and post processing posterior draws to correct for defects
in prior modeling when redoing a Bayesian analysis is impractical; and (3)
Identifying breakpoints in complex models, which includes a fast algorithm for
identifying astronomical boundaries and identifying breakpoints in joint
spatial, spectral, temporal models. Theme 1 is more theory driven, while Themes
2 and 3 are more methods and computation driven. Together they form a rich suite
of case studies for developing statistical methods for astronomical problems,
ranging from new theoretical foundations to innovative modeling strategies and
to efficient computational techniques. Consequently, the research will impact
both the fields of statistics and astronomy: spurring more interest and new
problems for statisticians and resolving long standing problems in
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.