* 2113536
* Synthesis of New Intergrowth and Nanostructured Metal Oxyhalide Photocatalysts
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sara Skrabalak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 515,148.00

Nontechnical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need for materials
that absorb visible light so that such energy can be used to drive reactions at
their surfaces, such a solar water splitting which promises to provide hydrogen
as a clean fuel. Metal oxyhalides are an exciting class of such photocatalytic
materials but often they will be converted to their corresponding metal oxide
upon use, making them ineffective long-term. Recently, a subset of bismuth-
containing metal oxyhalides was identified to be both visible light absorbing as
well as durable during their use as photocatalysts. With this project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, Professor Sara Skrabalak and her research group at Indiana University
will develop new materials that combine different bismuth-containing metal
oxyhalides for uses in solar water splitting. The atomic level structure of
these new materials are also characterized in detail to understand how their
structure provides both visible light absorption and critical durability. These
materials are also being synthesized as crystals with defined shapes so that the
best crystal faces are expressed to facilitate the water splitting reaction.
This work provides fundamental insight into the properties of materials, with
potential to address material durability challenges associated with harnessing
solar energy. The research is paired with broad educational and outreach
activities that foster understanding about material science and solar energy to
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, will develop
synthetic methods for the growth of new metal oxyhalide intergrowths of the form
Bi4MO8X-Bi2LnO4X. The fundamental hypothesis of this work involves the idea that
intergrowth formation and modulation of their stoichiometry enables engineering
of their electronic structure and internal electric fields toward enhanced
photocatalytic efficiency and photostability compared to the parent compounds.
This synthetic work is coupled with detailed structural characterization by high
resolution electron microscopy and X-ray total scattering experiments so that
robust structure-property correlations are established. A final aim focuses on
the synthesis of shape-controlled Bi4MO8X nanocrystals and the study of their
faceting on photocatalytic performance. Collectively, this research advances the
synthesis and design of durable metal oxyhalides by elucidating the roles of
local and nanoscale structure on the optoelectronic properties and
photocatalytic performance of these promising heteroanionic materials. The
project will also support educational and outreach activities that introduce
energy concepts to non-scientists through partnerships with Wonderlab (a
children’s science museum in Bloomington, Indiana) and Indiana University’s
ScienceFest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.