* 2113782
* Pomona Research in Mathematics Experience
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Edray Goins, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 548,786.00

This project focuses on algebraic geometry, a field of mathematics that concerns
geometric objects defined by polynomial equations. Pomona College will offer an
eight-week summer residential program to conduct research in algebraic geometry
and number theory, with an express aim to help diversify the field as it
advances research. The program, entitled "Pomona Research in Mathematics
Experience (PRiME)," will host fifteen undergraduates recruited in a national
competition, five graduate students, two junior faculty/postdoctoral fellows,
and three senior faculty members. PRiME will present new mathematical ideas and
techniques, highlight recent research in algebraic geometry and number theory,
provide enhanced mentoring opportunities, identify potential role models, and
strengthen professional networks for all participants in the program. These
components, individually and wholly, will produce significant broader impacts by
fostering the current and future professional skills of a diverse group of
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pomona Research in Mathematics Experience
(PRiME) has four goals. These are to (1) provide a nationally recruited group of
undergraduates with an 8-week intensive summer research experience in algebraic
geometry and number theory, leading to new results worthy of publication or
presentation at national meetings; (2) position undergraduates to enter post-
baccalaureate degree programs in the mathematical sciences; (3) provide
intensive mentoring and mentor training for graduate students, postdocs, and
faculty via vertically integrated research clusters; and (4) establish an
extended cross-generational network and community inclusive of underrepresented
minorities in algebraic geometry and number theory. PRiME aims to meet these
goals through four key elements. (a) Research with Undergraduate Participation:
Five research groups meeting daily, each forming an REU-like unit consisting of
one faculty member, one graduate student, and three undergraduates. Their
research projects will delve into the ranks of elliptic curves; compute
information about Belyi maps for the L-Series and Modular Forms Database
(LMFDB); write open-source software to visualize Dessin dâ€™Enfants; and create
animations to illustrate the action of monodromy corresponding to branched
covers of curves. (b) Professional Development: There will be weekly
professional development modules for both undergraduates and staff (faculty and
graduate students). Undergraduates will attend a series of weekly workshops on
various topics necessary for future success in mathematics. Every other week,
the staff will hold focused, literature-based discussions. (c) Mentoring
Clusters: There will be three mentoring/research clusters that meet separately
twice a week, each consisting of graduate students, postdocs, and faculty. (d)
Community Building: There will be weekly guest lectures and Q&amp;A featuring
distinguished faculty, including those from groups underrepresented in the
mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.