* 2113121
* Estimation of Functionals of High-Dimensional Parameters of Statisical Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Vladimir Koltchinskii, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 219,999.00

Estimation of low-dimensional features of high-dimensional parameters is an
important subject in contemporary statistical analysis of complex, high-
dimensional data. While information-theoretic limitations often make impossible
the reliable estimation of the whole unknown parameter due to its high
dimensionality, estimation of low-dimensional features could be done efficiently
with much faster error rates, common in classical statistics. Such problems
often occur in applications, in particular, when the unknown parameter is a
large matrix such as the density matrix of a quantum system, and the features of
interest are various spectral characteristics of such matrices. Despite the fact
that these problems have been studied for many years, there are few general
approaches to statistical estimation of functionals representing the features of
interest. The main goal of this project is to study functional estimation
problem in a general mathematical framework and to develop general estimation
methods as well as a comprehensive theory showing how the error rates in
functional estimation depend on the underlying properties of the target
functional such as its smoothness. The project provides new opportunities for
training graduate students in the areas of high-dimensional statistics, in
particular, by developing graduate level courses and seminars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of the project is on the development of a
higher order bias reduction method (bootstrap chain bias reduction) in
estimation of smooth functionals of unknown high-dimensional parameter of
statistical model. It is based on iterative bootstrap and it could be viewed as
a method of approximate solution of certain integral equations on high-
dimensional parameter spaces. In the case of high-dimensional Gaussian models,
this method yields estimators of smooth functionals with optimal error rates.
This research project will study the properties of such estimators for a variety
of important high-dimensional statistical models, including log-concave models,
models on manifolds, sparse models and density matrix estimation models in
quantum statistics. The goal is to determine minimax optimal error rates in
functional estimation and to study the phase transition between fast parametric
and slow nonparametric rates depending on the degree of smoothness of the
functional and complexity parameters of the problem. This requires solving a
number of challenging analytic and probabilistic problems, including the study
of approximation of bootstrap Markov chains by superpositions of independent
stochastic processes (random homotopies), the development of high-dimensional
normal approximation and coupling methods as well as of concentration bounds for
statistical estimators. The project will result in much deeper understanding of
functional estimation problems in high dimensions and in the development of a
variety of new probabilistic tools in high-dimensional statistical
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.