* 2113844
* Collaborative Research: Research: RUI: Engineers making process safety judgements...Mind the Gap! Beliefs vs. behavior
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Cheryl Bodnar, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 205,421.00

Chemical plant explosions and fires often make headlines due to the far-reaching
implications for the health and safety of workers, the environment, and the
local community. Investigations into these incidents have found that they are
typically the result of a series of judgements that are made by company
personnel (including engineers) over a significant period of time. Researchers
have established that how individuals believe they will make decisions is often
not the same as how they actually behave, and we posit that an inability to
reflect on any gap between beliefs and behaviors is a barrier to sound
judgements. Therefore, it is critical that engineers gain awareness of any gap
that may exist between their beliefs and behavior to enable reflective and safe
judgements. In this research project, we will investigate and compare the
beliefs and behaviors of both senior chemical engineering students and engineers
working in process safety contexts. As judgements related to process safety
would be difficult to model in the classroom and potentially dangerous within an
actual facility, we will use a game-based simulation that allows individuals to
role-play as a senior plant engineer. The digital environment allows individuals
to experience first-hand the safety challenges that arise in an industrial
environment while being safe and preventing the disastrous outcomes that could
occur in a real life setting when making these judgements. Participants will
then learn about the relationship between how they believed they would behave
and how they behaved, which is intended to enable awareness of the complexity of
process safety judgements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research study will leverage
both quantitative and qualitative methods through interviews, written
reflections, and immersive game-play to answer the following four research
questions: 1) What do participants believe about how they approach making
judgements? 2) How do they behave when actually making judgements? 3) What gap,
if any, exists between their beliefs and behavior, and 4) How do participants
reconcile any gap? Our research design captures beliefs at multiple data points
over time enabling us to generate an understanding of the efficacy of both 1)
the game play, and 2) exposure to an individualized profile demonstrating the
relationship between beliefs and behaviors. Our method for characterizing the
gap between beliefs and behaviors and presenting that information to engineers
to enable awareness and reflection has two potential impacts. First, it has the
potential 1) to be transferable across diverse contexts with implications for
improving professional judgement widely, and 2) to make specific recommendations
for the efficacy of the aforementioned two distinct interventions based on
participants who include engineering students and engineers working in process
safety contexts. The knowledge produced by this project can benefit not only
scholars seeking to further study the relationship between beliefs and
behaviors, but also engineering educators responsible for the professional
formation of their studentsâ€™ ability to exercise reflective judgement,
especially in process safety contexts. Finally, the outcomes of this work have
the potential to contribute to the professional formation of practicing
engineers by informing workforce development. This reflective process, which
brings awareness to gaps between beliefs and behaviors, is an unconventional yet
promising approach to ultimately reducing process safety
incidents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.