* 2113391
* Collaborative Research: Arctic Observing Network For Observing Transformation of the Greenland Ice Sheet Firn Layer
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2026
* Joel Harper, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 10/31/2026
* USD 1,199,063.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the Arctic warms two-to-three
times faster than the global average, the duration and intensity of melting is
generally increasing on the surface of the Greenland ice sheet. About 90% of ice
sheet is covered by compacted snow that is slowly transitioning into glacier
ice. This aged and dense snow is called ‘firn’ and forms a porous layer that is
many tens of meters thick. Much of the meltwater generated from the surface of
the firn layer infiltrates into the underlying open pore space of the firn and
refreezes. However, as this porous layer absorbs more melt it becomes warmer,
denser, and filled with ice layers, which reduces its ability to absorb
additional melt. Therefore, the thermal and structural transformation that
Greenland's firn layer is presently undergoing has important implications for
the ice sheet's capacity to retain future melt. This project is directly
observing firn evolution with a network of instruments installed within the firn
layer and with ice cores sampling the firn. The observational data collected by
this project provides on-the-ground documentation of firn conditions needed to
develop and test models and remote sensing tools for large-scale investigations
of changes to the Greenland ice sheet. Future transformation of the firn layer
will govern how much surface melt is retained locally on the ice sheet and how
much runs off, thereby impacting hydrologic conditions of the ice sheet and
surrounding regions, ocean salinity, and sea level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will install and maintain an
observation network along a transect of the Greenland ice sheet to directly
measure the state and transformation of firn properties. Repeat sampling of firn
cores and instrumentation extending from the surface to 25 meters depth will
yield the observational datasets needed by multiple scientific communities: firn
temperature, density and ice content, densification rate, surface boundary
processes (radiation, snow accumulation, temperature), and ice velocity. The
network will yield 4-5 full-year records in this five-year Arctic Observing
Network project. The project will provide comprehensive datasets for process-
level investigations, testing climate model simulations of firn processes, and
interpreting satellite-based measurement of surface elevation change. The
project will engage and support a relatively large number of undergraduate and
graduate students at R2 institutions with field research experiences and real-
world classroom learning. Outreach activities will target three groups poorly
represented in cryospheric science: 1) local and Indigenous residents of
Greenland; 2) American Indian undergraduate students; and 3) economically
disadvantaged school children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.