* 2113631
* Research: Faculty Assessment Mental Models in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Holly Matusovich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,157.00

The process of forming engineers is an iterative one that requires feedback to
indicate developmental progress and identify areas for improvement. A primary
source of feedback comes from assessment, which can play many roles in
engineering education: a signal to students of what they do and do not
understand about a concept; feedback to instructors about students’ conceptual
understanding as well as what may or may not be working regarding their own
teaching approaches; and information to administrators and prospective employers
evaluating students’ abilities. Although assessments function as a linchpin in
the formation of engineers, it is unclear how faculty members - i.e., the
individuals typically designing and implementing these assessments - think about
this pertinent signaling mechanism. Because faculty members often have autonomy
in making course decisions, understanding how they think about assessments is
essential to establish the foundation on future efforts in promoting diverse and
improved assessment approaches in engineering education. To better understand
how faculty think about and make decisions on assessment, we have designed a
three-phase study that uses interviews, surveys, and natural language processing
techniques to gather extensive data from a diverse sample of faculty who will
undoubtedly have diverse views on students and assessment. The outcomes of this
study will include characterizing faculty mental models of assessment and how
those models inform instructional decisions. In developing these outcomes, we
will also identify potential biases, misconceptions, and problematic, systemic
patterns in assessment implementation. The knowledge generated through this
project will inform better faculty training and policies to advance this vital
area in the formation of engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To characterize faculty
mental models and how they inform decision-making regarding assessment, we will
engage in a three-phased, multi-method study. Drawing on exploratory interviews,
Phase 1 will map the landscape of mental models that faculty members might have
related to assessment. Phase 2 will draw on the initial interviews and add
experience sampling methods to expand this mapping to connect those mental
models with decisions made by faculty related to assessment over the course of a
semester. Phase 3 will use a survey to expand the study sample in order to
support inferential statements about the population of engineering faculty
members in US engineering education ecosystems more broadly with regard to
mental models and decisions related to assessment. This study will make several
important contributions regarding intellectual merit. First, our study will
identify a range of mental models that faculty engage in assessment-related
decision-making, providing a view of the current state in engineering education.
Second, building on these findings, we will illuminate the connections between
these central instructional decisions and deeper perspectives that faculty
members wield. Third, from a methodological perspective, we will implement
ground-breaking methods that combine experience sampling methods (ESM) and
natural language processing (NLP) and provide a model for other researchers in
engineering education to do the same.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.