* 2113857
* IUCRC Phase III: University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee: Center for Water Equipment and Policy (WEP)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Qian Liao, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 149,219.00

Clean drinking water and sanitation are economic and policy issues that need to
be addressed for sustainable growth of the US economy. A collaboration between
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and Marquette University, the IUCRC for Water
Equipment and Policy (WEP) provides innovative water technologies and processes
to promote advancement of the water industry and conducts research to inform
water policy makers. During Phase I and II, WEP has completed nearly 100 pre-
competitive research projects in four thrust areas: water sensors, novel
materials, innovative treatment systems, and water policy research. Through
research, the WEP Center has provided innovative products and solutions to
address industrial partners’ unmet/underserved needs in point-of-use
technologies, emerging contaminants, sustainability, and energy conservation. In
Phase III, the WEP Center aims to capitalize on past success, grow center
research through new customer discovery, expand the research team through site
additions, continuously refine the technology roadmap, explore new frontiers of
water science for break-through technologies, and train a talented workforce to
meet the nation’s needs in drinking water quality and wastewater
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) is
the Lead Site of the WEP IUCRC. The UWM site’s research thrust areas include:
(1) low-cost, real-time, flow and water quality sensors for smart water
infrastructure applications and consumer products that reduces water leaks and
prevent contamination; (2) novel materials for water applications, such as non-
toxic biocide coatings, anti-fouling and anti-corrosion surfaces, and membrane
and absorbent-based water filtration materials; and (3) point-of-use water
treatment systems that remove or destroy contaminants in drinking water, such as
arsenic, bacteria, and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). Research activities at
the UWM site will benefit WEP members through improved product performance while
also improving STEM education, promoting entrepreneurship, attracting
underrepresented students, and training the future workforce for the growing
water industry. Unique resources and capabilities for collaborative research
include the UWM Water Technology Accelerator which is dedicated to turning
research activities into commercial products with advanced fabrication
processes; the Laboratory of Nanotechnology for Sustainable Energy and
Environment; and the UWM Composites Center for Advanced Materials Manufacturing
which creates novel superhydrophobic and self-healing
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.