* 2113602
* Collaborative Research: Covariate-Driven Approaches to Network Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Marina Vannucci, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,994.00

In this research project, the PIs will develop new statistical methods for
estimating networks from scientific data. In statistical network inference, each
node in the network corresponds to a variable, and each edge represents a
dependence relation. The project will address challenging scenarios where a set
of external covariates may influence either the values of the nodes within the
network or the strength of the connections. The PIs will develop new Bayesian
modeling approaches for learning both directed and undirected networks and their
dependence on covariates, including methods that can handle data that are not
normally distributed, and implement the proposed methods using efficient
computational algorithms. The PIs will apply the developed statistical models to
high-dimensional data, including functional brain imaging and microbiome
profiling. This work is significant, as it will break new ground in Bayesian
modeling and computation. The broader impacts of this project include the public
sharing of software, training of graduate students, and the application of the
methods to real-world neuroimaging and microbiome
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will break new ground in the
simultaneous estimation of graphical models and covariate effects. The PIs will
develop a framework to infer directed graphs based on vector autoregressive
models for time series data and will develop a novel formulation where
covariates may influence the strength of an edge in a non-linear fashion. This
framework will allow the determination of how key covariates modulate network
relations. The PIs will also develop Bayesian methods for the simultaneous
selection of covariates and edges in an undirected graph, focusing on models for
non-Gaussian data. They will implement these models using efficient Variational
Inference approaches, enabling scalability to real-world applications. This
project achieves innovation both in terms of the Bayesian modeling approaches
and the computational methods employed to enable efficient
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.