* 2113076
* CIF: Supporting the Space Science and Engineering Center (SSEC) Portable Atmospheric Research Center (SPARC)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Robert Holz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 09/30/2026
* USD 515,163.00

This Community Instruments and Facilities (CIF) award is for support of the
University of Wisconsin–Madison Space Science and Engineering Center Portable
Atmospheric Research Center (SPARC) mobile research laboratory. The SPARC CIF
will provide the research community access to a specialized suite of atmospheric
observing instrumentation housed in a mobile research laboratory that can be
rapidly deployed to regions of interest for atmospheric science research. SPARC
provides capability to measure properties of the lowest levels of the Earth’s
atmosphere that impact people and is critical for testing and improving models
for weather forecasting, air quality, and climate change. The project will
involve the participation and apprenticeship of students, scientists, technical
staff, and community members in order to train the next generation of
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly specialized ground-based remote
sensing instruments comprising of the Atmospheric Emitted Radiance
Interferometer, High Spectral Resolution Lidar, and a doppler wind lidar will
provide simultaneous thermodynamic and kinematic profiles in the planetary
boundary layer, along with detailed profiles of cloud and aerosol properties of
the entire atmosphere at high temporal and vertical resolution. These
observations will enable new field experiments to test models of physical
processes in the boundary layer, and to fill spatial and temporal gaps in
current observing systems that have prevented scientific advancement. Community
access to this facility will support fundamental research in a broad range of
fields including mesoscale meteorology, tropospheric chemistry, cloud physics,
land-atmosphere interaction, climatology, and energy balance studies. The
project will pursue an education and outreach program nationwide with particular
focus on involving underrepresented groups in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.