* 2113893
* CNS Core: Small: Integrating Real-Time Learning and Control for Large and Dynamic Networked Computer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Charlie Hu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 520,400.00

Large computer and network systems (such as data centers) are the workhorses
driving our information society. However, they are also increasingly difficult
to control and operate due to their enormous size, fast-changing workload, and
significant uncertainty in resource requirement and availability. Traditional
approaches to control and optimization rely on carefully-constructed models of
the systems under study, but they become insufficient in such a fast-changing
environment when crucial components of the system model are either unknown or
constantly changing. Instead, this project aims to develop new methods that can
quickly learn an updated model from fresh real-time data, and that integrate
such real-time learning with real-time control to improve the efficiency,
adaptability, and quality-of-service (QoS) of large-scale and dynamic networked
computer systems. Specifically, the project focuses on the operation of large
data centers serving big-data analytics and deep-learning training workloads,
and develops new real-time learning and stochastic control policies that are not
only efficient, but also scalable, able to interpret, and adaptive. The
intellectual merits include: (i) real-time learning and control policies that
can learn, from real-time feedback, server-dependent features of the computing
and network jobs, to greatly improve the throughput of data centers running
large and heterogeneous workload, reduce job completing times, and meet service
deadlines; and (ii) real-time learning and control policies tailored to the
unique features of deep-learning training workload, which can quickly estimate
the total training time and the dependency across heterogeneous processing
units, to optimize both throughput and delay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research has the potential to have a lasting impact to knowledge discovery and
education. The results could enable data centers to run jobs faster and complete
them sooner, and therefore benefit the computing industry, both by improving the
overall efficiency of data centers running diverse and fast-changing workload,
and by improving the satisfaction of users who rely on data centers for business
decisions and data analytics. The research findings may contribute to the
general theory of both online learning and stochastic control, which will also
be useful for other computer and network systems with both uncertain system
dynamics and uncertain agent features, such as wireless networks and online
service platforms. Students on the project will be trained on both theoretic
tools (including online learning, stochastic control, and data analytics) and
system building skills (including cluster computing and data-center networking),
which are essential for the future big-data economy. Further, the outreach
activity integrated with the research computed will broaden the knowledge of
high school students on the key principles of online learning and big-
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.