* 2113991
* Productive Online Teamwork Engagement Through Intelligent Mediation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Richardson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 850,000.00

Modern work environments are becoming increasingly distributed. As a result, the
ability of employees to work in a virtual environment is becoming essential for
corporate success. Employers expect higher education institutions to prepare
students to operate as productive members and leaders of virtual teams. While
research has built compelling pedagogical frameworks to improve in-class
teamwork performance, more research-based mechanisms are needed to maximize
student engagement and build teamwork skills in online education environments.
Focusing on large enrollment courses in higher education, this project will
study the use of effective teamwork in the online classroom by (1) developing
and testing technologies that promote social presence, (2) identifying
pedagogies that facilitate teamwork in an online environment, and (3) promoting
productive online teamwork engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To promote
productive online teamwork engagement, this design-based research project will
develop the PECAS Mediator, an educational innovation that provides (1) AI-
enabled monitoring, (2) productive and unproductive interaction detection, and
(3) faculty mediation via just-in-time guidance. The high-level conjecture of
this project is that monitoring and mediation, enabled by evidence-based
pedagogical practices and technological innovations, will increase social
presence within online teamwork sessions resulting in increased teamwork
engagement. The project has two main objectives: (1) Deploy and validate the
intelligent monitoring and mediation PECAS Mediator to promote social presence
and collaborative learning, and (2) Investigate the effect of increased social
presence and collaborative learning on teamwork engagement. The theoretical
conjecture of this project is that social presence mediating processes will lead
to productive engagement manifested as behavioral engagement via team
effectiveness, cognitive engagement via team performance, and affective
engagement via positive attitudes toward teamwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.