* 2113747
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Developing tools to assess the evolutionary implications of partial clonality in alpine snow algae
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Robin Kodner, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 152,439.00

Many globally important processes like carbon cycling and human disease dynamics
are a result of microscopic eukaryotes. Yet our understanding of evolutionary
processes across the entire tree of life is limited due to the inherent
challenges of studying microscopic taxa. Tools developed for macroscopic, and
often obligately sexually reproducing, species are often not tractable in
microbes where generation times are short, population sizes large, and
extracting DNA from individual cells difficult. Further, population-level
ecology and evolutionary biology research have focused on species that can be
grown in the lab; yet, only ~1% of microbes can be cultured. This proposal
focuses on the snow algae, a group of closely related, single-celled algae that
turn seasonal snow packs pink or red. The aim is to develop novel single-cell
population genetic protocols to study these threatened organisms and sentinels
of environmental change. Thousands of cells from inter- and intra-annual
Chlainomonas-dominated blooms in the Cascade Range of the United States will be
genotyped. A goal is to understand how environmental factors (e.g., nitrogen)
influence snow algal reproduction. The project will support two graduate
students. The three PIs will integrate data into classroom-based and field-based
curriculum for university-level students and share data with the public through
social media and peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses snow algae to
develop new methods for studying the population genetics of microbial eukaryotes
from natural populations. The work will provide novel and critical techniques
for studying reproductive modes that will be broadly applicable across microbial
systems. Two novel elements are proposed: (1) combining single-cell isolation
methods with state-of-the-art multilocus genotyping, and (2) using a novel
microbial eukaryotic system (snow algae) with features making the method
development tractable. Reproductive mode data will be generated and combined
with measurements of (i) the ploidy of cells and (ii) environmental conditions
to ascertain whether limited nitrogen initiates sexual reproduction. The
approach is radically different compared to traditional microalgal population
genetics that rely on lab-based cultures, raising questions of how
representative those data are in nature. This proposal fits the EAGER funding
mechanism as the single-cell population genetic methods are high risk-high
payoff and should be readily transferable to other
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.