* 2113915
* IUCRC Phase II: U of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign: Center for Advanced Research in Drying (CARD)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Pawan Takhar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI, lead site) and University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign (UIUC, partner site) are transitioning from the current Phase I
to Phase II of their NSF IUCRC entitled, “Center for Advanced Research in Drying
(CARD).” CARD is dedicated to assisting the U.S. manufacturing industries to
become sustainable by improving the energy efficiency and decreasing the carbon
footprint of various drying and relevant heat and mass transfer processes.
CARD’s activities fall into two major initiatives. The first is engagement in
innovative industrially-relevant research, with a focus on energy efficient
drying processes. This initiative, through fundamental and applied research,
continues to generate new insights, advanced processes, tools, and fabrication
techniques for effective industrial engineering practices. The second initiative
identifies and develops new engineering education methods to nurture innovation
as a vital core competency for a diverse, next generation, manufacturing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New energy efficient drying technologies have
been developed at WPI and UIUC and are being transferred to member companies.
For example, at WPI, these technologies include innovative reattachment nozzles,
unique fiber optic sensors, non-contact ultrasonic drying, and drying with
dielectrophoretic force. At UIUC, the nonthermal, ultrasonic, protein drying
method has provided a solution for the food industry to address the quality
degradation issue caused by traditional thermal drying methods. The current
Center members represent food, agriculture, and pulp and paper industry sectors.
In phase II, CARD will extend its membership to other industry sectors such as
chemical, pharmaceutical, and textile manufacturing. In Phase II, CARD will
build on its previous educational activities with undergraduate and graduate
students to further expand the STEM pipeline. Phase II outreach will include
hands-on STEM learning experiences for middle and high school students that
build technical knowledge and ability and that offer insights into different
STEM majors and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.