* 2113334
* I-Corps: Fabric Supercapacitor for Solar Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Jonathan Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a special textile product capable of harvesting and storing solar
energy. The potential application of the proposed technology is for alternative
power supplies and battery devices. Current alternative power supplies are
indispensable in remote rural areas where people lack access to reliable power
grid infrastructure. However, travelers, hikers, or campers may find these
alternatives cost- or safety-prohibitive. Disaster relief or military personnel
deployed to remote areas may find that in addition to the mobility issues,
current battery devices are costly on a large scale and fuel solutions are risky
for those supplying fuel to those situated in hostile environments. Using the
proposed technology, a hiker’s or soldier’s backpack may be turned into a power
supply. A solar cell may be sewn into the bag to harvest solar energy that will
be stored by the bag supercapacitor. Similarly, the fabric supercapacitor may be
embedded into tent material, making the tent into a solar power supply as well.
A sustainable, self-powered system make it possible for travelers to remote
areas or for soldiers deployed for military operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
technology for making fabric supercapacitors (FSCs). The proposed technology
includes various fabric materials, structural design of the fabric, and a novel
fabrication approach. The energy storage ability of the FSC device will be
determined by the size of the fabric areas used for forming the supercapacitor
structure. Compared with conventional supercapacitors, the proposed FSC
technology is flexible, light weight, and safe. In addition, the bendable,
twistable, rollable, and foldable design provides space that may be inaccessible
to conventional supercapacitors. A demonstration of the technology showed that
four series supercapacitors illuminated a red LED for more than 130 min and
still maintained a voltage output around 1.61 V. The supercapacitor was
susceptible to cyclic bending in 0-180 degree angles without losing its
performance. The proposed all-fabric FSC technology potentially may be adopted
into many textile products acquiring the functions of solar energy harvesting
and electric power storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.