* 2113069
* CRCNS US-French Research Proposal: Brainstem-spinal circuits for control of locomotor steering.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Ilya Rybak, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2025
* USD 650,000.00

The ability to move within the environment is essential for the survival of all
animals, including humans. In mammals, the neurons that generate and drive
locomotor movements reside in the spinal cord, and these spinal networks are
controlled by upstream signals from the brainstem. Most studies of neural
control of locomotion in mammals have focused on straight-trajectory forward
locomotion. However, how brainstem and spinal neural networks control turning
movements remains poorly understood. This study will investigate this question,
using a combination of experimental and computational approaches. The results of
this study will provide important insights into the neural control of turning
and, more broadly, the neural control of locomotion. The models developed in
this project can serve as test-beds for simulating different aspects of motor
disorders and treatment approaches. Study outcomes can help in the development
of novel strategies to restore locomotor function after spinal cord injury,
neurodegenerative pathologies, and other motor disorders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project will investigate the neural
control of locomotion in mice with a focus on mechanisms of turning movements. A
recently uncovered population of reticulospinal neurons in the gigantocellular
reticular nucleus (Gi) of the brainstem projects to all segments of the spinal
cord and is defined by the expression of the transcription factor Chx10 (V2a
neurons). Experimentally activating these neurons in the mouse induces robust
turning movements that seem to be mostly driven by an asymmetric control of the
motor circuits of the neck, upper trunk, and forelimbs. This study will test the
hypothesis that these pathways represent a major orchestrator of locomotor
turning maneuvers. This study combines state-of-the-art physiological, genetic,
pharmacological, and motion tracking approaches with computational modeling of
the brainstem and spinal cord circuits and animal biomechanics. The results of
in vitro and in vivo studies will be incorporated in a neuro-biomechanical data-
driven model of quadrupedal mammalian (mouse) locomotion. The model will provide
mechanistic explanations, and generate testable predictions that will then be
verified experimentally. The project has the following three objectives. (1)
Study the influence of reticulospinal V2a Gi neuron activation on spinal
circuits potentially involved in locomotor steering behaviors and computational
modeling of these brainstem-spinal pathways and circuits; (2) Characterize
kinematics of mouse locomotion during changes of locomotor direction and develop
a full-body neuro-biomechanical model of mouse locomotion; (3) Study the role of
different populations of reticulospinal V2a Gi neurons in locomotor steering and
test model predictions, challenge model assumptions, and investigate general
mechanisms. This study will provide a functional connectome linking brainstem
structures that initiate and support turning behaviors to the corresponding
executive circuits in the spinal cord and effector muscle groups. Studies will
also shed light on more general mechanisms of motor control like the
coordination of multiple rhythmic motor systems and will be useful for the
development of effective methods for recovery of locomotion after various motor
disorders and injuries affecting the brainstem and spinal
cord.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by the French
National Research Agency (ANR). This project is jointly funded by the following
NSF programs: Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering, Collaborative Research
in Computational Neuroscience, Robust Intelligence, Engineering of Biomedical
Systems, and Directorate for Biological Sciences Emerging
Frontiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.