* 2113864
* I/UCRC Phase II: The Pennsylvania State University: Center for Atomically Thin Multifunctional Coatings (ATOMIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Mauricio Terrones, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 558,142.00

Phase II of the Center for Atomically Thin Multifunctional Coatings (ATOMIC) is
devoted to advancing the design and development of coatings based on two-
dimensional (2D) materials. In ATOMIC Phase II, the center is expanded to three
sites located at Pennsylvania State University, Rice University, and Boise State
University. The joint research efforts will concentrate on addressing key
societal and industrial problems in areas of U.S. national interest that can be
mitigated through advanced multifunctional coatings, such as infrastructure
protection, internet of things (IoT) sensing, electronics, energy
harvesting/storage, autonomous systems, and biological threat reduction. Because
of the aligned partnership among academia, government, and industry, ATOMIC
seeks to impact the education and training of students, particularly those who
are underrepresented minorities. To encourage young people to pursue science-
technology research degrees, the center will jointly conduct activities, such as
the Penn State Learning Factory, where students focus on an industrially-defined
engineering problem for their senior project and leverage ongoing NSF programs
such as the Research Experiences for Undergraduates and Teachers. ATOMIC will
leverage Penn State's Innovation Park, which will serve as a hub for fostering
academic-industry partnerships, and technology translation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase II builds on the robust foundation of
scientific innovation in 2D materials at Penn State and Rice University and
expands it into scalable 2D materials printing enabled by Boise State
University. Penn State and Rice have successfully employed fundamental research
programs in novel 2D materials, such as graphene, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN),
MoS2, WS2, and WSxSe1-x; and Boise State has joined with experience nanomaterial
ink development and controlled precision printing such as inkjet, plasma jet,
aerosol jet, and micro-dispensing. This combination of expertise will ensure
relevant pre-competitive research of interest to the industrial members in areas
related to large-scale production processes, electronics, sensing, energy and
protection. In particular, Penn State will lead research efforts in the areas of
thin film deposition via metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD),
solvothermal and electrochemical deposition, device and sensor integration, and
benchmarking the optical, electronic, and sensing performance of 2D layers.
Furthermore, Penn State will synergistically work with Rice and Boise State on
atomic layer deposition, liquid exfoliation, device and sensor fabrication,
modelling, and advanced characterization, using state-of-the-art facilities for
materials processing, clean rooms for nanofabrication and unique
characterization instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.