* 2113179
* CRCNS US-France Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Encoding reward expectation in Drosophilia
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Brian Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2024
* USD 245,131.00

Animals develop an understanding of their environment through learning that
specific cues in the environment are reliably paired with and consequently
predict important outcomes, such as access to food or the presence of danger.
The concept of outcome expectation based on these predictions has been
influential in the development of studies of associative learning in mammals.
These analyses have had a profound impact on understanding of outcome-related
behavior in humans, including monetary rewards and the consequences of traumatic
experiences, and for pathologies of the reward systems in the brain. The neural
underpinnings of outcome expectation are particularly challenging to study in
mammals because of the requirement for exquisite cellular, temporal, and genetic
specificity of experimental manipulations. The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster
has been a valuable model for investigating the genetic and neural bases that
underlie learning and memory, including learning of cue-outcome associations.
The recent development of work with identified neurons and their detailed
connections in the fly brain makes the larval and adult fruit fly brains ripe as
models for advancing understanding of neural bases for outcome expectation
learning in mammals. Using the powerful experimental approaches available in the
fruit fly model system and resources guided by computational modeling, the team
of researchers investigate complex memory representations in Drosophila. This
project also provides interdisciplinary training for postdoctoral researchers,
and graduate and undergraduate students, development of new K-12 biology
classroom material, and collaboration with Arizona State University’s award-
winning Ask-A-Biologist program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early and most current
studies of learning and memory in the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) use
basic behavior conditioning protocols to study learning in controlled laboratory
settings. The ability to transgenically manipulate many of the brain neurons in
the fruit fly with exquisite specificity, and the recent knowledge of the
synaptic ‘connectome’ of the fruit fly brain, makes these animals almost unique
as a comprehensive model for studies of learning, memory and motivated behavior.
Within this context, the investigators propose that studies of learning and
memory will be greatly enhanced by using more sophisticated means for evaluating
memory representations, and by combining those studies with information from the
connectome guided by computational modelling. To that end, the investigators
examine the function of reinforcement pathways in relation to the absence of
expected reinforcement. Specifically, the investigators study the memory
representations in fruit flies when an expected consequence of a conditioned
stimulus fails to occur. Through a series of experiments, they test the
prediction that in Drosophila when a conditioned stimulus is associated with a
failed expectation of an appetitive food reinforcement, the conditioned stimulus
will acquire aversive value, and vice versa for a failed expectation of an
aversive reinforcer. The investigators combine these studies with manipulations
of reinforcement pathways in the central nervous system identified and selected
based on the recently released fly brain connectome. The experimental work is
iteratively knitted in with established computational
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by the French
National Research Agency (ANR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.