* 2113027
* CIF: Small: Load Balancing for Cloud Networks: Data Locality Issues and Modern Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Debankur Mukherjee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 439,202.00

Distributing incoming tasks among the back-end servers or virtual machines in a
balanced way is crucial for the seamless functioning of large-scale service
systems, such as data centers and cloud networks. As the bulk of modern
applications now tend to come with specialized service requirements, these
systems are suffering from stringent task-server compatibility constraints
arising due to data locality. In simple terms, it means that the resources to
process a particular type of task are available to only a small sub-collection
of servers and cannot be accessed by the entire network. This issue of task-
server compatibility has made large-scale load balancing ever more challenging.
State-of-the-art heuristics are predominantly based on "full-flexibility" models
that ignore the compatibility aspect and assume that any task can be processed
by any server. Naturally, algorithms implemented from these heuristics cause a
major adverse impact on the user-perceived delay performance. The current
practice to deal with this problem is to find ad-hoc solutions in specific
cases. With the investigator's expertise in the area of stochastic modeling and
performance analysis, the project is taking a thorough and structured approach
to address this issue. On successful completion, the findings will contribute to
designing modern load balancing algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical
research agenda of the project is divided into two thrusts: (1) to identify
classes of optimal compatibility constraints for existing algorithms, and (2) to
develop novel compatibility-aware distributed algorithms for arbitrary systems.
The research community has discovered several breakthrough load balancing
algorithms over the last few years. These algorithms have excellent performance
guarantees in the full-flexibility setup. The goal of Thrust 1 is to identify
classes of compatibility constraints that can still preserve such performance
guarantees under such existing algorithms. Employing these findings, a service
provider can design compatibility structures that enjoy the performance benefits
of a fully flexible system, by carefully placing the resource files across the
servers. When designing the compatibility structure is not an option, state-of-
the-art algorithms exhibit poor performance. In such cases, Thrust 2 aims to
develop novel distributed algorithms with provable performance guarantees, that
take the compatibility structure into consideration during task assignment. This
part of the project is having direct consequences for the practitioners in
implementing new algorithmic heuristics for modern systems. On the
methodological side, the investigation requires the development of a theoretical
foundation for the analysis of structurally constrained systems driven by
stochastic inputs. The project is advancing the area of mean-field analysis,
which has been a primary tool in the performance analysis of randomized
algorithms for large-scale systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.