* 2113589
* Collaborative Research: New Regression Models and Methods for Studying Multiple Categorical  Responses
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Aaron Molstad, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 96,410.00

In many areas of scientific study including bioengineering, epidemiology,
genomics, and neuroscience, an important task is to model the relationship
between multiple categorical outcomes and a large number of predictors. In
cancer research, for example, it is crucial to model whether a patient has
cancer of subtype A, B, or C and high or low mortality risk given the expression
of thousands of genes. However, existing statistical methods either cannot be
applied, fail to capture the complex relationships between the response
variables, or lead to models that are difficult to interpret and thus, yield
little scientific insight. The PIs address this deficiency by developing
multiple new statistical methods. For each new method, the PIs will provide
theoretical justifications and fast computational algorithms. Along with
graduate and undergraduate students, the PIs will also create publicly available
software that will enable applications across both academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address a fundamental
problem in multivariate categorical data analysis: how to parsimoniously model
the joint probability mass function of many categorical random variables given a
common set of high-dimensional predictors. The PIs will tackle this problem by
using emerging technologies on tensor decompositions, dimension reduction, and
both convex and non-convex optimization. The project focuses on three research
directions: (1) a latent variable approach for the low-rank decomposition of a
conditional probability tensor; (2) a new overlapping convex penalty for
intrinsic dimension reduction in a multivariate generalized linear regression
framework; and (3) a direct non-convex optimization-based approach for low-rank
tensor regression utilizing explicit rank constraints on the Tucker tensor
decomposition. Unlike the approach of regressing each (univariate) categorical
response on the predictors separately, the new models and methods will allow
practitioners to characterize the complex and often interesting dependencies
between the responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.