* 2113927
* Equity in PreK-12 STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 04/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Inequity in education is a critical issue in the United States with well-
documented evidence that many students receive substantially lower quality
educations due to structural inequity in public schooling. These inequities are
particularly pronounced in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education where issues of access to high quality instruction and advanced
coursework are intertwined with stereotypes and biases about which students can
succeed in STEM. Using the consensus study process of the National Academies of
Science, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM), NASEM’s Board on Science Education
(BOSE) will convene an expert committee to investigate the specific ways that
educational inequity manifests in STEM education and make actionable
recommendations for how education stakeholders at all levels can take steps to
address these inequities. The final report will elevate common threads in
policy, program design, and practice that lead to success in improving STEM
education outcomes for those students who have traditionally been marginalized
in the STEM disciplines. By identifying those common threads in policy and
practice and elevating them through the vehicle of a BOSE consensus study
report, this study will provide the entire STEM education community, from
policymakers at the highest levels to classroom teachers, with the trusted
resource they need to advocate and support productive change in policy and
practice. This project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed consensus study will provide a
synthesis of a wide range of research literatures relevant to addressing
inequity in PreK-12 STEM subjects. This synthesis will provide for a
comprehensive understanding of how policy and program interventions at the
federal, state, district, and classroom levels have attempted to address
inequity in STEM education—both in terms of inputs and outcomes—with attention
to replicable strategies and practices. An expert committee will examine the
evidence base related to inequity in STEM education; consider policies and
interventions at the state, district, school, and classroom level that have
shown evidence of addressing inequity in STEM education; and develop
recommendations and a research agenda for the field. This study will take a
systemic perspective that examines how policies at various levels might interact
with one another, resulting in a report that integrates multiple lines of
evidence that have developed in isolation from one another. To complement and
deepen the committee’s analysis of the research evidence, the study will employ
five regional stakeholder field engagement events around the country to
understand the concerns of specific communities and to identify the range of
opportunities and challenges experienced across different education contexts. By
highlighting areas where those evidence bases converge (as well as documenting
areas of disagreement and gaps in the evidence), the final report will look
across disciplinary lines of research and consider how they might be integrated
to provide more coherent approaches to addressing inequity in STEM education.
This integrated understanding may provide new perspectives on how to address
inequity in PreK-12 STEM education and identify areas where more research is
needed. Ultimately, the study will help to catalyze change toward a more
diverse, equitable, inclusive, and accessible STEM educational experience for
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.