* 2113265
* Habitat Use by Urban Muskoxen in Nome, Alaska
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Claudia Ihl, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,960.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project at
the University of Alaska Fairbanksâ€“Northwest Campus aligns directly with that
goal and will advance knowledge about a species of importance to local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the habitat use of a
population of muskoxen (Ovibos moschatus) using urban areas around Nome, Alaska.
This population is an important food and fiber resource and valued for
ecotourism and cultural significance. The location offers a unique opportunity
to study free-ranging muskoxen near an urban area and investigate unexpected
outcomes of mining reclamation. The project hypothesizes that there is a
difference in muskoxen forage species between disturbed, reclaimed areas near
urban sites and undisturbed rural sites and that spring flora emergence occurs
earlier in urban sites. The project aims to develop successional profiles for
reclaimed mining areas, phenological records from normalized difference
vegetation index (NDVI) and direct field measures, nutritional and mineral
profiles of forage species, and GIS maps of muskox locations and habitats.
Benefits for Native Alaskan individuals and communities include information
needed to mitigate human-wildlife conflicts associated with urban muskoxen that
could result in recommendations, such as where to erect fences or modify
vegetation to prevent muskox movement into critical areas and suggestions for
mine tailing reclamation procedures. The project also aims to provide
opportunities for Native Alaskan students to learn research techniques and
skills in scientific communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.