* 2113540
* Collaborative Research: Core Support for Future Earth International Global Change Research
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Judit Ungvari, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 02/28/2023
* USD 172,761.00

This project supports the US Secretariat of Future Earth. Future Earth harnesses
the insights and capacity of the global scientific community to address global
problems, like a warming and increasingly unstable climate, and a rapid loss of
biodiversity and ecosystem services. The Future Earth effort is based on the
recognition that modern global change challenges require coordinated research
efforts bringing together the world's best researchers in the natural, social,
behavioral, and engineering sciences, and connecting these researchers with the
needs and capacities embedded within a wide range of stakeholder institutions
and communities. The Secretariat leads and co-leads core functions that include
research enabling, networks and capacity, information technology, and
communications. In addition, the US Global Hub leads the evolution and growth of
Future Earth’s global efforts and directs many of Future Earth’s core global
initiatives, including a flagship capacity building program, communications
products, and collaborative data-platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future Earth
provides a critical service to the science community by advancing global change
science in the US and around the world, and by supporting the full range of
research modalities from fundamental disciplinary research to transdisciplinary
research. By connecting research across geography and discipline, the project
supports the emergence of novel, integrative scientific ideas. By elevating the
spread and impact of scientific results and connecting these results with
constituencies in business, government, and civil society, Future Earth’s work
supports decision making around the world. It also connects US researchers with
a vast and rapidly growing network of leading international scholars in global
change research and provides direct access to new knowledge and initiatives.
This work includes a broad range of communication capacities in the US and
around the world, like the establishment of the Sustainability Research and
Innovation Congress, the first global convening that brings the global change
research and innovation communities together, on an annual basis. The Future
Earth US Global Hub has also established partnerships to build and diversify the
next generation of global change researchers through an internship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.