* 2113060
* CIF: Making the Pi Convection-Cloud Chamber Available to the Community for Aerosol-Cloud-Turbulence Research
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Raymond Shaw, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 08/31/2026
* USD 654,057.00

This Community Instruments and Facilities (CIF) award is for support of the Pi
Convection-Cloud Chamber at Michigan Technological University. This project will
make the Pi Convection-Cloud Chamber and an extensive set of supporting
instrumentation available to the atmospheric sciences community for
investigations of atmospheric processes that include aerosols and clouds. The Pi
Convection-Cloud Chamber is designed to simulate cloud conditions within the
range of pressures and temperatures that occur in the lower part of the
atmosphere (the troposphere). It is the only operating major laboratory cloud
chamber for research use in North America. The award will also support a 10-week
experiential learning program for visiting students through a Chamber laboratory
fellowship program and broaden student participation in the physical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pi Convection-Cloud Chamber has a proven record of
enabling productive and insightful research in aerosol-cloud interactions, ice
nucleation and mixed-phase cloud properties, cloud optical properties, and moist
Rayleigh-BÃ©nard convection. The Pi Chamber and supporting instruments make a
facility that enables measurement of thermodynamics, turbulence, aerosol, and
cloud properties for research in the atmospheric sciences. This award will
enhance the ability of the broader scientific community to request and use the
Pi Cloud Chamber for research through the Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences
facility request process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.