* 2113930
* IUCRC: UCI: Planning Grant: Proposal Planning Grant: Center for Smart Space Research (CSSR)​
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Sharad Mehrotra, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

Smart spaces are characterized by the presence of smart services built on
emerging sensing, computing, and communication technologies. This planning grant
will create a multi-university Center for Smart Space Research (CSSR) involving
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) and the University of California, Irvine
(UCI). CSSR takes an integrated approach to make them versatile and adaptable to
situations by ensuring the availability and accessibility of data, knowledge,
and services. This planning grant will identify research challenges to build
application-focused smart spaces. Applications encompass health and disease
monitoring systems, smart buildings, public spaces and cities, mission-critical
systems, transportation, intelligent manufacturing, collaborative robotics, and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center’s focus will involve four main areas of
relevance to industry, university, and society: creation of adaptive computing
and communications infrastructure; trustworthy acquisition, processing,
interpretation and sustainability of data and knowledge; applications that span
all aspects of life and the environment; and creation of diverse and competent
workforce. UCI researchers will collaborate with industrial organizations,
technology developers, and users, to investigate: adaptive and resilient
multiscale network communications; data-driven real-time adaptations for
mission-critical applications; multi-tier and edge-cloud computing methods, IoT
data management and security/privacy techniques for instrumented spaces. These
collaborations will facilitate transition of research to practice in
smartspaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning phase of CSSR will impact
research and pedagogical activities at UCI and stimulate technology transfer to
collaborating industries. Our work will emphasize smartspace applications to
improve quality of life and enhance community resilience in challenging
situations. CSSR will leverage ongoing and future projects to reach
underprivileged populations with varying socio-economic backgrounds. UCI is a
Hispanic-serving institution with a diverse student body. The planning grant
workshops will promote interactions with industry and create opportunities to
recruit and mentor diverse groups of students in undergraduate capstone
projects, graduate courses and internships creating a future workforce in the
area of smartspaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the near future, access to smart
spaces and smart infrastructure will impact every individual and will greatly
improve quality of life. CSSR activities in fostering innovation in accessible
smart spaces will play a major role in the future world. The planning phase will
serve as a platform for meetings, discussions, and workshops, to identify
critical research to guide the development of smart spaces. CSSR will maintain a
publicly-accessible repository comprising meeting materials, workshop
information, research topics and details, and publications. This repository will
be maintained at a publicly accessible URL at RIT for the lifetime of the
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.