* 2113568
* New Frontiers of Robust Statistics in the Era of Big Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Zhao Ren, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 235,948.00

Modern technologies have facilitated the collection of an unprecedented amount
of features with complex structures. Although extensive progress has been made
towards extracting useful information from massive data, the statistical
analysis typically assumed that data are drawn without any contamination.
However, in reality the data sets arising in applications such as genomics and
medical imaging are usually more inhomogeneous due to either data collection
process or the intrinsic nature of the data in the era of big data. For
instance, in gene expression data analysis, outliers frequently arise in
microarray experiments due to the array chip artifacts such as uneven spray of
reagents within arrays. Compared to the recent advances in the era of big data,
research in modeling and theoretical foundations for robust procedures under
contamination models has fallen behind. To bridge this gap, this project seeks
to develop new robust estimation and inference procedures which are rate-optimal
for various contamination models as building blocks to address the modeling,
theory and computational challenges. Upon completion, this work will lead to a
comprehensive understanding of contamination models and have an immediate impact
on various disciplines such as biology, genomics, astronomy and finance. The
project also provides training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, and is used to enrich courses and outreach educational materials in
statistics and data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address
some of the most pressing challenges that are faced by robust procedures in
high-dimensional and nonparametric contamination models. Specifically, (I) the
research begins with statistical inference of low-dimensional parameters in both
increasing-dimensional and high-dimensional regressions under contamination
models. The PI will study the influence of contamination proportion in obtaining
the root-n consistency results. Robust large-scale simultaneous inference under
contamination models are also considered. (II) Next, the PI will revisit some
classical nonparametric density estimation problems both under arbitrary and
structured contamination distributions. The PI plans to propose rate-optimal
procedures and carefully study the effect of contamination on estimation through
various model indices, including contamination proportion, the structure of
contamination and the choice of loss function. (III) The PI will develop a
U-type robust covariance estimator under structured contamination models and
provide rigorous theoretical guarantees on its rate optimality. This general
robust estimator can serve as building blocks for establishing many rate-optimal
procedures for structured large covariance/precision matrix estimation problems.
User-friendly R packages will be developed to implement the proposed
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.